Hopes of breakthrough for stalled Doha round appear dim
Deep divisions ahead of global trade talks in Nairobi
Trade ministers meet as WTO  seeks to make breakthrough 
Prospects of WTO Nairobi conference remain "very uncertain": EU official
WTO conference pledges 90 mln USD to boost trade in poor countries
The United States tries to euthanize the Doha round
Kenya calls for fair trade ahead of WTO conference
Uhuru disputes the West's export subsidies, says they violate fair trade
Africa Economy: Africa calls for fair trade practices ahead of WTO meeting
Nations to Debate on Doha Round at WTO Meeting
Breaking WTO promises would be irresponsible
Can't declare the Doha Round 'dead' yet: Rob Davies
LDCs united as WTO conference begins today
Plea for WTO to support agriculture in Africa
Eyes on WTO Ministerial, Nairobi
WTO body to decide when COOL retaliation tariffs begin

Hopes of breakthrough for stalled Doha round appear dim
By John Aglionby in Nairobi
15 December 2015
Financial Times
Hopes of a breakthrough in the stalled Doha trade negotiations at a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation gathering this week have faded after the conference chairwoman rejected calls for a new approach.
Diplomats say failure to reach agreement on the future of the Doha framework at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO biennial ministerial conference, which starts in Nairobi today and runs for four days, could scupper the chance of an agreement on the myriad issues being debated. These include support for the least developed countries.
There are seemingly insurmountable divisions on the future of Doha, with nations led by the US, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU and Japan wanting the process scrapped or reformed and developing countries such as India, China and African states wanting the framework retained.
Mike Froman , the US trade representative, wrote in the FT yesterday that the 14-year-old Doha Development Agenda should be replaced because it "simply has not delivered".
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU said yesterday it should be bolstered by the inclusion of additional issues, such as investment and e-commerce, "which pose major challenges for today's global trade".
"[We] need to recognise that global trade has evolved since the Doha round started 14 years ago," EU commissioners Cecilia Malmström and Phil Hogan said. "We need a clear vision for the years to come."
Both views are anathema to many nations, such as India and South Africa, which fear the abandonment of Doha would threaten their ability to secure concessions on issues such as rich nations' agricultural subsidies, while the inclusion of additional matters would dilute the process.
Rob Davies, the South African trade and industry minister, said before leaving for Nairobi that his government wanted Doha completed before the agenda moved on.
But conference chairwoman Amina Mohamed, Kenya's minister for foreign affairs and international trade, said she would not consider altering the negotiations. "Doha is the declaration that we have on the table right now," she said. "It is the one that we're going to be negotiating on here." She said change would only come when members of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO, which operates on a consensus basis, "decide it is time to change tempo".
Keith Rockwell, the WTO's spokesman, accepted that it would be hard to achieve a breakthrough.
"Neither side's positions are irrational or illogical, and that makes it all very difficult to reconcile."
The failure to reach a deal on Doha has led to a proliferation of regional trade deals in the past few years, such as the recently concluded Trans-Pacific Partnership, which includes the US, Japan and 10 other economies.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Achim Steiner, head of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN Environment Programme, yesterday also added his voice to calls to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO to "reframe" its negotiations to incorporate a more sustainable development agenda because, he said, "the world has irrevocably changed".
"If it doesn't, [the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO] will increasingly struggle to make itself the central instrument for accelerating global trade, which is its aim," Mr Steiner said.
Geopolitical divisions over the future of Doha have been demonstrated by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN's sustainable development conference affirming its commitment to the Doha agenda but both the G20 and Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation both declining to do so for the first time.
Ms Mohamed said she remained optimistic about a deal, citing the success of the Paris climate change talks after the differences at the start of the two-week conference.
But diplomats say there has rarely been such a large number of outstanding issues ahead of a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO ministerial conference.
The Financial Times Limited 
Deep divisions ahead of global trade talks in Nairobi
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Marie-Noelle Blessig
15 December 2015
Agence France Presse
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization member countries remain deeply divided ahead of a key conference in Nairobi, with some urging the organisation to abandon talks deadlocked since 2001 and start fresh.
The four days of global trade talks, being held for the first time in Africa, will kick off in Nairobi on Tuesday amid predictions that chances of reaching even a limited trade deal are "gloomy".
On the eve of the conference, US Trade Representative Michael Froman warned that talks that started in Doha in 2001 aimed at lowering global barriers to trade had little prospect of success.
"It is time for the world to free itself from the strictures of Doha," he wrote in an opinion piece published in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Financial Times.
His comments appear to place the United States in the company of a number of countries calling for the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO to scrap the process and start over.
The Nairobi meeting comes two years after ministers from HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO member countries reached a landmark deal in Bali on overhauling global customs procedures.
This marked the first multilateral agreement concluded by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO since its inception in 1995, and also the first concrete progress since the Doha Round of trade liberalisation talks began.
But there are few signs that countries will be able build on the momentum gained in Bali to carve out even a limited deal in Nairobi.
Insiders say negotiators will focus on trying to nail down a partial deal focused on agriculture export competition and trade development in the world's poorest nations, but admit the chances of succeeding are shaky at best.
A source close to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO told AFP the intense preparations for the meeting that have been underway at the organisation's headquarters in Geneva in recent weeks have made little headway.
EU Trade Commissioner Cecilia Malmstrom also warned the European parliament last week that "prospects for even this more limited package are very uncertain, even gloomy."
"Developments in Geneva, have dramatically deteriorated in recent days, all but confirming that we are facing a very difficult Ministerial Conference in Nairobi," she lamented.
French Foreign Trade Minister Matthias Fekl meanwhile cautioned the French parliament last week to expect "difficult negotiations" in Nairobi.
"I have very little hope," that during the Nairobi conference "we will reach a broad agreement -- I won't even mention a comprehensive deal," he said.
The 162 countries which make up the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO set trade rules among themselves in an attempt to ensure a level playing field and spur growth by opening markets and removing trade barriers, including subsidies, excessive taxes and regulations.
But lacking progress towards fulfilling the Doha commitment has led countries to increasingly pursue bilateral or multilateral trade deals, casting a dark cloud over the relevance of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO.
"The upcoming ministerial conference is vital for the future of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO as a system," Malmstrom insisted, warning that a lack of agreement at the conference could prove "very dangerous for the whole multilateral system."
A well-informed source in Geneva told AFP the meeting would be dedicated to discussing the Doha agenda, "its future, a work programme for next year, the elimination of agriculture export subsidies, and what measures to take in favour of the least advanced countries."
The trade talks that began in Doha have been riven by a rich-poor split.
They never recovered from a collapse in negotiations in Geneva in 2008, notably because of a dispute over a provision that allows developing countries to erect protective import tariffs on farm goods.
In Nairobi, that split will remain apparent, with some countries calling for revisions of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's list of developing countries and questioning their special treatment.
Froman lamented that some emerging markets have today become the biggest providers of agricultural subsidies, but are still allowed to circumvent the rules.
"If you are a poor farmer facing a global market distortion it does not matter where the subsidies causing it came from. Artificial distinctions between developed and emerging economies make no economic sense," Froman wrote.
Agence France-Presse
Trade ministers meet as WTO  seeks to make breakthrough 
15 December 2015
The Nation
Deutsche Presse-Agentur
Geneva
A global free-trade agreement could boost flagging exports and imports around the world, but the slow pace of the negotiations is throwing the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation into doubt.
Diplomats and officials at the seat of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO in Geneva like to talk about what could or may happen if they were to finally close a global free-trade deal. An upturn in trade could provide momentum to the global economy and create jobs, they say.
However, ahead of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO meeting of trade ministers starting in Nairobi today, chances of a breakthrough look slim. Growth of exports and imports has been slowing for years. In September, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO had to downgrade its trade forecasts again, citing falling commodity prices and slower demand in large emerging markets like China.
World trade would grow only 3.9 per cent next year, down from 4 per cent projected in April, the world trade body's economists said then.
WTO Director-General HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevedo wants to see some action and results.
"HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members can help to set trade growth on a more robust trajectory by seizing the initiative on a number of fronts, notably by negotiating concrete outcomes by our December Ministerial Conference in Nairobi," he said.
But all the Brazilian WTO chief's pushing and pleading to overcome differences and remove trade hurdles have had little effect so far.
The line of economic and political conflict runs between the group of emerging and developing countries, led by China, India and Brazil on one hand, and the United States, Japan and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union on the other.
There was a ray of hope when HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO trade ministers met in late 2013 in Bali. There, they agreed to the so-called Bali Package, which addressed parts of the Doha agenda. It included the Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA) that aims to simplify customs bureaucracy and measures to reduce some agricultural subsidies.
Implementing the TFA could raise merchandise trade by up to a trillion dollars per year, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO calculates. Developing countries could boost their exports by up to US$730 billion (Bt26.3 trillion), and millions of new jobs could result from the deal, according to the forecasts.
However, fewer than 60 countries have ratified the TFA so far. While the Doha process has remained stuck, regional trade deals have been negotiated in parallel.
Last month, a dozen countries on both sides of the Pacific proved that developed and developing countries are able to agree on #124trade issues when they closed the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) deal in October after seven years of talks.
Both the TTIP and the TTP deals would account for half of global trade, raising the question whether the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO and its negotiations are still relevant.
The United States and other countries have already called for shelving the Doha plans and for reforming HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO.
Nation News Network Co., Ltd. 
Prospects of WTO Nairobi conference remain "very uncertain": EU official
Shuai Rong
14 December 2015
Xinhua News Agency
BRUSSELS, Dec. 14 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xinhua) -- The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) should keep working on outstanding Doha Development Agenda issues "but with new approaches," HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU high official said on Monday ahead of the 10th WTO Ministerial Conference to be held in the following days in Nairobi.
EU Trade Commissioner Cecilia Malmstrom said in a statement HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO needs new approaches because the global trade has evolved since the Doha round started 14 years ago.
"The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU has a deep and longstanding commitment to multilateralism in trade, however the prospects of the Nairobi conference remain "very uncertain," said Malmstrom.
She called upon all HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO partners to come to the negotiating table in good faith and prepare for the final necessary stretch needed on the limited issues selected for the talks this week.
she said the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU is also concerned with the deep persisting differences in positions of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members as it comes to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO post-Nairobi agenda.
Regarding agriculture issues, the trade commissioner said "we need a balanced outcome in agriculture dealing with all forms of export support, benefiting in particular the most vulnerable developing countries" and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU was ready to give up its right to use export subsidies but only as part of a comprehensive, balanced deal based on parallelism.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO ministerial discussion will also center on the topic of Least Developed Countries (LDCs), on which the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU wants to see progress on trade preferences on goods and services, rules of origin, and cotton, said Malmstrom.
Xinhua News Agency
WTO conference pledges 90 mln USD to boost trade in poor countries
Deng Yaomin
14 December 2015
Xinhua News Agency
NAIROBI, Dec. 14 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xinhua) -- Ministers of trade from around the world have pledged 90 million U.S. dollars to finance initiatives to boost trade in poor countries over the next seven years, officials said.
With the threat of failed talks hanging over the Nairobi Ministerial Conference of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation (WTO), the pledging of the 90 million dollars to finance initiatives to improve access to the world's trading markets for the poor countries would be celebrated as a major achievement.
Earlier, the WTO Director General HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevedo and the Secretary-General of the UN Conference on Trade (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UNCTAD) Mukhisa Kituyi, said the successful holding of the pledging conference would be a success of the ministerial meeting, bringing together 161 ministers of trade.
The ministerial conference is also looking at the possibility of striking an agreement on the contentious removal of export subsidies that has made the international price of cotton much lower.
The pledging conference was held just hours after the Chinese government signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO, to offer assistance to the poor countries to effectively participate in the trade facilitation.
At the donor pledging conference, several rich countries pledged to provide funds to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's Enhanced Integrated Framework (EIF) to assist poor countries improve their ability to trade internationally.
"The Least Developed Countries have access to the international markets but they cannot compete effectively because they lack the skills, the skilled personnel and have no real guaranteed access to the markets in other countries such as Europe," said Mario Musa of the EIF Secretariat.
The funds would be used to provide trade support services to some 48 countries categorized as Least Developed Countries over the next seven years to improve their capacity to trade by developing their export sectors. It is also meant to provide support for firms involved in the cotton trade and textiles, agricultural commodities and professional services in the manufacturing sector.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO also uses the funds to provide skilled workers to countries that need help to develop policies that would enable their countries to use the international markets as a basis for fighting poverty.
"The LDCs need a few things to help them use trade to reduce poverty. These countries represent 12 percent of the world's population but only account for 1.2 percent of the world trade. They also lack opportunities to attract investment," Musa told HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xinhua.
"These funds would be used to integrate them. They would be spent on helping the countries to understand the opportunities they have to trade and how to deal with the constraints facing them in the international trading arena."
Xinhua News Agency
The United States tries to euthanize the Doha round
By Daniel W. Drezner
14 December 2015
Washington Post.com
One of the truisms of the postwar multilateral trade negotiations is that each "round" of trade talks has been longer than the previous one. The Uruguay round, which led to the creation of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization, lasted eight years. The current Doha round began in November 2001. The last serious effort to complete the round collapsed in the summer of 2008; the negotiations are now on year 14 with no end in sight.
The Doha round became something of a punching bag for those who like to slag on global governance. I wrote a book about post-2008 global governance called "The System Worked," and even I had some fun at the Doha round's expense.
I bring this all up because U.S. Trade Representative Mike Froman dropped a bomb  in Monday's HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Financial Times, just before the next HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO Ministerial meeting in Nairobi. Froman's op-ed contains a rather serious proposal with respect to Doha: kill it. Kill it with fire:
This week trade ministers from around the world will gather to engage once again in the Doha Round of talks which, for all the initial hopes it represented, simply has not delivered. If global trade is to drive development and prosperity as strongly this century as it did in the last, we need to write a new chapter for the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation that reflects today's economic realities. It is time for the world to free itself of the strictures of Doha….
To be clear, Froman is not calling for the shelving of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO (indeed, one of the biggest misperceptions of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization is that it's just about the trade rounds) but rather, a different way of negotiating within the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO. In plain language, Froman wants an approach that does not require consensus on everything before anything can be accomplished.
Shawn Donnan reports in the FT that the global reactions to Froman's announcement will be somewhat variegated:
Countries such as Brazil, China and India and many of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's African members insist the [Doha] round needs to continue, because the Doha Development Agenda, as it is formally known, includes issues of vital importance to poorer countries, such as efforts to rein in agricultural subsidies in rich economies like the US and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU….
So we can learn a few things from this announcement and its reaction.
The first is that the United States really likes the Bretton Woods institutions… until the transaction costs of negotiating within them get too high. Which is just a wee bit hypocritical. After all, the United States has frowned on China setting up financial institutions outside the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF's purview. This op-ed is the U.S.'s way of saying that Washington is perfectly fine pursuing this approach on the trade front, because it can't get what it wants through the multilateral trade round.
The second thing is that the developed economies' support for the U.S. position suggests that key players in the developing world have overplayed their hand. Five or 10 years ago, there is no way the United States makes this announcement without catching all kinds of hell. At year 14, however, it seems that everyone is tired of trying to negotiate trade deals with India recalcitrant HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members. To be clear, there should be a bargain that can be completed. The fact that it's come to this is a partial indictment of the developed economies for not giving more on agricultural subsidies — but it's also an indictment of developing country trade negotiators showing little recognition of what is politically feasible.
The third thing is that the USTR is taking a big risk here. The U.S. logic is that with the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (T-TIP) in the works, the United States can just walk away from Doha. Except that there's no guarantee that Congress will ratify the TPP, and no guarantee that the T-TIP negotiations will even be completed anytime soon. Or, to put it in tweet form:
Of course if the Congress kills TPP and the German public kills TTIP, we may wish we still had Doha to kick around. Froman's op-ed is the next logical move in the forum-shopping game of trade negotiations. That doesn't mean it isn't risky.
Washington Post
Kenya calls for fair trade ahead of WTO conference
Ding Xiaoxi
14 December 2015
Xinhua News Agency
NAIROBI, Dec. 14 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xinhua) -- Kenyan President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Uhuru Kenyatta on Monday called for fair trade and urged the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation (WTO) ministers due to meet in Nairobi on Tuesday to remove agricultural subsidies in rich nations.
Speaking during the Fourth China Roundtable meeting in Nairobi, Kenyatta said trade rules in agriculture must be made fairer, adding that the trade distorting domestic support offered as subsidies by Western countries is negatively affecting Africa's agriculture and industry.
"If we are to industrialize, tariff escalation and peak tariffs should be eliminated. Standards should not be the next frontier of protectionism," he said.
He said the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO, established on the foundation of non-discrimination, a rules-based global market economy, trade openness, transparency, and the rule of law is a central pillar of global economic governance.
Kenyatta said he hoped this China Round Table will lend support for the ratification of the Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA) and for its early coming into force so that goods and services can flow more freely amongst countries; and in consequence create employment for the youth entering the job market.
"We need a rules-based Multilateral Trading System that provides space and mutual accommodation for the growth and enhanced welfare of all its members," he said.
President Kenyatta observed that the Fourth China Round Table which he officially opened in Nairobi is a valuable mechanism for strengthening the rules-based multilateral trading system.
He called for the strengthening of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO to enable it to fulfill its mandate effectively, saying no economy can exist in isolation.
Kenyatta said the questions and thematic focus of the Nairobi China Round Table establish the right policy context regarding Africa's position in HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO in relation to the international community.
"One of the principal gains from this process has to be the further integration of Least Developed Countries and newly Acceded Members into the Global trade regime," he said.
"National, regional and multilateral policy choices that we make will matter. The choices and positions we take will have consequences," Kenyatta said and emphasised the need for African countries to urgently diversify their economies, re-establish their manufacturing base and integrate into value chains.
He noted that although the continent has registered robust growth, manufacturing was failing and the industrial process weak.
The President said African countries must make the right policy choices and implement them all the way. "The primary responsibility to industrialize is with Africa. We need to deepen and sustain domestic economic, legal, institutional and structural reforms," he said.
He said other members of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO also have a responsibility to ensure that the global trading system is fairer, noting that trade distorting domestic support was damaging African agriculture and industry.
"I believe that International cooperation is the key to resolving the collective socio-economic challenges that face us all. It is the basis for stability, peace and security," he said.
Foreign Affairs and International Trade Cabinet Secretary Amina Mohammed said the 4th China Round Table and the 10th WTO Ministerial Conference were taking place at an important time when there was growing focus on African Trade performance and policy in relation to the role of the Multilateral Trading System.
She affirmed Kenya's commitment to domestic reforms including those accompanied by capacity building for sustained growth and development.
"Improving competitiveness and integration into the global economy are means of delivering sustainable development and enables us to improve on the quality of lives of our respective populations," she said.
Xinhua News Agency
Uhuru disputes the West's export subsidies, says they violate fair trade
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Gerald Andae
14 December 2015
Business Daily
President Uhuru Kenyatta Monday called on the ministers in WTO talks to eliminate agricultural subsidies in developed nations, even as it emerged that Africa's issues may not be on the agenda.
Mr Kenyatta said that the domestic support that is offered as subsidies by western countries is damaging Africa’s agriculture and industry.
Speaking during the Fourth China Roundtable meeting, Mr Kenyatta said that trade rules in agriculture must be made fairer so that African economies producing competitively are not halted with defensive trade remedies.
“When we speak about the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation (WTO), we, the members are the WTO! Trade rules in agriculture must be made fairer. Trade distorting domestic support is damaging African agriculture and industry,” said Mr Kenyatta.
“If we are to industrialise, tariff escalation and peak tariffs should be eliminated. African economies producing competitively should not be halted with defensive trade remedies. Standards should not be the next frontier of protectionism,” he added.
READ: Africa's trade issues off agenda
The President’s remarks come at a time when the Kenya will be hosting the 10th Ministerial Conference starting Tuesday, where African states have put the issue of subsidies as one of the key items to be discussed.
The Doha declaration promised major reforms in agriculture, particularly reduction in subsidies and tariffs for developed countries and special terms for developing countries.
These are the issues Africa is pushing for, which are not included on the agenda since they have been classified as contentious,” said a WTO official, adding that there were fears that the Doha Round will be “closed” without an agreement.
Areas of interest to Africa include financial and technical support for least developed countries (LDCs), agriculture, fisheries, trade in services as well as trade-related aspects of intellectual property rights (Trips).
Nation Media Group Limited
Africa Economy: Africa calls for fair trade practices ahead of WTO meeting
Deng Yaomin
14 December 2015
Xinhua News Agency
NAIROBI, Dec. 14 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xinhua) -- South African Trade Minister Rob Davies said Monday that African countries were being ripped off their fair share of the proceeds from trade in raw agricultural commodities such as coffee due to its lack of representation at the world market.
Citing recent reports showing the worldwide coffee marketing value chain was worth 100 billion U.S. dollars while African coffee exporters earned a paltry 6 billion dollars, Davies said Africa will benefit from its share of the world trade only if it was facilitated to participate internationally.
Speaking at the 4th China Roundtable ahead of the WTO Ministerial Conference in Nairobi, Davies said the lack of industries in Africa was to blame for the continent's poor share of the world trade and its low returns from the global trade.
"The value chains have not benefited Africa. Africa needs assistance so that it can weather the next wave of the financial crisis. We must industrialise. We can only do this through proper trade policies. It is not the trade rule that is the problem, it is the lack of products to trade across," the minister said.
"We must create regional value chains. We must create space to slow down the importation of the finished goods and we must have space to industrialise," the minister said at a panel debate on Africa's perspectives on the future of the trading system after the roundtable.
The debate convened by China is part of a series of debates the WTO Secretariat intends to hold after signing an agreement with China to facilitate the trade participation of poor countries.
Lesotho's Minister of Trade Joshua Setipa said while the foreign multinational corporations mostly dominated the international value chains, a requirement for the decentralization of the trading system, especially in the textile sector, would benefit more African countries.
"The textile industry can play a role in industrialization in African countries because it requires more labour. It is central to manufacturing. This means it is also a platform for our countries to enter into new sectors like motor vehicle sector where we also provide services associated with the textile sector such as the provision of seats for new vehicles," Setipa said.
"We have improved on our volume of trade in Africa. We have also managed to integrate into the global market and the global value chain," the minister added.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO is discussing further opening up of markets to produce from African countries.
"These global value chains are not a dream. They are already happening," said Arancha Gonzales, the Chief Executive of the International Trade Centre, a technical body created by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO.
She said to support trade, a new system to support local small and medium enterprises in poor countries was required to ensure these local companies benefit from international trade.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" ITC executive said the African region would only benefit from international trade if it manages to create local markets and regional trading blocs that would benefit locally produced goods.
Xinhua News Agency
Nations to Debate on Doha Round at WTO Meeting
Kirtika.Suneja@timesgroup.com
15 December 2015
The Economic Times - Mumbai Edition
The Tenth Ministerial Conference of the World Trade Organization in Nairobi is a tough battleground for India this time around. It is not the usual issues related to development that have been pushed for in the last 14 years since the Doha Development Round began, but the 162member HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO will debate if development issues need to be addressed at all in the four-day meeting starting December 15.
Though the warring parties are the same developed versus developing the bone of contention this time are the doubts being raised on the standing of multilateralism and its scope. The developed countries, principally the US, no longer perceive the Doha Development Agenda as beneficial for them and their focus is almost exclusively on gaining additional market access into the developing countries, particularly the so called emerging economies like India, China and Brazil, in both agricultural, and industrial goods. Hence, the US and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU, among developed countries want to close the Doha round as early as possible and likely to use the Nairobi ministerial to do so. They have been urging HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members to lower their ambition and work towards recalibrated, simplified and doable outcomes. The implication is that they should be willing to move away from the present versions of the negotiating texts and even the mandate of the round, if necessary . They view that India and china should not be given special and differential treatment which is available to the developing countries and also mandated in the DDA. India has been consistent in its stand based on the principle that the round must contribute to development as per the DDA mandate and that all areas under negotiations must be addressed. A hundred other countries also want have similar wish lists."While India has made it reasonably certain that it is very serious about food security and special safeguards, the agenda on the table is very light. There is emotional pressure on India to make this ministerial a success because it is happening in Africa for the first time," said an official.
India has maintained that the developed countries want to force a conclusion of the round in any form is the 'make or break' narrative that that failure in Nairobi would be disastrous for the multilateral trading system. India has countered this narrative in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO by stating that the round can't be completed without a credible outcome on the development dimension. "We have been receptive to the views of other members and have done our best to accommodate them for the sake of a positive outcome in Nairobi. The same spirit has been sadly missing in the positions of some other members," said commerce and industry minister Nirmala Sitharaman at the G-33 ministerial meeting on Monday . In fact, Kenya's President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Uhuru Kenyatta had written to the WTO DG HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevedo urging all countries "to show their political will and necessary flexibilities in order to deliver a successful outcome...
As such, the success of MC10 in Nairobi is indeed critical to further restoring the credibility of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO and the multilateral trading system. "While India will strongly take up the issue of food security and farmers' interest through a permanent solution and special safeguard mechanism especially , but as per its negotiating mandate, it does not want to be seen as obstructionist neither concur with rich nations' attempts to expand the domain of the talks by introducing new issues without completely fulfilling the Round's development dimension. FARM SUBSIDY As there is no consensus on reduction in domestic support by the developed countries, farmers in developing countries face a risk of injury from cheap and subsidised imports from the developed countries. The gravity of the situation is evident because in many developed countries, the level of subsidies as a share of value of production of some agri produts has exceeded 50%. Experts say that the US' share in value of dry peas is 57%, rice 82%, sunflower 65% and cotton 74% while the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU's share in butter is 71%, lemon 60%, rice 66% and olive oil at 76%. Even though there is broad consensus on general architecture of the SSM, the conditions imposed are onerous such as maintaining data on imports happening on preferential  tariffs and those under MFN rates. EXPORT COMPETITION Developed countries like the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU along with Brazil want developing countries to phase out their export subsidies by 2025. and also want to change the rules for export credit.
Bennett, Coleman & Co., Ltd. 
Breaking WTO promises would be irresponsible
15 December 2015
China Daily-US Edition
The United States' suggestion that the Doha Round of trade talks be prematurely ended is both ill-timed and irresponsible.
It is true that the world has changed since the Doha Round was launched at the beginning of this century: China's rapid rise as a top trading power in the past decade and the 2008 global financial crisis have reshaped the global trade and economic landscape beyond recognition.
However, what remains unchanged is the dire need for the international community to deliver on the Doha Round Development Agenda.
Last week, the United Nations cut its forecast for global economic growth in 2015 to merely 2.4 percent, and emphasized that growth in developing and transition economies was at its weakest since the global financial crisis.
At a time when developing countries are particularly exposed to rising volatility in exchange rates and capital flows that could further slow their economic growth, the international community should not try and weasel out of its early Doha Round commitments to address the needs of developing economies.
The hard-won success of the climate change talks in Paris should be used as reference at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization conference being held this week in Nairobi, Kenya.
The international community should keep reaffirming in the context of global trade rules that HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO negotiations must address issues vital to poorer countries, such as efforts to rein in the agricultural subsidies in rich economies like the US and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union.
The lack of progress in the Doha Round is surely a cause for concern and frustration. But rather than an excuse to backpedal, it should spur greater efforts.
Yet Michael Forman, the US trade representative, wrote in a recent article that "we are at the end of the line on Doha", which means the US wants to abandon the global trade negotiations.
On the one hand, the US' unwillingness to continue the Doha negotiations smacks of unwarranted defeatism, which is in sharp contrast to the newly found triumphalism global leaders displayed after ending about two decades of fruitless climate change talks.
On the other hand, it deals a heavy blow to the confidence of most developing countries that rich countries are truly committed to realizing the Sustainable Development Goals through fair and free trade.
For international agreements on climate change or trade to fulfill their goals, developed countries cannot shirk their responsibilities.
China Daily Information Company
Can't declare the Doha Round 'dead' yet: Rob Davies
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" D Ravi Kanth
15 December 2015
Mint
Nairobi, Dec. 15 -- The 10th ministerial conference of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) beginning in Nairobi on Tuesday cannot be the venue for declaring the Doha Round "dead" without fulfilling its fundamental objective of bringing a "developmental" dimension in the global trading system, South African trade minister Rob Davies said.
The big issue to be settled at Nairobi, said Davies, "is the way the work programme (for continuing with Doha negotiations) is defined".
"Here we have got very different and divergent views but a large majority of membership wants to reaffirm the Doha mandate and Doha work programme," he said.
In an interview, Davies said the core issues in agriculture involving steep reduction commitments in trade-distorting domestic and export subsidies must be addressed. He said cotton subsidies are a big issue for the four West African countries that have not been addressed.
As trade ministers began arriving at the heavily guarded Kenyatta International Conference Center for the preliminary group meetings of different coalitions, the topic of the day was what would happen to the Doha Round and whether it would be terminated in Nairobi.
The Doha negotiations were launched in 2001, immediately after the 9/11 terrorist attacks in the US. The late Murasoli Maran, former Indian trade minister, had opposed the launch of the Doha Round in September 2001 on the grounds that the previous Uruguay Round issues were not fully addressed.
But Maran was ignored at Doha and the US and the EU promised that they would address the global inequities in international trade and bring in a development dimension, according to a former Indian trade envoy who took part in the Doha meeting.
But after 14 years, the US and the EU along with Japan are determined to bring the Doha Round to a close in Nairobi. In an op-ed piece published in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Financial Times on Monday, US Trade Representative (USTR) ambassador Michael Froman said "it is time for the world to free itself of the strictures of Doha (Round)". The top US trade official suggested that trade initiatives are taking place outside the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO because of the deadlock in the Doha negotiations. He argued that "multilateralism-the attempt to reach a comprehensive global deal-is stuck".
"Getting it unstuck begins with acknowledging that Doha was designed in a different era, for a different era, and much has changed since," he said.
Moving beyond Doha, Froman said, "means bringing new approaches to the table. Doha issues are too important to leave to the Doha architecture that has failed for so long".
Froman maintained that when the Doha Round was launched in 2001, the EU and the US were top agricultural subsidizers. But now, emerging economies such as India and China are the biggest providers of agricultural subsidies.
At Nairobi, the four West African countries-Benin, Burkina Faso, Mali and Chad, which are now facing terrorist threats-have asked for substantial and binding commitments to reduce trade-distorting domestic subsidies in the US. Under the Doha mandate, the US is required to reduce its cotton subsidies and also bring overall agricultural subsidies to around $14.5 billion.
The US has flatly rejected the demand from the four West African countries. "Froman's comments are a total insult to Kenyans apart from anything else," said a former trade envoy from an industrialized country, who asked not to be named.
If multilateralism has failed, how is it that the climate change negotiations have succeeded after 23 years when they were launched in 1992, asked an African trade minister. The Kyoto protocol was concluded in 1997 and after it there was a new agreement in Paris last week to enable all United Nations members to take appropriate commitments, and the same can be done with the Doha Round, the African minister said, requesting anonymity.
Asked to comment on Froman's call, South African trade minister Davies said he would not respond to something he has not seen, nor enter into "polemical" arguments. But what is clear, said Davies, is that the Doha mandate has identified certain priorities for the developed and developing countries in which agriculture was the central focus and the needs and priorities for developing countries were at the heart of the Doha work programme.
"That is the reason why many of us are not willing to abandon the continuation of Doha process," Davies said. The South African minister said he will support India's demands for a permanent solution for public stockholding programmes for food security and a special safeguard mechanism for developing countries.
Earlier, at a meeting of the trade ministers of the G-33 coalition, India issued a strong message on continuing with the Doha Round. The trade ministers from the 47-country coalition agreed "to advance negotiations where concrete progress achieved including focusing on elements of the DDA (Doha Development Round) and with a view to achieve an outcome that would among other things rectify some of the gross imbalances in the existing HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO rules on agriculture".
Indonesian trade minister Tom Lembong, who chaired the G-33 ministerial, said the group is seeking "pragmatic solutions" without adopting strident positions in the "face of increased volatility of food production and prices on the global market since the food and financial crises in 2008, we underline the importance of protecting the small and resource-poor producers from market volatilities through public stockholding for food security purposes and special safeguard mechanism in the developing country members' food security, livelihood security and rural development strategy," the G-33 ministers said in their statement.
Published by HT Syndication with permission from MINT. 
LDCs united as WTO conference begins today
Meer Saiful Islam
15 December 2015
Dhaka Tribune
Members of the Least Developed Countries (LDC) group yesterday called upon HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation (WTO) members to fully and faithfully implement decisions taken so far on duty-free and quota-free market access.
They emphasised, in particular, the decisions taken in the Hong Kong and Bali Ministerial Declarations.
The demands were raised at a meeting of the LDCs in Nairobi yesterday, chaired by Commerce Minister Tofail Ahmed, the LDC group's coordinator at the WTO.
The LDCs put forward the demands, in the presence of WTO Director-General HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevedo, a day before the start of the 10th WTO Ministerial Conference in the Kenyan capital of Nairobi today.
A 21-member delegation from Bangladesh is attending the biennial conference.
“We will take a common stand on our demands at the trade negotiation with WTO members,” Tofail said.
The LDCs called for a strong commitment to addressing the marginalisation of the LDCs in international trade and to improving their effective participation in the multilateral system.
All issues of specific interest to the LDCs would be pursued on a priority basis to achieve commercially meaningful and legally binding outcomes, the LDC ministers' declaration said.
In the ministerial declaration issued yesterday, a dispute over cotton emerged at the top of the LDC concerns, with ministers expressing dissatisfaction about the lack of progress over decisions about the cotton industry affecting the sector.
The declaration urged members to fast-track the resolution of the cotton issue at the Nairobi conference by adopting a section on it.
It also called upon members to adopt the proposed decision on rules of origin for LDCs which aims to operationalise the guidelines enumerated in the “Ministerial Conference Decision on Preferential Rules of Origin for LDCs” adopted in Bali, Indonesia.
Dhaka Tribune
Plea for WTO to support agriculture in Africa
15 December 2015
Pretoria News
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" The World Trade Organisation (WTO) must do more to support large-scale agriculture in Africa and develop a new, global approach to domestic farm subsidies, African leaders said yesterday, the day before the world body meets in the Kenyan capital, Nairobi.
At the first ministerial meeting of the trade body in sub-Saharan Africa, African leaders say that they hope to find ways to level the playing field as they seek a bigger role in global trade and an increase in profits from the raw materials that they produce.
The Geneva-based HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO has been trying - and largely failing - to agree on a worldwide package of trade reforms since a meeting that took place in Doha in 2001 hatched an ambitious plan for knocking down trade barriers.
Its 162 members meet from today until Friday in Nairobi.
"Many of the developing countries, including Liberia, have been making the point that it is time to support agriculture," Liberian President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf said, stating that Liberia needed technology and investment.
One of the world's poorest countries, Liberia spent much of the last two years battling the Ebola crisis that killed 4 800 people.
Sirleaf also said African countries must continue to push for reducing subsidies by wealthy countries for cotton production and other areas of farming.
Such support made it impossible for developing nations to compete, she said.
Observers say it would be politically impossible for most Western countries to make those concessions, which are hugely popular in the nations that have them.
Although talks will be held in Africa, the topics will cover global trade issues that include pledges of trade assistance for poor nations.
Liberia and Afghanistan will also be formally welcomed to the group.
The biggest winners from a global trade deal would be the world's least-developed countries, most of whom are excluded from regional trade talks going on elsewhere, such as the US-led Trans-Pacific Partnership.
Kenyan President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Uhuru Kenyatta said in a speech yesterday that African countries had to do more to industrialise their economies, but should not be put at a disadvantage by high tariffs or other controls imposed by wealthier nations.
"African economies producing competitively should not be halted with defensive trade remedies," Kenyatta said. "Standards should not be the next frontier of protectionism." - Reuters
Independent Online
Eyes on WTO Ministerial, Nairobi
NZ International Business Forum
15 December 2015
Scoop.co.nz
A lot is at stake in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation (WTO) Ministerial meeting getting underway in Nairobi - for New Zealand, for developing countries and for the multilateral trading system - says NZ International Business Forum Executive Director Stephen Jacobi.
The tenth HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO Ministerial meeting is being held in Nairobi from 15-18 December and will be attended by newly appointed New Zealand Trade Minister Hon Todd McClay.
"As the pre-eminent body of multilateral trade rules and the arbiter of global trade disputes, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO is critically important to New Zealand", says Stephen Jacobi.
"Today the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's role in liberalising trade and eliminating trade barriers is being relegated to second or even third place as economies look to bilateral and regional agreements to boost trade growth. While regional agreements provide benefits for the participants, this approach risks leaving behind the world's poorest countries, which need the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO to provide the means for them to compete on a more level playing field in global trade".
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's Doha Development Agenda launched in Doha, Qatar in 2001 was dubbed a "development round" precisely to foster a more inclusive approach to trade and investment, but Doha has languished since Ministers came close but ultimately failed to conclude the round in July 2008.
"With Doha seemingly on a very slow burn, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO agenda risks becoming out of date as business models continue to evolve rapidly. In a world of global value chains the time and cost of doing business is paramount. It is important, therefore, that the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members move to ratify the Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA), concluded at last year's Ministerial in Bali two years ago. So far only 57 members (including New Zealand) have ratified and 108 ratifications are required to enable TFA to enter into force. If something as obviously beneficial as customs co-operation cannot be quickly implemented, it is hard to see how other more complex issues can be addressed".
Mr Jacobi says regional agreements like the Trans Pacific Partnership (TPP) are not substitutes for effective action in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO.
"While regional agreements like TPP can help move forward the trade liberalisation agenda, they do not deal effectively with issues like agricultural and export subsidies which need solutions involving all trading partners. Some might prefer it if these issues were never dealt with, but that is not likely to lead to concessions being made in other areas of importance such as market access for goods and services. Only a comprehensive outcome which delivers benefits for all participants is likely to achieve the consensus necessary to enable the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO to move on to next generation trade issues".
Mr Jacobi said that Ministers were faced with a stark choice in Nairobi - having to wind up Doha at this point or re-committing to its conclusion in a specified time frame. At the very least Ministers need to come take significant decisions on other key issues on the Nairobi agenda such as the elimination of export subsidies, a package of measures to assist development and liberalisation of environmental goods and services. A future expansion of the WTO Information Technology Agreement (ITA) covering trade in electronic products is also under consideration.
"Many in business have already given up on Doha, but they have not yet given up on the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO. Hopefully something of the "spirit of Paris' can flow over to Nairobi to show that multilateralism can work as much for trade as it can for climate change".
"We wish Minister McClay and the New Zealand team well in Nairobi" concluded Mr Jacobi.
ENDS
Scoop Media Limited
WTO body to decide when COOL retaliation tariffs begin
By P. Scott Shearer, Bockorny Group, Washington, D.C.
14 December 2015
National Hog Farmer
With the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization’s ruling last week of allowing $1.01 billion annually in tariffs (Canada: $781 million and Mexico: $227 million), the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO’s Dispute Settlement Body will hold a special meeting on Dec. 18 to officially authorize Canada and Mexico to retaliate against the United States.
Once this takes place, Canada and Mexico could start applying tariffs as early as Dec. 18 but more likely Dec. 21. Both countries plan to use the carousal process in that products can be added and removed for tariffs as needed to cause the most political pain. Canada and Mexico in a joint statement called on Congress to repeal country-of-origin labeling requirements for beef and pork to avoid retaliation.
[CHARTBEAT:3]
Canadian Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Justin Trudeau told a reporter last week, “We would rather not have to engage in retaliatory measures but we certainly will stand up for our farmers, stand up for Canadians who have been unfairly addressed and affected by this legislation.”
Efforts continue by the meat industry, livestock groups, COOL Reform Coalition, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" U.S. Chamber of Commerce, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" National Association of Manufacturers, and businesses to include a COOL repeal provision in the fiscal year 2016 omnibus appropriations bill being considered by Congress. More than 240 companies and associations wrote members of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" U.S. Senate asking them to repeal COOL with $1.01 billion in tariffs pending. Various pro-COOL Senators are now saying we have to avoid tariffs. The House and Senate leadership continue to work on the omnibus appropriations bill and will likely be considered on Wednesday. 
Penton Business Media
END
 
Josep Bosch, 
Head of Media unit
Information and External Relations Division
+41227395681
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.