Philippines can file case at WTO to enforce cigarette decision against Thailand
Cuba demands at WTO end to US blockade
WTO Public Forum 2015 to Focus on Trade as Development Driving Force
U.S. hopes to conclude Asia-Pacific trade deal this week
Japan, U.S. agree to try to conclude Pacific trade talks this week
Japan mulls additional proposal for U.S. rice imports
Market economy status for China is "a disaster for Europe"
China Dismisses U.S. Criticism of Its Cotton Subsidies
Trouble looms for developing countries as commodity revenues collapse
Latin America's great divide: Two trade blocs yielding dramatically different results
 
Philippines can file case at WTO to enforce cigarette decision against Thailand
29 September 2015
Manila Bulletin
The Philippine government can file an implementation case at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) against Thailand for failure to execute the multilateral trade body's decision four years ago to level the excise tax treatment on Philippine cigarette exports, a legal adviser on the case said.
Atty. Anthony Abad, who is part of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Philip Morris Philippines legal team which won the tobacco cigarette tax case against Thailand, said that under Article 21.5 Implementation Rules of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO the Philippines has the right to ask for HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's intervention.
“If they feel that within the reasonable period after the decision that the country that lost is not actually implementing it, the aggrieved country can file an implementation case at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO,” Abad told reporters recently.
At the implementation process, a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO panel will assess whether there was an implementation based on what Thailand said or if they have or have not yet implemented the decision at all.
Abad could only surmise that the hesitation of the government to file for an implementation case could be that it is of lesser importance or the Philippines would like to go diplomatic about it.
The case stemmed from a complaint by the Philip Morris Manufacturing Philippines that Thailand has been imposing higher tariff rates to its tobacco imports.
Abad, who is part of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Philip Morris legal team, said he will also clarify the plan of the private firm saying that the government is taking the cudgel on behalf of the affected local cigarette manufacturer.
“If a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO member does not file, nothing will happen,” he said noting that what he gathered is that HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Philip Morris has several concerns about the implementation of the case, including another tax evasion investigation issue that Thailand was said to have filed against the Philippine company.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Philip Morris is still dealing the tax evasion issue with the Thai courts. The tax evasion issue was deemed separate from the case filed by the Philippines as shipments involved in this particular case were not covered in the investigation period of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO case.
To recall, the dispute started when Philippines filed a complaint to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO against Thailand in 2006 for violation in the General a Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) of 1994.
The Philippines argued that Thailand imposed higher tax duties on imported tobacco products than domestic cigarettes, thus affecting Philippine cigarettes to Thailand and not promoting a fair trade competition.
Also, the country raised to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO other issues on Thailand such as customs valuation practices, excise tax, health tax, TV tax, VAT regime, retail licensing requirements and import guarantees in which the Philippines claimed that Thailand administered those measures in a “partial and unreasonable manner.”
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO favored Philippines' arguments, thus resulted to issuance of recommendations and ruling to Thailand in June, 2011.
On August, 2011, Thailand informed the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO that it intends to comply with the issued recommendations and ruling of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO regarding this issue.
On September, 2011, both Philippines and Thailand mutually agreed on a “reasonable period of time” to comply with the ruling. This “reasonable period of time” expired in 2012.
On January, 2013, Thailand told the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO that “it had completed the final outstanding steps in its implementation process.”
However, on February 2013, the Philippines expressed to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO that Thailand did not fully implement the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO recommendations and ruling and the latter did not inform the former of any progress on resolving the dispute.
Apparently, Thailand has not implemented the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO decision.
Manila Bulletin Publishing Corp
Cuba demands at WTO end to US blockade
29 September 2015
Mehr News Agency
GENEVA, Sep. 29 (MNA) – Cuba reiterated the necessity of ending the economic, commercial and financial blockade imposed by the United States to the island for more than 50 years.
Despite the measures implemented by Washington to change the application of some aspects of the blockade and its calls to the Congress to eliminate it, the laws and regulations supporting this policy are still in force, a diplomatic source stressed.
In this regard, Monica Rodriguez, an official of the Cuban Permanent Mission to the International Organizations in Geneva, referred to the negative implications of the "Section 211 of the (US) Omnibus Law of Budgetary Assignments of 1998."
In virtue of it, a specific license to renew the trademark registration for Havana Club rum has been denied for many years to the Cuban company Cubaexport,” she explained at the Dispute Settlement Body (DSB) of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO).
Rodriguez stated that the sustained failure by the United States in this dispute, responds to the absurd measures and laws in force in the northern country to endorse the aforementioned fence.
Among the serious consequences of this absurd policy, the compliance with the recommendations and rulings of the DSB, which since 2002 declared the Section 211 incompatible with the intellectual property rules of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO, is prevented,” she emphasized.
The diplomat recalled that for 23 consecutive years, the blockade has been expressly rejected by the international community at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN General Assembly.
On October 27, for the twenty-fourth time, the resolution entitled "Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and financial blockade imposed by the United States of America on Cuba" will be again voted on at the Assembly,” she said.
An important group of countries expressed their strong support for the island’s declaration, among them Mexico, Russia, Nicaragua, Bolivia, El Salvador, Ecuador, India, Trinidad and Tobago, Brazil, Argentina, China, Peru, Venezuela, Uruguay, Paraguay, Vietnam and Zimbabwe.
Mehr News Agency
WTO Public Forum 2015 to Focus on Trade as Development Driving Force
29 September 2015
Sputnik News Service
GENEVA, September 30 (Sputnik), Anastasia Levchenko - The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO annual Public Forum, which begins in Geneva Wednesday, will focus on trade as a driving force for development, the reduction of inequality between the rich and the poor, and political and economic stability.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's largest annual outreach event will take place under the slogan "Trade works!" Discussions will revolve around issues including trade's role in setting the cost of living and providing stability; global risks that impede trade, such as protectionism or geopolitical instability; integration of the least developed countries into the global trade community, and many others. Many discussions are particularly urgent in the context of the continuing downward adjustment in oil prices, existing geopolitical tensions, and new and reinstated global trade partners, including Iran.
According to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO website, the public forum normally attracts over 1,500 representatives from civil society, academia, business, the media, government, and inter-governmental organizations.
This year, the WTO director-general and his deputies, trade ministers and advisers from Western and Asian countries, members of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Parliament and heads of international trade organizations are among the participants.
The work will be organized in a form of plenary debates and numerous working sessions and workshops, and will last three days. This year, the Public Forum is taking place in the context of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's 20 anniversary.
Rossiya Segodnya International Information Agency
U.S. hopes to conclude Asia-Pacific trade deal this week
David Nakamura 
30 September 2015
The Washington Post
The Obama administration is aiming to wrap up talks this week on an expansive Asia-Pacific free-trade accord between the United States and 11 other nations, starting the clock toward a vote in Congress by early next year.
The prospect of the pact coming up on Capitol Hill in the midst of the U.S. presidential campaign has created fresh uncertainty about the prospects of success for the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), which would represent the largest U.S. trade deal since the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" North American Free Trade Agreement in 1993. President Obama has called it central to his economic and foreign policy agendas.
Negotiators from the 12 nations are gathering in Atlanta with the goal of reaching a final agreement among countries that account for 40 percent of the world's gross domestic product. Among them are Japan, Australia, Mexico and Canada. The pact would lower tariffs on beef, dairy products and automobiles, while setting up new regulatory provisions on pharmaceuticals, financial services and online commerce.
The White House had hoped to get the final deal to lawmakers by the end of this year to avoid the messy politics of an election season. But even if the administration breaks impasses on several thorny issues between the TPP countries and closes a deal this week, it is unlikely that trade legislation will reach the House and Senate floors for another three months at the earliest.
Opponents said they will renew an all-out effort to defeat the pact at a time when the nation's growing income gap has become central to the 2016 race for the White House. Candidates including Republican front-runner HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Donald Trump and Sen. Bernie Sanders (I-Vt.), running for the Democratic nomination, have criticized U.S. trade policies, saying American workers are being put at a disadvantage. In recent days, Trump has called HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" NAFTA "a disaster" and pledged to tear up the agreement or renegotiate it.
Appearing at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" U.N. General Assembly in New York on Monday, Obama defended the TPP as part of his vision for U.S. leadership in which painstaking multilateralism triumphs over a "might makes right" approach to global affairs.
"We can promote growth through trade that meets a higher standard," Obama said. "And that's what we're doing through the Trans-Pacific Partnership - a trade agreement that encompasses nearly 40 percent of the global economy; an agreement that will open markets while protecting the rights of workers and protecting the environment that enables development to be sustained."
Administration officials are eager to get a deal in place to maintain momentum from the spring, when Congress granted Obama new fast-track powers to negotiate trade deals despite a ferocious backlash from Capitol Hill liberals, organized labor and environmental groups.
The fast-track trade authority sets up a vote on a specific timetable that cannot be subject to filibuster. But deep divisions remain among the TPP nations on dairy and sugar trade, automotive manufacturing and intellectual-property rights for pharmaceutical companies.
"The president has made clear that he will only accept a TPP agreement that delivers for middle-class families, supports jobs, and furthers our national security," said U.S. Trade Representative Michael B. Froman, who will head to Atlanta on Wednesday. "That's the bar we have to meet, and we won't accept anything short of it. The substance of the negotiations will drive the timeline for completion, not the other way around."
Administration officials are cautiously optimistic that they can close the gaps by week's end, but their hopes of completing the pact over the summer were dashed when the talks broke off during the last negotiating round in Maui in July.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" AFL-CIO, which fiercely opposed the fast-track legislation, pledged to renew its fight against the trade pact. Once the TPP deal is finalized, the text of the agreement will be made public for the first time for at least 60 days before Obama can sign it, giving foes time to sow opposition to specific provisions.
"We're going to go all-out on TPP," said Thea Lee, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" AFL-CIO's deputy chief of staff. "As soon as the deal is done, we will ramp up education and mobilization."
Obama has touted the deal as a cornerstone of his bid to integrate the United States into the economy of the vast and fast-growing Asia-Pacific region, where China has sought to expand its influence. China is not involved in the pact.
The issue is a rare one on which the White House is aligned with the Republican leadership in Congress. Obama won the fast-track powers on a bipartisan vote, with broad support from the GOP and the backing of only a fraction of Democrats.
The public is divided. About 49 percent of Americans viewed the TPP as a good thing for the United States, with 29 percent saying it was a bad thing, according to a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Pew Research Center survey in June. Those surveyed in many of the other negotiating nations had higher opinions of the deal.
The debate over trade has put Democratic presidential front-runner Hillary Rodham Clinton in an awkward spot. She touted the TPP as the "gold standard" of trade agreements while serving as secretary of state during Obama's first term, but she has hedged since declaring her candidacy for the White House.
But Clinton, concerned about Sanders's rise in public opinion polls, has felt compelled to take stronger positions on issues on which she had previously equivocated, including announcing her opposition last week to the Keystone XL oil-sands pipeline.
Rep. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Sander M. Levin (Mich.), ranking Democrat on the House Ways and Means Committee, sent a memo to colleagues last week outlining 13 areas of concern he had first raised in the spring, including on currency manipulation and labor rights. Most of them remained unaddressed or were not resolved to his liking.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Public Citizen's Global Trade Watch, another source of vehement opposition to the deal, noted in a memo for reporters that all of the House members are up for re-election next year, raising the specter that some who supported fast-track authority could look more sceptically at the TPP deal.
Washington Post
Japan, U.S. agree to try to conclude Pacific trade talks this week
Kakumi Kobayashi Kakumi Kobayashi 
Kyodo News
30 September 2015
NEW YORK, Sept. 29 -- Japanese Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Shinzo Abe and U.S. Vice President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Joe Biden agreed Tuesday that the two countries will cooperate to conclude talks on a Pacific free trade initiative this week, both governments said.
Biden and Abe agreed that their negotiating teams for the Trans-Pacific Partnership would work closely together "with the goal of resolving the limited number of outstanding issues at the upcoming ministers meeting in Atlanta," according to the White House.
Abe and Biden met before ministers from Japan, the United States and 10 other TPP member countries resume their negotiations in Atlanta on Wednesday over thorny issues such as exceptions in tariff removal and drug patents.
A Japanese official who attended the meeting quoted Biden as saying the 12 countries engaging in the TPP talks should use this opportunity to strike a deal.
The Japanese premier told Biden that it is important to dispatch a forward-looking message to the world by reaching a deal early, Katsunobu Kato, Japanese deputy chief Cabinet secretary, told reporters. The envisioned Pacific free trade zone would cover some 40 percent of the global economy.
Abe and Biden pledged "utmost cooperation" between Japan and the United States over TPP-related issues, Kato added.
The 10 other TPP member countries are Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore and Vietnam.
In Atlanta, Akira Amari, Japanese minister in charge of the TPP, told reporters ahead of the ministerial talks that he was confident that chief TPP negotiators had made progress over sticky issues in their talks which began Saturday.
Amari said he could hold bilateral talks with U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman as well as New Zealand Trade Minister Tim Groser on the sidelines of the broad ministerial session to resolve remaining issues.
Kyodo News
Japan mulls additional proposal for U.S. rice imports
29 September 2015
Kyodo News
ATLANTA, Sept. 29 -- Japan is considering making an additional proposal regarding U.S. rice imports to reach a Pacific free trade agreement, creating one of the world's biggest free trade zones, a source close to the matter said Monday.
With talks ongoing in Atlanta between chief negotiators from the United States, Japan and 10 other countries involved in the Trans-Pacific Partnership deal, the two countries appear to remain at odds over rice, Japan's heavily protected staple food.
Japan has already proposed setting a 70,000-ton tariff-free annual import quota for U.S. rice, but that is far short of the 175,000 tons demanded by the United States.
Tokyo is now looking at an additional proposal of allocating 50,000 tons within an existing 770,000-ton quota for rice imports set under an earlier multilateral trade agreement as medium-grain rice, which is mainly grown by American farmers, the source said.
Japan currently imposes a 778 percent tariff on imported rice to protect local farmers. But following the Uruguay Round of global trade talks under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade framework, it set up a 770,000-ton tariff-free "minimum access" rice import quota. U.S. rice accounted for some 360,000 tons of the 770,000 tons in fiscal 2014.
U.S. farmers are likely to make up most of the 50,000 tons that would be allotted to medium-grain rice, which would boost American rice imports while squeezing allocations for other countries such as Thailand, China and Australia.
The Japanese government, which controls wheat imports, is also planning to cut by 45 percent the mark-up on wheat sold to flour millers and others, another source said. The mark-up is viewed as a de facto tariff.
The government has already decided to cut back the mark-up to respond to calls from the United States and other countries. Rice and wheat are among what Japan considers "sensitive" products. Diet resolutions adopted in 2013 call on the government to protect five key farm products including beef and pork, dairy products and sugar from an influx of cheaper foreign products.
These proposals came under consideration as the Japanese minister in charge of TPP negotiations prepares to attend ministerial talks from Wednesday in Atlanta.
Economic and Fiscal Policy Minister Akira Amari, who is in charge of the TPP talks for Japan, told reporters ahead of his departure that an agreement has to be reached at the meeting to keep negotiations from dragging on.
He reiterated that a final agreement could be delayed for years if the talks are not concluded in Atlanta.
Some countries see a need to strike a deal ahead of the general election in Canada next month and before the national focus in the United States shifts later this year to the 2016 presidential election.
Such political events will make it hard for politicians in those countries to concentrate on TPP issues, political analysts said.
Major sticking issues such as intellectual property protection, market access and automotive trade blocked ministers from wrapping up negotiations at the previous round in Hawaii in July.
The TPP negotiations were launched in 2010 involving the United States, Australia, Brunei, Chile, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore and Vietnam. Malaysia, Mexico, Canada and Japan joined the talks later. Kyodo News

Market economy status for China is "a disaster for Europe"
Robert Scott 
30 September 2015
City AM
WHAT is a market economy? A system in which free trade and enterprise are encouraged to thrive, or one that is closely controlled by a powerful central government, repeatedly guilty of anti-competitive conduct and hostile towards new entrants.
That is the question facing Brussels policy-makers, who are currently deciding whether to recognise China as a "market economy" - a decision I believe could be a disaster for the EU, costing upwards of 3.5m jobs and hitting GDP growth across the region by €228bn a year.
The seeds of this ticking time bomb were sown back in 2001, when China joined the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) following 15 years of talks. China's admission to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO, which governs global trade rules, came with a crucial clause that handed existing members - including those in the EU and the US - the right to "ignore Chinese prices and costs in anti-dumping cases and instead calculate dumping margins using external benchmarks". Anti-dumping is a protectionist tariff a government imposes on foreign imports, if it thinks that they're priced below normal market value. This effectively meant the US and Europe could place much higher duties on imports from China in antidumping cases than if China was treated as a market economy.
However, Chinese officials now argue that the provisions of their original agreement means that all member governments must grant China market economy status (MES) automatically on 11 December 2016. If this happens, then Europe's fragile economic recovery could be set back years.
Research I have undertaken for the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Economic Policy Institute shows that if the EU decides to give away MES to China, then between 1.7m and 3.5m jobs would be put at risk by allowing Chinese companies to undercut domestic production by flooding the EU with cheap goods.
In addition, more than 2m direct jobs in highly import-sensitive manufacturing industries could be at risk, due to surges of imports in specific industries such as paper, ceramics, steel, motor vehicle parts.
So why are we on the verge of this economic catastrophe? It is because China maintained extensive controls over the economy through 71 detailed five-year plans and 22 national industrial-sector plans, faithfully implemented by provincial and local governments. Currency manipulation by China has also acted as a subsidy to its exports to the EU and other countries, as well as a tax on EU exports to China, and to all other countries where EU products compete with those from China. These subsidies and support policies, plus the rapid growth of planned investments in "leading and pillar" industries in China's fiveyear development plans, have led to sustained overproduction and substantial excess capacity throughout the Chinese manufacturing industries.
Even without MES, China has been able to dramatically increase exports to Europe by a remarkable 11.1 per cent annual rate over the past 15 years, rising from €74.6bn in value in 2000 to €359.6bn in 2015. Quite simply, if the EU decides to grant MES to China, imports from it would increase at least by between 25 and 50 per cent over the next three to five years.
Declining demand for domestic manufactured goods in the EU due to surging imports could also have a depressing effect on business investment in manufacturing. I advise the EU to consider the hundreds of billions of euros of output and millions of jobs that would be at risk before unilaterally offering MES to China.
But how likely is this all? Although some EU officials are believed to be leaning in favour of granting MES to China, prominent analysts and trade lawyers disagree whether the provi-sions of China's HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO accession agreement require other HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members to grant MES to China next year.
According to AEGIS Europe, an industry alliance that promotes manufacturing, investment, employment, growth and innovation in Europe, a decision to grant China MES can only be made if China meets five specified EU criteria that determine what a market economy is. The two most important of these are: does the government influence the operative decisions of firms or are they made in response to market signals? And does the legacy of the command economy, in terms of public ownership, barter trade and so on, affect firms' operations? Both the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" US Department of Commerce and the EU Commission have found, during the course of antidumping investigations, that firms in China do not operate under market economy conditions and that China as a whole does not meet the technical criteria for MES. Even worse, China is not meeting obligations under its HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO Accession Protocol to take steps that would turn China into a market economy - in particular, its obligation to allow nearly all prices to be determined by the market.
It is in China's own, long-term interest to take the hard steps necessary to become a true market economy. However, Chinese President Xi and the current generation of leaders are stuck in the past, and too dependent on the old model of export-led growth to rescue China from its deep economic troubles. The EU needs keep up the external pressure on China to reform by maintaining the current system of treating China as a non-market economy.
Professor HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Robert Scott is a director at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Economic Policy Institute.
This decision could cost upwards of 3.5m jobs and hit GDP growth across the EU
City AM Ltd
China Dismisses U.S. Criticism of Its Cotton Subsidies
By staff reporter Wang Su 
29 September 2015
Caixin Online
China argues its financial support to farmers is less than what HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO allows, document from trade body says(Beijing) – Beijing has dismissed criticism from the United States over its subsidies for the cotton industry, saying they are lower than an allowed level set by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization.
A document released by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's agricultural committee on September 22 details China's response to a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO survey of policies covering cotton subsidies, market access and exports in member countries that was performed in late May. Seventeen WTO members, including the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union, United States, Russia and Australia, participated in the survey. Beijing said in the document that its support for cotton output is less than the WTO-allowed level of 8.5 percent of the value of sales and lower than the levels in developing countries, which range from 8.5 percent to 10 percent. In 2011, Beijing introduced a reserve program in which governments promised to buy cotton from farmers when prices fell below a certain level. The measure was aimed at protecting the domestic industry, but resulted in excessive stockpiles, prompting regulators to cancel the program last year.
That approach was replaced by a subsidy that came into effect last year, but this has annoyed the United States. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" National Cotton Council of America has urged American trade officials to investigate China's cotton policies.
In testimony to the U.S. Trade Representative in October 2014, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" National Cotton Council of America said China's subsidies exceeded the allowed 8.5 percent level and called on U.S. regulators to further investigate.
However, China argued in the document that its cotton production is based on small-scale subsistence farming in remote, underdeveloped regions, and China "has no choice" but to subsidize its cotton farmers to safeguard their livelihoods.
"They will be forced out of jobs if the government does not take the necessary actions," it said.
In the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO document, China also denied the accusation that the country exports its cotton reserves. Instead, it says the reserve is intended to protect its textile industry from volatility in international market caused by subsidies in developed countries.
Since China joined the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO in 2001, its imports of cotton have increased from 113,000 tons to 4.2 million tons in 2013, the document said. It added that as the world's top importer of cotton, China buys more than half of the world's cotton.
Caixin Media Company Limited
Trouble looms for developing countries as commodity revenues collapse
30 September 2015
Reuters News
By John Kemp 
LONDON, Sept 29 (Reuters) - Slumping commodity prices pose a serious challenge to economic and political stability in developing economies across Latin America, Africa, the Middle East and Asia. 
According to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, 94 developing countries depended on commodities for more than 60 percent of their merchandise export revenues in 2012/13. 
Sixty-three developing economies were considered "extremely commodity dependent" with commodities accounting for more than 80 percent of export earnings ("State of commodity dependence" April 2015). 
Most commodity-dependent developing countries rely on raw material exports for more than 20 percent of their entire economic output, in some cases rising to more than 50 percent, according to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UNCTAD ("Key statistics and trends" June 2015). 
During the boom years, the value of commodity exports from developing countries jumped from $2.0 trillion in 2009/10 to $3.2 trillion in 2012/13, mostly as a result of higher prices, which gives some idea of the scale of revenues now at risk. 
For example, oil export revenues for the members of theHYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OPEC) rose from $123 billion in 1994 and $375 billion in 2004 to a peak of $1.2 trillion in 2012. 
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OPEC export revenues had already fallen to $965 billion in 2014 and are set to fall even more sharply in 2015 as the full impact of slumping prices filters through ("Annual Statistical Bulletin" 2014). 
COMMODITY SUPER-CYCLES 
Developing countries have always had to contend with unusually high volatility in export earnings and output as a result of the extreme variability in commodity prices. 
Studying a broad range of fuel, farm and metals prices since the late 19th century, researcher David Jacks identified four commodity price super-cycles since 1900 ("From boom to bust: a typology of real commodity prices in the long run" 2013). 
In a typical super-cycle, prices rise for 10-20 years, by 20-50 percent compared with the previous trend, before starting to decline. The whole cycle is generally completed within less than 40 years. 
According to Jacks, the four commodity super-cycles peaked during the 1910s, 1950s, 1970s and most recently the 2010s. 
Subsequent busts in the 1930s, 1960s and 1980s/1990s proved painful for commodity dependent countries and were often characterised by debt defaults as well as political and economic instability. 
Previous super-cycles have been linked to the industrialisation and urbanisation of the United States in the late 19th century, the two world wars, and the reconstruction of Europe and Japan in the mid-20th century. 
The most recent super-cycle stemmed from the rapid industrialisation and urbanisation of China after reform and opening up in the 1980s. 
BEGINNING OF THE END? 
Writing in March 2013, Jacks observed 15 of the 30 commodities which he had studied since the early 20th century started to exhibit above-trend real prices beginning between 1994 and 1999. 
He concluded presciently: "the accumulated historical evidence on super-cycles suggests that the current super-cycles are likely at their peak and thus nearing the beginning of the end". 
Commodity price cycles are associated with significant political, economic and diplomatic changes. The last big super-cycle, which started in the 1960s, peaked in the 1970s, and crashed in the 1980s, contributed to very poor economic performance and political instability in the commodity producers in the 1980s and 1990s. 
The wave of defaults which swept across Latin America in the 1980s, the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 and the intense financial and political pressures on many oil producers in the Middle East in the 1980s and 1990s have all been blamed on the fall in commodity export revenues ("The Soviet collapse: grain and oil" 2007). 
Parallels with the 1980s should be drawn with great care but the potential loss of more than $1 trillion in annual export revenues, which could last for a number of years, will put the economic, social and political systems of commodity exporters under the sort of stress many have not experienced for well over a decade. 
Commodity-dependent economies used increasing export revenues to improve their budget balances and public finances until 2008, but after 2008 balances deteriorated and public debt increased, according to the chief economist of the South Centre, an intergovernmental organisation set up developing countries. 
Most commodity dependent developing countries are entering the downturn with little or no room to manoeuvre on fiscal policy, he warned HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UNCTAD's global commodities forum in April. 
While a handful of gulf monarchies such as Saudi Arabia and Kuwait amassed enormous reserves during the boom, which could insulate them from the full force of the downturn for some years, the majority of commodity producing countries face a much more pressing adjustment unless prices rebound. 
TERMS OF TRADE SHOCK 
The plunge in commodity prices since 2012, accelerating since 2014, represents and enormous shift in the terms of trade as well as income and wealth between commodity producing and commodity consuming countries as well as individual households and businesses. 
Most HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD countries will big net beneficiaries since they are net food and fuel importers: obvious exceptions are Canada, Australia and New Zealand, which depend on commodities for a large share of export revenues and GDP. 
Outside the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD the picture is more complicated. Some big commodity importers, notably China, are clear winners, as are some urban households who benefit from lower food and fuel prices. 
But with so much economic activity in many developing countries linked to agriculture, oil and gas and mineral extraction, the impact on government revenues, jobs and incomes will be severe. 
Large changes in relative prices and redistributions of income are always disruptive economically, and often politically as well. 
The reverse side of the 1970s commodity boom for developing countries was the energy crisis in the United States, Western Europe and Japan as prices for fuel. 
The painful adjustments required by the surge in energy and other commodity prices during the 1970s remain seared onto the collective memory of many advanced economies. 
U.S. President Jimmy Carter memorably went on television in April 1977 to have an "unpleasant talk" about the energy crisis which was "a problem unprecedented in our history" and required a brave response "the moral equivalent of war". 
Thomson Reuters (Markets) LLC
Latin America's great divide: Two trade blocs yielding dramatically different results
By Abbey Mansfield Ruby, Cynthia Collins Allner 
29 September 2015
Inside Counsel
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" Latin America has a long history with economic and political alliances. Today, the two most prominent trade blocs in HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" Latin America are the Southern Common Market (Mercosur) and the Pacific Alliance. These two blocs represent over 80 percent of regional trade and over 90 percent of Latin America’s gross domestic product.
The Mercosur customs union was created in 1991 by Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay (and joined by Venezuela in 2012) for the purpose of promoting business and encouraging the movement of people, goods and currency. The much younger Pacific Alliance trade group, established only recently in 2011, joins the economies of Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Peru through a free trade agreement with a goal to promote “deep integration” of economies through the free movement of goods, services, capital and labor and to strengthen ties with the world (the Asia-Pacific region in particular).
These two blocs have approached trade and growth quite differently: protectionist Mercosur provides preferential trade access to less than 7 percent of the world economy, while the much more open Pacific Alliance represents countries having trade pacts representing nearly 75 percent of the global market. In its short history, the Pacific Alliance has established itself as a powerful economic alliance, while Mercosur has struggled since its founding to find success.
Mercosur
Inspired by the example of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union, Mercosur’s founders envisioned a trade bloc as a tool to strengthen democracy among members as they recovered from the oppressive dictatorships of the 1980’s. Mercosur’s protectionist attitude toward major financial centers and traditional world powers resulted from a combination of members’ shared histories of socio-economic inequality and Western support for oppressive 20th-century autocracies, as well as modern multinational corporations with poor human rights records in the region.
Mercosur’s member countries include some of the world’s largest food producers and are home to Earth’s largest known mining and energy reserves. Brazil remains the regional economic giant by virtue of its abundant natural resources and large consumer market, while Venezuela commands some of the largest petroleum reserves in the world. While Mercosur was expected to be an economic powerhouse, growth in the Mercosur countries lagged significantly behind that of their neighbours, even during periods of cheap money and strong commodity prices in the region. In its 20 years of existence, Mercosur has failed to create deeply integrated economic structures, remaining barely more than a customs union which suffers from mistrust among members and a deficient legal framework for economic growth.
Pacific Alliance
While the Pacific Alliance countries have similar political and social histories to their Mercosur counterparts, the manner in which they have approached economic policy marks a significant departure from the protectionist foundation of Mercosur. The Pacific Alliance has committed to free-market policies and sought to increase trade by lowering tariffs and actively pursuing new export markets. Unlike Mercosur, the goal of the Pacific Alliance is to deepen cooperation among members with the explicit purpose of forging closer relations with markets outside of Latin America – in particular, the Asia-Pacific region.
In its short history, the Pacific Alliance has moved swiftly to create a model of economic and political integration aimed at attracting investment and creating export platforms for the global market. In 2013, members signed an agreement to abolish tariffs on 92 percent of merchandise traded, with the remainder to be abolished by 2020. Member countries have abolished tourist visa requirements for each other’s citizens and have opened shared embassies abroad. The Pacific Alliance created a joint regional stock exchange called MILA with market capitalization of MILA-listed companies now exceeding $950 billion. The Declaration of Paracas, signed in July of 2015 by the Pacific Alliance countries, provides further collaboration in citizen migration, public spending, attracting investment and the health care industry, among others.
The Pacific Alliance model has worked. An ever-increasing share of foreign direct investment has landed in Pacific Alliance countries, and members have experienced increased trade with the United States, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union and Asian countries. Companies doing business in Pacific Alliance countries have also reported significant business benefits. While Mercosur countries have grown at an average rate of less than 1 percent per year, Pacific Alliance members have experienced growth upwards of 4 percent annually during the bloc’s short history, and their economies are expected to continue growing at three or four times the rate of their Mercosur neighbours.
What the Future Holds
With dramatically different views on free trade, Mercosur and the Pacific Alliance are normally seen as being sharply divided. However, foreign ministers of the two blocs have recently begun to discuss regional integration. At a Pacific Alliance summit in July of 2015, Chilean president Michelle Bachelet insisted that a convergence with Mercosur is needed as the entire region faces dropping commodity prices and an international context of slow growth: “We can’t give the image that in this region the two coasts (Pacific and Atlantic) live back to back,” she argued. Perhaps the success of the Pacific Alliance will put pressure on the struggling Mercosur economies to consider trade deals and abandon their protectionist measures in favor of more liberal policies and free trade.
ALM Media LLC
END
 
Josep Bosch, Information Officer
Information and External Relations Division
+41227395681
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.