WTO Delegation Heads to Discuss Post-Bali Agenda
Mega CII summit begins today in city
Egypt hosts meeting to unify African positions in WTO negotiations
Mauritius to Host WTO Regional Workshop for Parliamentarians in February
Indonesia, Morocco Ban Imports of Poultry from U.S. Following Avian Flu Reports
Russia to Broaden Import Replacement, Ban Military Imports from NATO Members
Ecuador impone nuevos aranceles a importaciones de Colombia y Perú
UCAB Appeals To WTO To Block Law Raising Import Duties On Seeds And Crop Protection Agents
Free trade deal between Japan, Australia takes effect
Advocacy groups launch global anti-poverty campaign
Jamaica tops list of countries with the most women managers
 
WTO Delegation Heads to Discuss Post-Bali Agenda
WTO Reporter, January 15, 2015

Jan. 14 — The heads of delegation of the World Trade Organization's 160 members will convene in Geneva Jan. 21 to discuss their goal of advancing a detailed post-Bali work program.
 
WTO Director-General Roberto Azevedo asked members to attend an informal meeting at 10 a.m. in Room W of the WTO building, according to documents released Jan. 14.
 
Members agreed in November to produce a “clearly defined work program” to address the remaining elements of the Doha Development Agenda (DDA) by July 1.
 
That deadline was extended by seven months after members failed to meet the Bali ministers' Dec. 31 deadline to deliver a work program that concludes the DDA after India's opposition to the Trade Facilitation Agreement bogged down the organization's work.
 
 
Mega CII summit begins today in city 
15 January 2015
The Times of India - Jaipur Edition
 
Chief minister Vasundhara Raje, railway minister Suresh Prabhu, Union commerce and industry minister Nirmala Sitharaman on Thursday will exhort to initiate development ideas to business delegations, political leaders from 51 countries, captains of the Indian industry and several corporate heads, including representatives from multinational companies, who will assemble in the Pink City for the Confederation of Indian Industry's (CII) flagship event ­ Partner Summit. Pics: Bhagirath Over 1,000 delegates will deliberate on global economic and trade scenario, its growth and the challenges and opportunities before it in the three-day event. Abdulmohsen Medij Al Medij, deputy PM and minister of commerce and industry of Kuwait, will inaugurate event while Zimbabwe's industry and commerce minister Michael C Bimha and Macedonian prime minister Nikola Gruevski among others will attend a plenary session on "Defining Shared New Realities".

A session on World Trade Orgainzatiom (WTO) on the second day will dwell on how the world trade body can be made more responsive to development needs and how its response will be in future to the ever expanding list of issues, including the proliferation of free trade agreements and rising non-tariff barriers. The session will be addressed by WTO director general Roberto Azevedo, a CII release said. A session on `'US and India: Co-Creating a Shared Future" will throw light on how the US can be a natural partner as India seeks its development process to the next level through the `Make in India' initiative. Andrew Robb, minister for trade and investment of Australia; Malaysian minister for international trade and industry Y B Dato Sri Mustapa Mohamed and Gao Yan, China's vice-minister of commerce will be among other panelists for the session on ''Mega-Regional Trading Blocs: Implications for Emerging Economies''. The potential of the Modi government's initiative 'Make in India' to turn the country into a global manufacturing hub and to attract foreign investors will be discussed in another session on "Make-in India: Offering a New Partnership Opportunity to Industry ," it said. A special session on `Resurgent Rajasthan' will also be held and will be addressed by Raje. The last day of the summit will witness sessions on ''Financing for Growth and Development'', ''Growing Importance of Service Sector in Manufacturing Value Chains'', and ''Global Development Agenda Beyond 2015''.

 
Egypt hosts meeting to unify African positions in WTO negotiations 
Egypt Independent 
14 January 2015
 
Minister of Trade and Industry Mounir Fakhry Abdel-Nour said that Egypt has called for a meeting on 18 January to discuss African unified positions in World Trade Organization (WTO) negotiations, specifically in issues of development, trade liberalization and storage of food commodities. The meeting would also discuss an agenda for the meeting of trade ministers of 31 countries on the sidelines of the Davos Forum on 24 January in Switzerland. We will also coordinate arrangements for the WTO Ministerial Conference in Nairobi in December,” Abdel Nour said, adding that it would be the first time that the conference is held in an African country. These statements came at the Kenyan Egyptian Business Forum in Nairobi, which was attended by Egyptian Foreign Minister Sameh Shokry, Kenyan Foreign and International Trade Minister Amina Mohamed, and more than 200 businessmen from both sides.

Abdel Nour also said that he signed a framework trade agreement with Kenya to establish a joint trade committee to enhance intra-regional trade and remove obstacles. The committee, which would be headed by the trade ministers of both countries, would meet every six months. He also agreed to form a joint business council of 10 members from each country in various economic sectors. Egypt seeks to achieve economic integration between the various economic blocs of the continent,” he said, pointing out that the integration of the three biggest African blocs of SADC, COMESA and East Africa into one entity in the next few months will undoubtedly open new markets and remove trade obstacles for the member states.
 
 
Mauritius to Host WTO Regional Workshop for Parliamentarians in February
14 January 2015
All Africa
 
Jan 14, 2015 (Government of Mauritius/All Africa Global Media via COMTEX) -- A regional workshop on WTO (World Trade Organisation) issues for Parliamentarians from Member States of the Indian Ocean Commission and the East African Community will be held from 9 to 11 February 2015 in Mauritius.

Organised by the WTO Secretariat in collaboration with the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association and the Assemblee Parlementaire de la Francophonie, the workshop has as objective to enable parliamentarians obtain a better understanding of the WTO rules and its functioning. It also aims at enhancing the understanding of the Bali Ministerial Conference (2013) outcomes and the way forward to conclude the Doha Round of Negotiations.

About the WTO and the Ministerial Conference

The WTO is a rules-based, member-driven organisation -- all decisions are made by the member governments, and the rules are the outcome of negotiations among members. Its main function is to ensure that trade flows as smoothly, predictably and freely as possible.

The Ministerial Conference is the topmost decision-making body of the WTO which usually meets every two years. It brings together all members of the WTO, all of which are countries or customs unions. The Ministerial Conference can take decisions on all matters under any of the multilateral trade agreements.

As at 26 June 2014, the WTO comprised 160 members. Mauritius has been a WTO member since 1st January 1995. 
 
 
Indonesia, Morocco Ban Imports of Poultry from U.S. Following Avian Flu Reports
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, January 15, 2015
 
Jan. 14 — Indonesia and Morocco joined more than two dozen countries in restricting imports of U.S. poultry and egg products, according to World Trade Organization documents released Jan. 14.
 
The import bans stem from recent findings of highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) H5N8 in guinea fowl in Winston, Ore., and in wild gyrfalcons in Washington state, as confirmed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) on Dec. 14.
 
In the last month, more than 30 countries and regions including China, the EU and South Korea have restricted imports of U.S. poultry products after the HPAI discoveries.
 
The H5N8 virus has not been found in any commercial poultry in the U.S., the USDA's Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service said Dec. 18. USA Poultry and Egg Export Council members “don't ship any appreciable amounts of products” to Indonesia or Morocco, said Toby Moore, the organization's vice president of communications. “We haven't shipped poultry to Indonesia for many years because of the refusal of the government to recognize U.S. halal certification,” Moore told Bloomberg BNA in an email.
 
The Indonesian Ministry of Agriculture notified the WTO of its prohibition on U.S. poultry and poultry products dispatched after Dec. 16, 2014.
 
Indonesia is among the world's biggest poultry markets, with estimated domestic consumption of 1.56 million metric tons of broiler meat in 2014, according to the USDA.
 
The prohibited products include day-old chickens, live poultry and fresh poultry products, with the exception of specific pathogen-free eggs and hatching eggs.
 
Separately, the Moroccan National Office for Food safety notified the WTO that it had banned imports of all species of birds, poultry, poultry meat, poultry meat products, eggs and egg products shipped from the U.S. and Italy after Dec. 23.
 
The Moroccan poultry ban does not apply to “treated and packaged products that have been subjected to treatment during the manufacturing process” to ensure the destruction of the HPAI virus, the WTO filing said.
 
Indonesia and Morocco said that their decisions comply with the World Health Organization for Animal Health's terrestrial animal health code chapter 10.4.
 
 
Russia to Broaden Import Replacement, Ban Military Imports from NATO Members
By Jenny Johnson
WTO Reporter, January 15, 2015
 
Jan. 14 — Amid continuing sanctions against western countries, the Russian government is considering broadening its program to replace imports with domestic products in more key sectors by mid-year and banning military imports from NATO member countries, according to Russian officials.
 
Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev, speaking at an economic forum in Moscow Jan. 14, called on lawmakers to pass a plan in the next six months to extend existing policies to replace imports in the pharmaceutical, machine tools and oil and gas industries. The plan also should include new supports for domestic industry, particularly for agricultural producers.
 
“We will increase support for non-oil exports,” Medvedev said. “Today the demand for grain is a more stable trend than the demand for energy.”
 
Plans to Replace NATO Imports
 
Replacing imports of electronic components from NATO countries will be on the agenda at the next Military-Industrial Commission meeting with President Vladimir Putin, Deputy Defense Minister Yuri Borisov announced Jan. 13.
 
Up to 700 components for weapons and military equipment should be replaced by the end of this year, including up to 80 percent of the 200 types of equipment supplied to Russia from Ukraine, officials said.
 
Russia currently imports about 10 percent of its military supplies, according to Borisov.
 
Bill on Government Purchases to Avoid WTO Rift
 
Lawmakers also will soon take up legislation from the Ministry of Economic Development to permit preferences for domestic companies in government purchases.
 
The legislation would insert new language into the government procurement law that would favor domestic suppliers for special investment projects, according to the bill submitted for public review Jan. 13. Explanatory text accompanying the bill said that such language would not violate World Trade Organization rules.
 
 
Ecuador impone nuevos aranceles a importaciones de Colombia y Perú
Puentes
14 January 2015
 
El gobierno de Ecuador ha decidido cerrar el año 2014 imponiendo una salvaguardia cambiaria a las importaciones provenientes de Colombia y Perú en un intento por proteger su economía tras la depreciación de las divisas de estas dos naciones. 
 
De acuerdo a la Resolución Nº 50-2014 del Comité de Comercio Exterior de Ecuador, emitida el 29 de diciembre de 2014, el país andino ha impuesto desde este 5 de enero recién pasado un impuesto ad valorem adicional del 7% a todos los productos originarios de Perú y del 21% para aquellos de Colombia.

Las medidas, que tienen un carácter temporal, buscan proteger la economía ecuatoriana tras la devaluación que el peso colombiano y el sol peruano han sufrido durante los últimos seis meses, 25% para el primero y 5,4% para el segundo, lo que ciertamente tendría consecuencias negativas para las relaciones comerciales entre las partes.

Además de la subida del dólar, divisa utilizada en Ecuador, la caída de los precios del petróleo también ha afectado a la economía ecuatoriana, por lo que las medidas arancelarias se unen a otras dos reformas, la reducción de la cuota de importaciones de vehículos y el recorte del Presupuesto General del Estado en US$ 1420 millones para el presente año, reducidos en US$ 840 millones del gasto de inversiones y US$ 580 millones del gasto corriente.

Si bien la salvaguardia ha causado la molestia de las partes, esta se encuentra estratégicamente amparada en el artículo 98 del Acuerdo de Cartagena, texto constitutivo de la Comunidad Andina (CAN) y a la cual pertenecen los países citados, y que establece que si “existen antecedentes que hagan temer fundadamente que, como consecuencia de la devaluación, se producirán perjuicios inmediatos que revistan señalada gravedad para su economía, que requieran con carácter de emergencia la adopción de medidas de protección, [el Miembro solicitante] podrá plantear la situación a la Secretaría General, la cual, si considera fundada la petición, podrá autorizar la aplicación de medidas adecuadas, para lo cual dispondrá de un plazo de siete días continuos”.

Ecuador ha considerado, por tanto, que al no recibir observación alguna por parte de la Secretaría General de la CAN se encuentra en pleno derecho de aplicar la salvaguardia ya señalada. La polémica reside en que esta fue presentada precisamente cuando los funcionarios que debían revisar la medida detenían sus actividades debido al periodo vacacional de fin de año.  
 
En un reciente comunicado, la Secretaría General ha indicado que recién este 6 de enero se han retomado las actividades, por lo que los plazos establecidos en el artículo 98 corren desde el día en que se ha tenido registro oficial de la solicitud. En consecuencia, la aplicación de la medida de Ecuador no corresponde y debería esperar hasta el pronunciamiento pertinente.

Por su parte, tanto Colombia como Perú han presentado su disconformidad con la medida ecuatoriana y han indicado que esto va en contra del espíritu de diálogo y trabajo al interior de la CAN. Para Perú, el 3% que representan sus exportaciones a Ecuador “no son la causa de los posibles desequilibrios macroeconómicos” que este pudiera presentar.

Las partes ya han establecido conversaciones para encontrar una solución, de lo contrario tanto Colombia como Perú han señalado que podrían imponer contramedidas que equiparen el escenario.
 
 
UCAB Appeals To WTO To Block Law Raising Import Duties On Seeds And Crop Protection Agents
Serhii Chaplia 
14 January 2015
Ukrainian News
 
On behalf of companies in the Ukrainian agricultural sector, the Kyiv-based Ukrainian Agribusiness Club (UCAB) has appealed to the World Trade Organization (WTO) to block a law that proposes setting import duties of 10% on seeds and 5% on plant protection products.

UCAB announced this in a statement.

"On behalf of companies in the Ukrainian agricultural sector, the Ukrainian Agribusiness Club (UCAB) has appealed to the World Trade Organization (WTO) to block the law of Ukraine No. 73-VIII 'On Measures to Stabilize Ukraine's Balance of Payments in Accordance with Article XII of the 1994 General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade' dated December 28, 2014, which proposes establishment import duties of 10% on seeds and 5% on crop protection agents, which will lead to serious losses to businesses, citizens, and the state," the statement said.

According to the statement, the Ukrainian Agribusiness Club explained in a letter that additional duties on these products would make them inaccessible to local agricultural producers, who will be forced to minimize production costs, which will have a negative impact on crop yields.

According to estimates by the Ukrainian Agribusiness Club, the gross grain harvest will decrease by about 14.2 million tons and the harvest of oilseeds by 4.8 million tons, which severely limits the country's export potential.

In monetary terms, this will mean a reduction of USD 4.8 billion in foreign exchange earnings.

As Ukrainian News earlier reported, the Ukrainian Agribusiness Club association has appointed the head of one of its divisions, Taras Vysotskyi, as its general director, replacing Volodymyr Lapa, who became Ukraine's deputy minister of agrarian policy and food on December 24.

 
Free trade deal between Japan, Australia takes effect 
Kyodo News
 
TOKYO, Jan. 15 -- A free trade agreement between Japan and Australia took effect Thursday, with Australia becoming the first major agricultural exporter to reach an FTA with Japan, where the farm sector has traditionally been protected.

Under the agreement, Australian exporters now have greater access to the Japanese beef market, while the deal will also benefit Japanese automakers with the abolition of 5 percent Australian tariffs on imports of Japanese automobiles.

The entry into force of the deal "represents an historic development in economic relations" between the two countries and "lays the foundation for the next phase of bilateral economic relations," Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe and Australian Prime Minister Tony Abbott said in a joint statement.

Australia is the largest trade partner among countries with which Tokyo has concluded free trade deals. Abbott and Abe announced a broad agreement last April after seven years of negotiations.

Japan will lower its tariffs on Australian beef by up to half incrementally from the current 38.5 percent. Duties on frozen beef, mainly used for processed food for restaurants, will be cut to 19.5 percent over 18 years and those for chilled beef, sold in supermarkets, to 23.5 percent over 15 years, up to certain amounts.

For the first year, tariffs have been set at 30.5 percent for frozen beef and 32.5 percent for chilled beef, the Japanese farm ministry said.

Australia, the biggest exporter of beef to Japan, now receives preferential treatment in the Japanese beef market compared with the United States, which has also called for greater access to it under a Pacific free trade initiative.

Trade observers had expected a deal between Japan and Australia to help break the stalemate in talks for a broader Trans-Pacific Partnership free trade deal, which involves the two countries, the United States and nine other members, but the TPP negotiations remain stalled.

As for automobiles -- among Japan's main export items -- Australia's tariffs on 75 percent of Japanese exports of assembled automobiles in value terms, including duties on mainstay gasoline vehicles with engine displacement of 1500 cc to 3000 cc, are now abolished. The rest will be abolished within three years, according to the Japanese industry ministry.

Tariffs on all Japanese automotive parts will also be scrapped within five years, the ministry said.

In 2013, Japanese exports to Australia stood at around 1.7 trillion yen and Australian exports to Japan at about 5 trillion yen, according to government data.
 
 
Advocacy groups launch global anti-poverty campaign
Ferdinando Giugliano, Economics Correspondent
Financial Times 
January 15, 2015 1:32 am
 
A thousand organisations around the world are launching a high-profile campaign named “Action/2015” on Thursday, as they seek to put pressure on world leaders to make progress in the fight against climate change and global poverty ahead of two crucial summits this year. 
 
In September, the UN will hold a three-day gathering to agree on the Sustainable Development Goals, a 15-year framework set to replace the Millennium Development Goals that expire this year. The conference in New York comes only three months before policy makers descend on Paris as they seek to seal a legally binding global climate pact.

The eight Millennium Development Goals, which were established in 2000 and ranged from halving extreme poverty rates to providing universal primary education, have been seen as a mixed success. While several of the targets are likely to be missed, supporters claim that progress in areas such as public health and disease control would have been impossible without them.

“At the beginning of the MDGs, child mortality was addressed through a limited set of immunisation measures and malaria was off the agenda. The Millennium Development Goals were pivotal for public health,” said Jeffrey Sachs, director of The Earth Institute at Columbia University.

The Sustainable Development Goals, which were first formally discussed at the 2012 UN Conference on Sustainable Development in Rio de Janeiro, are meant to build on the MDGs, while broadening their scope to areas such as climate change and social wellbeing. Last July, a working group of 70 countries agreed to a list of 17 goals, including 169 targets ranging from eradicating extreme poverty to promoting sustainable tourism.

But critics fear the list is too long to ensure the targets are implemented. And since many of the aims remain impossible to measure, it will be hard to hold governments accountable for any promises they commit to.

The sustainable development goals are too many, too fuzzy and cannot be measured, so we have a problem. Every country insisted their issue was included in the agenda
- Jan Vandemoortele, development economist

“The sustainable development goals are too many, too fuzzy and cannot be measured, so we have a problem,” said Jan Vandemoortele, a development economist who helped to design the MDGs. “Every country insisted their issue was included in the agenda,” he added. Representatives approached the negotiations with “a salesperson mindset”. 
 
Campaigners, who include celebrities such as U2 lead singer Bono and Nobel Peace laureate Malala Yousafzai, argue that the SDGs still provide a useful framework to increase awareness over sustainable development and foster policy action.

“The critical elements of [the SDGs] are ambition, implementability, focus and a strong emphasis on tackling inequality. The current draft is still a long way from that but a lot of the building blocks are there and we’re confident with the right political engagement this is eminently achievable,” said Brendan Cox, director of policy at Save the Children, one of the charities taking part in the Action/2015 campaign.

The success of the SDGs will also hinge on ensuring there is adequate financing for the policies needed to implement the targets. Rich countries have historically pledged to commit 0.7 per cent of their gross national income to overseas aid, but in 2013 they pledged only a total of 0.3 per cent.
 
 
Jamaica tops list of countries with the most women managers 
By Maria Caspani

NEW YORK, Jan 13 (Thomson Reuters Foundation) - More women are managers in businesses than ever before but only about five percent are chief executives of the world's largest companies, according to a new report.

The Dominican Republic is the country with the highest percentage (55.8 percent) of women holding senior and middle-level managerial roles, while Jamaica tops the list of countries with the highest number of women managers overall (59.3 percent), followed by Colombia (53.1 percent), a report by the International Labour Organization (ILO) found.

Yemen ranks last with only two percent of management posts held by women.

"As documented in the report, evidence-based public policy design and gender-smart private sector practices can make a big difference in leveling the playing field for women in management," said Henriette Kolb, head of the Gender Secretariat at the International Financial Corporation, a part of the World Bank Group.

For example, she noted that in the case of the Dominican Republic, firm-level gender certification programs were established.

The United States takes 15th place on the list with women representing just over 40 percent of all managers, while Britain is number 41 (34.2 percent) among the 108 countries examined by the report.

However, the UK is among the four countries, including Sweden, Norway and Finland, where women hold over 20 percent of board seats. Portugal, India and the United Arab Emirates are among the worst performers with less than five percent of board positions held by women.

There are more women in paid employment than ever before and their growing presence in the job market has been the biggest engine of global growth and competitiveness, the ILO said.

According to several studies examined by the ILO, companies with more women in top roles tend to perform better, but the organisation was cautious in establishing a direct causal link.

Women hold over 40 percent of jobs globally. They own and run 30 percent of the world's businesses, but female leadership tends to be more common in small enterprises.

Despite significant strides, experts remain cautious in declaring that the so-called "glass ceiling" has been shattered.

"There is a long way to go before we achieve true gender equality in the workplace, especially when it comes to top management positions," said Deborah France-Massin, director of the ILO Bureau for Employers' Activities.

"'Glass walls' still exist with the concentration of women in certain types of management functions like human resources, communications and administration." 
