China calls for early conclusion of WTO-backed tariff-free treaty talks
US, China and major economies to wrap up deal on Information Technology Agreement
The pros and cons of the Trans-Pacific Partnership pact
Brics lender opens as challenger to World Bank 
OECD commends S. Africa for sound economy
Vietnamese garment exports to US likely to hit 11 billion USD
India raises social security, market access, visa issue with US
Perú modificará franja de aranceles a productos alimenticios a más tardar en 18 meses
Para OMC franja de precios no es compatible con sus normas


China calls for early conclusion of WTO-backed tariff-free treaty talks
Gao Yuan 
22 July 2015


China hopes that the long-delayed international negotiations on adding more tech products to a tariff-free treaty backed by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization will be put through soon, a senior trade official said on Tuesday.

"The government has been actively participating in the dialogue. We have made great efforts (during negotiations) and wish an agreement will be reached as soon as possible," said Shen Danyang, spokesman for the Ministry of Commerce.

Shen's comments came after the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO said 54 of its members are close to a deal that will expand the 20-year-old Information Technology Agreement and eliminate tariffs on an additional list of 201 products valued at about $1 trillion in annual trade across the globe.

The products to be put on the list include new-generation semiconductors, global positioning system navigation equipment and medical equipment, such as magnetic resonance imaging products and ultrasonic scanning apparatus, according to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO.

The negotiators were asked to hand in a feedback of the product list to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO before Friday.

When the product list and draft declaration are approved, the members will spend several months hammering out the technical details and the timetable for tariff elimination, according to the ministry and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO.

Once finalized, the ITA 2.0 will be the first tariff-cutting agreement in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO for 18 years.

Industry insiders said the new deal will benefit both Chinese tech buyers and local technology firms, which are looking to sell products outside the country.

Imported tech products are likely to lower their prices to compete with local vendors after China stops collecting double-digit tariffs.

Kitty Fok, director of industry consultancy HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"International Data Corp China, said: "I think this is good news for Chinese customers. To ensure information communication technologies are more affordable to everyone's daily life is important."

Chinese tech firms, especially smartphone makers, will also have a bigger edge selling products overseas.

Top local manufacturers, such as HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Huawei Technologies Co Ltd, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Xiaomi Corp and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"ZTE Corp, are all looking to tap into West Europe and the United States using handsets with good performance and affordable prices.

"We are set to have a bigger advantage in product prices if the tariffs can be reduced to zero," said Jeff Yee, vice-president and technology planning and partnerships at ZTE USA. ZTE, based in Shenzhen, Guangdong province, mainly sells mid-price range smartphones in the US.

Zero tariff will also be a good news for overseas companies operating in China, which spent over $200 billion on information technology products and services in 2014.

The US and European medical equipment providers will find it easier to compete with local companies, which dominate the market now. Tariffs on semiconductors, GPS devices, printer ink cartridges and an array of other products will be cut to zero under the deal, according to the US Trade Representative Office.

Companies such as HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Seiko Epson Corp and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Hewlett-Packard Co stand to benefit in the printer market, while foreign GPS navigator makers will still need to alter their products in order to pass regulatory checkups. Navigators sold in the country need to embed China's own Beidou system.

IDC estimated Chinese IT spending will reach $256 billion by 2018, accounting for more than 10 percent of the global total. The ITA was finalized in 1997 and covers 80 HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO members.

gaoyuan@chinadaily.com.cn

China Daily Information Company

US, China and major economies to wrap up deal on Information Technology Agreement

Bien Perezbien.perez@scmp.com 

21 July 2015

scmp.com

The United States, China and other major economies are set to wrap up on Friday a long-sought deal to expand the range of tariff-free information and communications technology products, following a breakthrough reached by trade negotiators in Geneva over the weekend.

Proponents for a broader Information Technology Agreement (ITA), a plurilateral pact launched in 1997, said about US$1 trillion in annual sales of those products will have zero duty from July 1 next year — marking the biggest and first major tariff-cutting accord under the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organisation (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO) in 18 years.

The list of 201 additional products for tariff exemption and the draft declaration which spells out how the expanded agreement would be implemented were sent for review to the capitals of the 54 HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO members involved in the ITA talks. These members have until Friday at noon, Geneva time, to give final approval.

Once this enlarged scheme takes effect, it will scrap import tariffs on such products as video game consoles, liquid crystal display televisions, next-generation semiconductors, printer ink cartridges, global positioning system devices, loudspeakers, video cameras, solid state drives, magnetic resonance imaging machines and computed tomography scanners.

“This is a big deal,” said WTO director-general Robert Azevedo, who led the marathon negotiations which started last Tuesday and concluded late on Saturday.

“The trade covered in this agreement is comparable to the annual global trade in iron, steel, textiles and clothing combined,” Azevedo said. “By taking this step, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO members will help to provide a jump-start to the global economy.”

After technical details are hammered out, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO expects the expanded ITA to be formally concluded at its 10th Ministerial Conference in Nairobi in December.

The 54 economies in the ITA talks account for 90 per cent of the more than US$4 trillion in annual global trade of information and communications products.

“Building on the agreement between President Obama and President Xi last November, the United States led efforts to broker compromises among the other parties to find the path forward toward a final agreement,” US Trade Representative Michael Froman said in a statement released on Sunday.

US President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Barack Obama and Chinese President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Xi Jinping last November reached a bilateral agreement in Beijing on expanding the scope of the ITA.

China, the world's biggest exporter and importer of hi-tech goods, had previously refused to pare down the number of products that it wanted excluded from a broader ITA, which led to the collapse of negotiations in November 2013.

The third round of ITA talks in December last year had also failed because of a standoff between China and South Korea over LCD televisions in the expanded ITA.

“South Korea and the EU last week worked out their issues with China over flat screen displays and car radios, respectively,” Hosuk Lee-Makiyama, director of Brussels-based think tank the European Centre for International Political Economy, told the South China Morning Post.

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"John Neuffer, the president and chief executive of the Semiconductor Industry Association, said on Tuesday that all key players — including the US, China, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union countries, Japan and South Korea — “made adjustments in the eleventh hour [in Geneva] that allowed the deal to close”.

“There was a recognition that if a deal on the product list was not reached this month, ITA expansion was at risk of losing momentum to the point that it may never get across the finish line,” Neuffer said.

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Stephen Ezell, the vice-president for global innovation policy at US think-tank Information Technology and Innovation Foundation, said the ITA declaration included a “review clause” that commits all parties to return to Geneva in 2018 to consider including additional products to the ITA.

“Updating the ITA will not only lower prices and help boost exports, but also facilitate greater diffusion and adoption of information and communications technologies worldwide,” Ezell said.

South China Morning Post Publishers Limited

The pros and cons of the Trans-Pacific Partnership pact

21 July 2015

Deutsche Welle

As the 12 countries negotiating a major Trans-Pacific trade pact address the last sticking points, economist Gary Hufbauer spoke to DW about the risks and advantages of the deal which might be sealed as early as August.

It is an accord that could increase world GDP by more than $200 billion. And chances the ambitious Trans-Pacific Partnership or TPP - pushed by the United States but which excludes China - will be concluded this year dramatically increased after US President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Barack Obama was given fast-track authority by Congress last month to negotiate such deals.

The TPP involves 12 Pacific Rim nations - Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore, the United States and Vietnam - which account for 40 percent of the global economic output and 26 percent of world trade. The far-reaching deal aims to dismantle tariff and non-tariff barriers to trade and investment between the participant countries.

It also foresees streamlining regulations, and the implementation of common standards for the protection of foreign investment and intellectual property, among other things. After its successful conclusion and ratification, the deal is expected to serve as a model for future trade pacts. Many countries negotiating the TPP such as Australia, Singapore, South Korea and Canada already have free trade agreements with the US.

However, the huge differences in terms of economic structure and competitiveness among TPP members - which include countries at different stages of economic development - require undertaking significant restructuring and reforms by some countries, should the deal be implemented. Moreover, critics argue that the deal may actually cost jobs in some countries and weaken labor and environmental standards.

Gary Hufbauer, an international trade expert at the Washington-based HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Peterson Institute for International Economics talks to DW about the key aims of the deal, the risks involved and the countries set to benefit most from the pact.

DW: What are the key aims of the TPP?

Gary Hufbauer: The broad goal of the TPP is to create a trade and investment bloc that covers approximately 40 percent of the world economy. The hope is that the removal of trade and investment barriers will entice countries to join the partnership, despite the high standard of rules the countries are expected to follow.

Furthermore, there will be a unified set of rules for state owned enterprises, intellectual property rights and labor and environmental standards. The ambitious partnership is far more expansive than the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization's (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO) system, but falls well short of achieving the same institutional framework found in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union. It is important to note that full implementation of the trade agreement will take a considerable amount of time, perhaps even a decade.

How is the TPP expected to boost trade, create jobs and improve the living standards of the countries involved?

The Trans Pacific Partnership is expected to lower trade and investment barriers that will enable competitive firms to move into new markets, hire workers at better wages, cut prices and improve the range of quality of goods and services available to households and firms.

The TPP is a supply side program. Some may ask: "Do we need more action on the demand side to boost the economy of TPP countries?" And I give a resounding "yes." But on the bold assumption that the macro managers will do a better job in stimulating demand, the TPP will enable a lot of demand to be filled without inflation.

However, critics argue that the deal may actually cost jobs in some countries and weaken labor and environmental standards. What is your view on this?

Trade and investment gains work through the process Joseph Schumpeter called "creative destruction." Some jobs will be lost and some firms will go out of business, which will require transition assistance for displaced workers. But our calculations indicate that national gain through lower prices, higher pay in export jobs, better quality of goods and services, etc., exceeds $400,000 annually for every displaced worker.

However, the criticism on labor and environmental standards is completely unwarranted. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO has no labor and environmental standards in its playbook, while the TPP will have rigorous standards that will be enforced by a dispute settlement mechanism.

In terms of the ongoing negotiations, what are the key sticking points that still need to be overcome?

The key sticking points are: (1) market access for "sensitive" products, like sugar and apparel in the US, pork and beef and rice in Japan, dairy in Canada, and a range of protected services like insurance and health care in many countries; (2) the right amount of intellectual property protection in terms of the duration of data exclusivity, patent linkage, enforcement against music and software piracy; (3) commercial standards for state-owned enterprises - nearly the whole of the Vietnamese economy; (4) labor practices in Malaysia with respect to anti-Chinese preferences and trafficking in Burmese workers.

Which countries are likely to benefit most from the deal?

A country with a more protected economy will benefit more from liberalization. That's not what the "man in the street" thinks, but that's what economists think. So, relative to their economic size, Vietnam and Japan will benefit the most. Vietnam will benefit in almost every sector thank to the jolt from external competition. Japan will receive a jolt in the agricultural and service sectors (retailing, education, insurance, etc.).#big#

Which are likely to benefit the least?

Free market economies are likely to have the smallest gains relative to the country's GDP. Therefore, Singapore, Australia and New Zealand will likely experience smaller gains in relation to GDP. Nevertheless, the most competitive firms in these countries will gain from greater access to export markets. The same is true of competitive firms in Vietnam (apparel and some foodstuffs, like shrimp) and Japan (a wide range of manufacturing firms).

Why is China not part of the negotiations?

China is not prepared to meet the high standards of free trade and investment envisaged in the TPP. It may be ready to join ten years down the line. I co-authored a book, "Bridging the Pacific," which lays out a path for the eventual Chinese membership. The book received a lot of interest from Chinese officials and academics.

How is the TPP likely to affect China's economic position in the region?

China continues to be an economic powerhouse. Recently, I gave a talk in Shanghai urging China to accelerate the RMB towards the status of an international currency. Even since my speech the authorities have taken constructive steps, opening the bond market, disclosing gold reserves, etc. The AIIB will be a major source of infrastructure finance for all of Asia.

China's growth will continue at the six to seven percent range, making China a huge market for all sorts of goods and services exported from Asia and the world. Taken by itself, tariff preferences in the TPP will deprive China of about $100 billion of exports annually, but that will be a small loss given the Chinese growth trajectory.

Economist Gary Hufbauer is an international trade expert at the Washington-based HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Peterson Institute for International Economics.

Deutsche Welle

Brics lender opens as challenger to World Bank 



By Gabriel Wildau in Shanghai 

22 July 2015

Financial Times

New Development Bank is launched with $100bn initial funding for projects

A new Brics development bank was formally launched in Shanghai yesterday, with representatives from Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa envisaging a nimbler, more responsive alternative to institutions such as the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Bank.

The inauguration of the lender, officially called the New Development Bank, comes less than a month after the launch of the China-led HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Asian Infrastructure Development Bank , which similarly aims to create a parallel global investment institution in which developing countries have greater influence.

Although it has only five founding members compared with the AIIB's 57, the NDB will begin with initial capital of $100bn, the same as AIIB. The five countries all have equal voting shares.

"We believe the funding needs of Asia in the infrastructure space are so vast that there is easily space for the two of us and, indeed, more lenders to participate," said KV Kamath, NDB president and former chief executive of ICICI, India's largest private sector bank.

But unlike AIIB, NDB will not limit itself to Asia. Excluding South Africa, the four original Bric countries comprise more than 40 per cent of the world's population, a quarter of the world's land area and more than 25 per cent of global gross domestic product.

Mr Kamath and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Lou Jiwei, China's finance minister, were careful not to criticise the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Bank, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Asian Development Bank and other incumbent institutions yesterday. But they made clear that they believe NDB can improve upon existing norms.

"This bank will place greater emphasis on the needs of developing countries, have greater respect for developing countries' national situation, and more fully embody the values of developing countries," said Mr Lou. "Development is a dynamic process. There's really no such thing as so-called 'best practices'."

Mr Kamath pledged to move the bank "from best practices to next practices", adding that traditional development lending was often "too rigid, inflexible, and slow". "From a borrowing country's perspective, these become huge deterrents to growth," he said.

The bank aims to have the first set of loans disbursed by April next year.

Lord Stern, professor at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"London School of Economics, recalled how he and former World Bank chief economist Joseph Stiglitz conceived the idea for the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Brics bank at Davos in 2011 for emerging markets with large trade surpluses to recycle those savings into productive investments in their countries. The idea was discussed at a summit of Brics countries the following year, and articles of agreement signed last July.

Analysts agree the economic logic is sound, but some warn that geopolitical tensions between the Brics could interfere with the NDB's smooth operations. They note that while the AIIB officially launched less than two years after China's President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Xi Jinping first proposed the idea in October 2013, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Brics bank has taken more than four years to start. One source of delay was talks on where to locate the NDB's headquarters. Chinese leaders hope the bank's presence in Shanghai will boost the city's ambitions to become a global financial centre by 2020.

But Mr Kamath said he had seen no sign of political infighting.

The Financial Times Limited (AAIW/EIW) 

OECD commends S. Africa for sound economy

guyuan 

21 July 2015

Xinhua News Agency

JOHANNESBURG, July 21 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Xinhua) -- The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD) on Tuesday commended South Africa for its stable macro economic framework and infrastructural improvement under way among other various reforms.

The South African government has done a lot in addressing some social and economic fundamentals,

said Andreas Woergoetter, Head of Division at the OECD Economics Department.

He was speaking in Johannesburg while launching the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD South African Economic Survey for 2015.

"The (SA) government has largely eradicated poverty and improved access to basic services and basic infrastructures. These include access to water, sanitation and electricity. We have also noted progress in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"South African Revenue Service (SARS), since 2010 when they improved on their system more people are now paying tax," Woergoetter said.

He stated that the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD would like to engage the SA government like they have done before on how to improve various sectors where they found gaps.

He emphasized, however, that they will not dictate to the government.

"South Africa is one of our key partners like China and Indonesia among others. We are not here to tell South Africa what to do but to give recommendations on what we think have worked somewhere and can be used in the South African circumstances. We want to engage the government in a meaningfull discussion in a constructive way on economic policies,"he said.

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD also noted some problems in various South African sectors,including labour unrest which is damaging the economy as well as underutilization of the Small and Medium Scale (SME) sector.

Woergoetter said,"We are not saying the South African economy is doom and gloomy but is underperforming and needs to be improved.

The future for South African economy is bright ... There should be more arbitration and negotiation to make it less confrontational. More needs to be done to improve the infrastructure to unleash the country's potential."

He said relations between employers and employees have to be improved.

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD also suggested a minimum wage which can be regional or national.

He said, "There are some people who are not participating in the country's economic activity whether formal or informal.

Putting in place minimum wage can reduce poverty but has the potential to reduce employment and therefore needs some balancing."

He also encouraged the government to include the private sector in the energy generation and end the monopoly of the state-run

Eskom, the country's major electricity utility.

"Also high port services are eroding the country's competitiveness. There is a need to help companies to access foreign markets by reducing port costs," said Woergoetter.

Simi Siwisa from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"South African National Treasury said most of the things raised are known to the government and are being addressed through various interventions.

These include the National Development Plan (NDP) which is the government's economic blue print, she said.

"HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD has noted that the country's macroeconomic frame work is sound and the government have done a lot in addressing socioeconomic issues.

"We are committed to some of the recommendations. We are currently working on some of the partnerships with HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD to get international experience and benchmark what we are doing," Siwisa said.

She stated that the government is also using independent private electricity generators to improve efficiency.

Energy is one of the government's priority areas, Siwisa said, adding, "We will study the report and see which recommendations are achievable without damaging our fiscal constraints."

Most of the government projects are sustainable, she said.

"We are currently working on reducing inefficiency in the government across the board, like in municipalities so that they can get a qualified audit report. The government has adequate system and measures which are sustainable. We have committed people in the government who are clear about the priorities,"said Siwisa.

She also stated that the government is also in the process of ensuring that the servile service bill does not balloon as the report predicted.

Siwisa said the government is currently working with the private sector to ensure that they also participate in the mainstream economy. 

Xinhua News Agency

Vietnamese garment exports to US likely to hit 11 billion USD

22 July 2015

Vietnam News Agency Bulletin

Hanoi, July 22 (VNA)? Textile and garment exports to the US is likely to reach 11 billion USD this year, said Dang Phuong Dung, Vice Chairwoman of the Vietnam Garment and Apparel Association.

The figure may double after the signing of the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) agreement, which will benefit businesses with tariff cuts for imports, she added.

Vietnam ?s garment and textile products normally are levied import duties of 15-16 percent. However, the taxes will be cut down to 7-8 percent after the country joins the TPP and the products meet the requirements of origin.

Currently, the US is the biggest importer of Vietnamese garment and textile products, consuming about half of the total exports.

Garment and textile exports to the American market have increased sharply over the past two decades, hitting 9.8 billion USD last year./.

Vietnam News Agency

India raises social security, market access, visa issue with US

21 July 2015

Press Trust of India

New Delhi, Jul 21 (PTI) India today pressed for setting up a high-level committee to look into a range of issues including American Totalisation and non-tariff barrier, as also the Social Security Act that discriminates Indians working in the US.

Commerce Secretary Rita Teaotia flagged these issues during her meeting with US Deputy USTR Ambassador HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Robert Holleyman here.

She highlighted the "need for setting up a High Level Group to discuss India's concerns on US Totalisation and Social Security Act (how the policy was discriminatory towards Indian worker's in the US who ended up losing their social security contributions due to discrepancy in the visa and social security regimes, also indicating recourse to legal remedies)," an official statement said.

Teaotia also raised the issue of high visa costs in the US which is impacting Indian IT professionals working there.

Market Access issues of agrarian products including rice, mangoes, pomegranates and table grapes also figured in the discussion, it said.

It also said that US Department of Labour listing of textile products is acting as a non-tariff barrier and has impacted exports of certain textile products to the US.

"...(it) is applicable only to countries that are not signatory to the Government Procurement Agreement," it said.

The commerce secretary also suggested a separate working group to discuss the issue of market access for Indian pharmaceuticals and traditional AYUSH pharmacopeia and professionals.

India wants early conclusion of the totalisation agreement or Social Security Agreement with the US. It aims to protect interests of professionals of Indian-origin who contribute more than USD 1 billion each year to the US social security.

Under this pact, professionals of both the countries would be exempted from social security taxes when they go to work for a short period in the other country.

On the other hand, the Deputy USTR proposed a range of issues for collaboration on standards and manufacturing.

Holleyman is here for an inter-ministerial discussion to deliberate on the agenda setting, modalities and dates for convening the next round of the ministerial level meeting of the Trade Policy Forum (TPF) in the US, by the end of October.

The issues that are likely to be taken up for discussion at the next TPF meeting from both sides were also deliberated at length, it said.

US side has been requested for issue specific details for consideration under the TPF, it said adding HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO Issues and Trade Facilitation issues were also discussed briefly.

The US-India TPF is an inter-agency collaboration led by the USTR. It is the principal trade dialogue between the countries. It has five focus groups: Agriculture, Investment, Innovation and Creativity (intellectual property rights), Services, and Tariff and Non-Tariff Barriers.

At present, bilateral trade is USD 64.26 billion in 2014-15. PTI RR MKJ

Press Trust Of India Limited

Perú modificará franja de aranceles a productos alimenticios a más tardar en 18 meses

21 July 2015

Gestión Online

Implementar recomendaciones de reciente fallo de la OMC tomará entre 9 a 18 meses, informó el Mincetur. Modificación de la franja aplicará para la importación desde todos los países.

La ministra de Comercio Exterior y Turismo (Mincetur), Magali Silva, estimó que el Perú modificará su franja de aranceles en un plazo de entre 9 a 18 meses.

Ello en base a las recomendaciones dadas en el reciente fallo de la HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Organización Mundial del Comercio (OMC), tras una demanda impuesta por Guatemala el 2013. La OMC le dio la razón al país demandante y falló en contra de la posición peruana.

La ministra no detalló en qué consistirán esos cambios, pero remarcó que “la OMC no manda desmantelar (todo) el sistema de franja de precios de Perú”, apuntó.

“De las experiencia de análisis de otros casos que han habido, se ha observado que los países tienen entre 9 a 18 meses para poder implementar las recomendaciones de la OMC”, agregó Silva.

Por su parte el viceministro de Comercio Exterior, Edgar Vásquez, confirmó que la modificación que se realice a la franja de aranceles tendrá efectos para la importación de productos desde todos los países. “La aplicación será multilateral”, subrayó.

La franja de aranceles se aplica a la importación de productos como el maíz, azúcar, arroz, leche, etc.

Prensa Popular S.A.C

Para OMC franja de precios no es compatible con sus normas

El Comercio 

21 July 2015

Por Marienella Ortiz

El órgano superior que fija las reglas sobre el intercambio comercial de bienes y servicios en el mundo, la HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Organización Mundial de Comercio (OMC), dejó en claro ayer que el sistema de franja de precios del Perú es incompatible con su normativa, como parte de una resolución en que le da la razón a Guatemala por el cobro arancelario adicional que hace el país a su azúcar.

Si bien la resolución no recomienda directamente desmantelar el sistema de franjas ?aplicable a los lácteos, azúcar, arroz y maíz?, recalcó que el Perú aplica un ?gravamen variable a la importación?, incompatible con las reglas mundiales de comercio.

En respuesta, el Poder Ejecutivo emitió un comunicado de prensa aclarando que no se ha pedido el desmantelamiento de la franja y afirmaron que: ?El Perú no comparte las conclusiones y recomendaciones [de la OMC]. Sin embargo, fiel a su compromiso con la normativa del sistema multilateral del comercio, realizará el proceso de coordinación interna y de implementación de las recomendaciones dentro de los plazos usuales para este tipo de controversias?, señaló.

¿Modificar o desaparecer?

En declaraciones en junio a este Diario, el ministro de Agricultura, Juan Manuel Benites, señaló que si la OMC admitía la demanda de Guatemala no iba a poder mantenerse, la franja de precios en el país. ?Si les dan la razón, la franja se cae. Eso le pasó a Chile con Argentina?, comentaba.

Al respecto, la gerenta general de Cómex, Jessica Luna, manifestó que el Perú debe cuidar su reputación internacional y acatar el fallo en el sentido de eliminar la franja de precios. Además, dijo que ha quedado demostrado que el mecanismo distorsiona los precios internos al consumidor.

Por su parte, el gerente general de la Asociación de Ganaderos Lecheros del Perú, Héctor Guevara, recalcó que el pedido de Guatemala no ha sido la desaparición de la franja de precios, sino una flexibilización a los valores del sistema que les parecían muy altos. ?De alguna manera el Perú ya cumplió anticipadamente con ese pedido, el pasado 1 de mayo, cuando sacó la norma que puso como tope de 20% a la franja?, apuntó.

Disputa Azúcar

Guatemala interpuso una demanda en el 2013 al Perú ante la OMC para cuestionar los derechos específicos resultantes del sistema de franja de precios (SFP).

Ratificación

Un tribunal de la OMC respaldó la queja guatemalteca en noviembre del 2014 y ayer el organismo de apelaciones de la entidad ratificó el dictamen contra el Perú.

Pedido

Antes de la modificación del MEF del último 1 de mayo, el arancel tope del azúcar era del 72% como parte del SFP. Ahora, conjuntamente con los lácteos y el maíz, será máximo de 20%.

