Headlines:
Air-Freight Data Suggest Growth Slowing -- Market Talk
CO2 emission reduction plans not enough to meet targets - OECD
OECD calls for more carbon emissions-cutting efforts
IAEA Report Highlights Nuclear Power’s Role in Combating Climate Change
China needs the TPP to jump-start stalling reforms
U.S., EU to exchange revised tariff offers in Atlantic trade talks
WTO gives green light to Iran membership
1st global education industry summit discusses future learning environment
STEEL DUMPING EXPLAINED
Battling Trademark Piracy In Cuba
 
Details:
Air-Freight Data Suggest Growth Slowing -- Market Talk
20 October 2015
Dow Jones Institutional News
New data from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development suggest global growth may be slowing, based on air-freight data that is often an indicator of global trade. It notes 2Q volume fell in the US while Europe remains below pre-crisis peaks. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD does add exports to Asia and the BRICs "remain locomotives of growth." 
Dow Jones Newswires
CO2 emission reduction plans not enough to meet targets - OECD
20 October 2015
Reuters News
PARIS, Oct 20 (Reuters) - Plans published by rich nations and major emerging countries to cut greenhouse gas emissions are not enough to limit a rise in global temperatures to 2 degrees Celsius (3.6 Fahrenheit), the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development said on Tuesday.
The United Nations has set that increase in average temperature from pre-industrial levels as the ceiling to avert dramatic increases in heatwaves, droughts, floods and extinctions.
But a report from the Paris-based think-tank analysed the past efforts and new pledges of its 34 members and 10 other partner countries including China and India, which together account for more than 80 percent of global carbon emissions.
"Countries have made efforts but these are not sufficient to reach their own targets, let alone reach the 2 degrees Celsius objective," climate specialist Mikaela Rambali, who co-authored the report, told reporters in Paris.
The study coincides with Monday's start of a week of talks among almost 200 nations in Bonn, Germany, the final preparatory session before a a U.N. climate summit in Paris in December intended to produce an agreement to limit climate change beyond 2020.
About 150 nations have so far submitted national plans for fighting climate change as building blocks of a Paris accord. But there is no agreed system to compare each nation's level of ambition.
Thomson Reuters (Markets) LLC
OECD calls for more carbon emissions-cutting efforts
20 October 2015
Xinhua News Agency
PARIS, Oct. 20 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xinhua) -- Advanced and emerging economies have made progress in cutting green gas emissions but more efforts are needed to tackle global warming and stop climate deterioration, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD) said on Tuesday.
In a fresh analysis on climate change mitigation in 44 countries and the EU, the Paris-based think-tank urged "governments to significantly accelerate their efforts and strengthen their climate change policies" and "to move from pledges to action."
"The momentum behind climate action is growing, with more countries taking action to price carbon and regulate emissions. But achieving the targets countries have set for themselves will require a sharp acceleration of effort," said OECD Environment Director Simon Upton.
"Countries are running out of time to make the policy adjustments needed to meet their targets and keep alive the long-term goal of limiting the temperature rise to 2 degrees. Governments need to construct a policy pathway that will lead to zero net carbon emissions by the end of the century," he added.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD report studied the 34 HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD members in addition to Brazil, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, India, Indonesia, Latvia, Lithuania, Russia and South Africa, and the EU bloc, which together account for more than 80 percent of global greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions.
"Nearly all have decreased GHG emissions per unit of GDP by cutting fossil fuel subsidies, investing more to promote green technologies, protecting forests and reducing emissions from factories and farms," the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD said.
"Several countries are also reducing their use of nuclear energy after the Fukushima disaster and some are turning to coal without carbon capture and storage. These countries still have a long way to go to transform fossil fuel-intensive systems that have been historically responsible for most of their emissions," the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD added.
Xinhua News Agency
IAEA Report Highlights Nuclear Power’s Role in Combating Climate Change
20 October 2015
Emirates News Agency (WAM)
Vienna, 20th October, 2015 (WAM) -- Climate change is the biggest environmental challenge of our time. As governments around the world prepare for the climate summit in Paris next December, an HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IAEA report released today highlights the role nuclear power could play in reducing greenhouse gas emissions (GHG) that contribute to global warming.
Six weeks before the kick-off of the Paris conference, which will seek to reach a new legally binding accord on combating global warming, Climate Change and Nuclear Power 2015 offers a comprehensive review of nuclear power’s potential to mitigate GHG and to address economic, energy and environmental challenges.
"Nuclear power is one of the major low-carbon energy sources currently available, and many countries believe that it can help them to address the twin challenges of ensuring reliable energy supplies while curbing emissions," IAEA Director General HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Yukiya Amano said. "As governments around the world prepare to negotiate a climate agreement in Paris, it is important that the contributions that nuclear power can make to combating climate change are recognized. "The annual report, substantially revised compared to last year’s edition, was updated to account for new scientific information, analyses, technical reports and other publications that have recently become available. These publications include Projected Costs of Electricity Generation by the Nuclear Energy Agency of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (NEA-HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD) as well as World Energy Outlook and Nuclear Energy Roadmap, both produced by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" International Energy Agency (IEA).
New sections explore emerging issues likely to affect the relationship between climate change and nuclear power in the coming decades, including: A comparison in the lifecycle of GHG emissions of different nuclear technologies. The differences between pressurized water reactors and boiling water reactors technologies are indiscernible and comparable to other low carbon energy technologies. Further, studies indicate that gas-cooled and fast reactors have even lower emissions due to higher thermal efficiencies and lower fuel cycle demands, respectively.
An explanation of the impact of system costs according to technology type. For example, grid connection costs for intermittent renewables are a factor of 3 to 10 higher than for dispatchable technologies such as coal, gas or nuclear. And balancing costs penalties paid by producers that provide more or less power than what they had announced rise sharply with increased shares of renewables on the grid.
A comparison of the emissions from fossil carbon capture and storage (CCS) and nuclear power. CCS costs are uncertain, siting CO2 storage repositories are challenging, and lifecycle emissions of GHG are still higher than nuclear.
David Shropshire, Head of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IAEA’s Planning and Economic Studies Section, which produced the report, said all low-carbon energy technologies will be needed in the years ahead to address the climate challenge.
"The carbon footprint for nuclear power is very low – comparable to hydro power and less than any kind of fossil energy, while also providing a constant baseload supply of electricity," Shropshire said. "If the world is to limit the global temperature increase at an acceptable level, all low-carbon energy sources will be needed."
The Emirates News Agency
China needs the TPP to jump-start stalling reforms
21 October 2015
South China Morning Post
Cary Huang says with its stricter rules, the trade agreement could do for the economy what China’s HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO accession did – reinvigorate growth
To sceptics, the US-led Trans-Pacific Partnership is a demon pact as far as China is concerned. The free trade agreement, which is also backed by Japan, Canada, Mexico, Chile, Peru, Australia, New Zealand, Singapore, Brunei, Vietnam, and Malaysia, is seen as a blatant attempt to economically contain fast-rising China.
Yet optimists see the agreement as a potential angel. They believe it will provide another opportunity for China’s development – if Beijing gets itself inside the tent.
Officially, China has cautiously welcomed the pact. And some reform-minded officials and liberal scholars say the government should go further. China should aspire to join the partnership, as its efforts to comply with the higher standards of the pact – in such areas as environmental protection, investment and labour – would greatly boost its own market reforms. Economic globalism is what China badly needs at this historical juncture.
In the 1990s, China used its negotiations to join the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation to launch reforms. In the same way, it could now use potential membership of the TPP to give stalling reforms a push.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO accession was a turning point for Chinese reform; joining the TPP could be another milestone.
The Trans-Pacific Partnership aims to establish the most comprehensive rules for trade in the 21st century. These include enforceable labour standards, environmental protections and curbing the unfair advantages of state-owned enterprises. The deal also requires its signatories to embrace the rule of law and democratic norms. Indeed, the stringent requirements make China’s accession to the pact a great challenge, if not a mission impossible.
Yet, these higher standards are not much different from what China itself wants to achieve, if the recent ambitious programmes launched by the ruling Communist Party are to be believed.
After three decades of cutthroat growth, China faces a host of problems that require a fundamental overhaul of its system of state capitalism, so as to sustain growth.
At the party’s third plenary meeting in November 2013, Chinese leaders unveiled a reform package aimed at building an economy in which market forces will play a “decisive” role. At the fourth plenum a year ago, they pledged to introduce law-based governance, often translated as “rule by law” in the English press.
The measures pledged are no less ambitious than TPP requirements. For instance, China now falls short of an important TPP standard to put state-owned enterprises on an equal footing with the private sector, since the state sector still enjoys preferential treatment in many ways. Beijing is well aware of the problem, and has been trying to restructure the state sector.
Similarly, China realises the need for the protection of intellectual property rights, as it wants to develop an innovation-driven economy.
The other TPP provisions, such as those relating to labour rights and the protection of the ecosystem, are in sync with China’s own reform agenda.
New rules of trade are needed to correct the market distortions in China’s state capitalism, and save China from the stagnation of a “middle income trap”.
China should join the Trans-Pacific Partnership not because it has any wish to be part of a preferential trade club; rather, it needs the TPP to give the country’s slowing reform programme a boost. Unsurprisingly, various interest groups are strongly resisting any such move.
In the late 1990s, then premier Zhu Rongji used China’s HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO negotiations to facilitate bold domestic reforms which paved the way for the country’s fastest growth period. Is the current leadership under President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xi Jinping and Premier HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Li Keqiang ready to make history in a similar way?
How they respond to the just-concluded TPP will be a test of their political wisdom and will.
Cary Huang is a senior writer at the Post
South China Morning Post Publishers Limited
U.S., EU to exchange revised tariff offers in Atlantic trade talks
Gao Pan
450 words
20 October 2015
Xinhua News Agency
WASHINGTON, Oct. 19 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xinhua) -- The United States and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union (EU) are expected to exchange revised tariff offers this week as the 11th round of the Atlantic free trade talks kicked off Monday in Miami, Florida.
During the weeklong negotiations for the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP), both sides are expected to have proposals covering 97 percent of tariff lines, holding back the remaining 3 percent for the tough final negotiations on tariff elimination, according to the U.S. political news website Politico.
The two sides exchanged initial offers in February 2014, with the EU accusing the United States of failing to match its level of ambition, Politico reported, adding that "there have been many twists and turns both inside and outside the talks" since they started more than two years ago.
The U.S. and EU leaders had initially set a timetable for completing an agreement for TTIP by late 2014. But the negotiations moved very slowly amid rising political and public resistance to the deal on both sides.
Supporters in Europe believed that the deal will boost exports, create jobs, fuel growth and strengthen Europe's voice in global trade rules, while opponents feared that Europe's strict standards on environment and food safety will be eroded, and local governments' regulation power in dispute settling be weakened.
The Business Coalition for Transatlantic Trade (BCTT), a group spearheaded by U.S. business associations to promote the TTIP negotiations, has expressed frustration at the Atlantic talks so far.
"Yet, two years on, repeated expressions of political support for an ambitious outcome are not translating into progress at the negotiating table," the coalition said in a letter to U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman and the EU's Trade Commissioner Cecilia Malmstrom last month.
"Too many red lines are being drawn, and political decisions needed to break impasses at the negotiating table have not been forth coming," the coalition said, urging negotiators to "halt the drift" in the talks by "insisting on substantial progress on all issues" from both sides during the current negotiating round in Miami.
Some trade experts said one of the reasons the TTIP talks have not made much progress is because the Obama administration has made concluding the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) negotiations as top priority.
As the TPP deal has been reached by trade ministers from the 12 Pacific Rim countries earlier this month, U.S. and EU business groups are expecting negotiators to accelerate the TTIP talks in the next few months, in a bid to wrap up the talks before Obama leaves office in January 2017.
Xinhua News Agency
WTO gives green light to Iran membership
20 October 2015
Trend News Agency (Azerbaijan)
Baku, Azerbaijan, Oct. 20
By Fatih Karimov – Trend: The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization has given Iran the green light to join the organization.
Valiollah Afkhami-Rad, head of the Trade Promotion Organization of Iran, said it is hoped that the process for joining the organization would be started through support of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Iran’s Fars news agency reported Oct. 20.
Joining the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization is seriously pursued by the administration, he added.
Iran became a supervisory member of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization 10 years ago. “However, we have not taken preliminary steps to join the organization, while Afghanistan and Iraq are passing final stages.”
Negotiations with Iran’s working group on joining HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization will start soon, he said. Prior to that a series of reforms in the national trade laws and regulations will be necessary, he noted.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO received Iran’s membership application on July 19, 1996. The General Council established a Working Party to examine the application of Iran on May 26, 2005. The country submitted its Memorandum on the Foreign Trade Regime in November 2009.
Iran ’s bid for accession into the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO has long faced a US veto. Washington agreed to drop its opposition as part of a preliminary nuclear agreement in November 2013.
Edited by CN. Trend Agency
1st global education industry summit discusses future learning environment
lijizhi
21 October 2015
Xinhua News Agency
HELSINKI, Oct. 20 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xinhua) -- High ranking education policy makers and education-related industry leaders were able to sit together in Helsinki in the past two days, trying to find solutions to meet the digital era challenges faced by educators.
The first Global Education Industry Summit was jointly organized by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD), the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Commission (EC) and the Finnish Ministry of Education and Culture.
"We need to challenge our education systems in order to keep up with current social change and expectations to encourage people to learn continuously," said Sanni Grahn-Laasonen, Finland's Minister of Education and Culture.
At a press conference on Tuesday, she mentioned that Finland will introduce a new national curriculum for basic education emphasizing digital skills in August 2016.
The new curriculum is also expected to witness a pioneering reform which will put more emphasis on phenomenon learning which is different than the traditional subject learning.
Commenting on the Finnish practice, Andreas Schleicher, director of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD Directorate for Education and Skills, told HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xinhua that it is a good example of "how we can overcome the rigidities of the past" and to deal with the challenges in the fast changing world.
Martine Reicherts, Director-General for Education and Culture of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Commission, said efforts would be done to come forward with "maybe ten or twenty best practices" in the world, although the meeting is yet focusing on sharing experiences for the moment.
Gao Yuhang, First Secretary of Chinese Embassy in Finland, said that it might be the first time that industry leaders are able to discuss with high ranking policy makers so closely on a global platform.
He agreed with the opinions that the industries should play more active role in designing digital pedagogy while the educators could help develop the content, and there is need for the governments to lessen political pressure on industries.
The summit grouped ministers and representatives of 24 countries and international organizations as well as a number of education business leaders. The next summit will take place in Israel in 2016. 
Xinhua News Agency
STEEL DUMPING EXPLAINED
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Ben Chu
21 October 2015
The Independent
World | Q&A
Q | What is steel 'dumping'?
A | It is a technical term applied in international trade disputes. It's where a country sells a product abroad at a price that does not reflect its true domestic cost. It is regarded as unfair competition and prohibited under free trade agreements.
Q | Is China guilty of it?
A | Here's what we know. China's domestic steel capacity has shot up dramatically over the past 15 years. It now accounts for half of the global total. And capacity continued growing in 2014 even though the growth of its domestic economy was slowing down. Chinese steel exports have gone up - they rose 40 per cent year in the first quarter of 2015. And Chinese steel imports to the UK have grown, from 2 per cent of the total four years ago to 8 per cent this year. It's very likely that China is producing steel at below economic cost thanks to the soft bank loans given to state steel companies by state-owned banks. There is certainly a prima facie argument that China is indeed dumping steel on international markets.
Q | Why is China doing it?
A | Steel was one of the key drivers of China's economic development since 1980. But things have gotten out of hand. There is now excessive capacity - possibly as high as 30 per cent. The Beijing government has said it plans to reduce some of the country's excess capacity but it is proving difficult because steel is a large employer. Closing plants down would cost jobs, which would create a headache for local politicians at a time when the wider economy is stuttering. There are powerful domestic financial vested interests in the sector which who are fighting consolidation of their plants. The path of least resistance for officials and the industry itself is to soft-pedal reform and keep revenues up by dumping spare capacity abroad.
Q | What can the West do about it?
A | Since 2001 China has been a member of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation. That means it must abide by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO rules that preclude dumping. The UK could take its case to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO dispute board in the hope of getting the right to impose duties on Chinese steel imports. This would require an analysis of whether dumping is occurring and a causal link between the two.
Another body which could be called upon to take more action is the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Commission, which already imposed some duties on steel from China in April.
Independent Print Ltd.
Battling Trademark Piracy In Cuba
Erica Gould
1681 words
20 October 2015
Mondaq Business Briefing
The recent restoration of diplomatic relations between the United States and Cuba has sparked the interest of U.S. companies in protecting their intellectual property in Cuba. While an exception under current U.S. sanctions allows U.S. companies to file and maintain Cuban trademark registrations, many trademark owners have not seen any benefit in doing so until now, since other U.S. sanctions block the ability to trade. Although the embargo remains, the Obama administration has amended the Cuban Assets Control Regulations ("CACR") and Export Administrations Regulations ("EAR"), and further changes in policy are currently on the table. Trademark pirates have been quick to take advantage of the evolving landscape. As an example, an individual recently filed sixty-five Cuban applications for third-party logo trademarks that are well known in the U.S. and throughout the world. That person was not alone, and more are likely to follow.
Empresa Cubana del Tabaco v. General Cigar Co., Inc. After being inactive in Cuba for over half a decade, or never having been present before, the best way for U.S. companies to deal with trademark piracy is to take pre-emptive action by securing Cuban trademark registrations. But for some trademark owners, it may already be too late. Since Cuba is a "first-to-file" country, it may seem at first glance that U.S. trademark owners without Cuban registrations have no recourse for preventing a pirate from stealing their spot on the registry. Fortunately, Cuban trademark law provides several means for challenging trademark applications under these circumstances, namely in the absence of a prior application or registration. This article addresses a number of grounds for opposing Cuban trademark applications, and the potential effects of the U.S. case, , No. 13-1465 (Fed. Cir. 2014) ("Empresa Cubana"), on oppositions based on the General Inter-American Convention for Trade Mark and Commercial Protection (also known as the "Washington Convention" or the "Pan-American Convention").
Cuba is a party to almost all international intellectual property treaties, and local legislation has been structured to satisfy international obligations. When Cuba joined the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization ("HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO") in 1999, it modified its trademark law by enacting Decree Law No. 203, which meets the requirements of the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights ("TRIPS"). (Procedural regulations related to Decree Law No. 203 are provided under Resolution Number 63/2000.) As a contracting party to TRIPS, Cuba is also a party to the Paris Convention, which provides for the protection of famous trademarks under Article 6 bis. In compliance with the Convention, the famous-marks doctrine is implemented through Article 17.1 (d) of Decree Law No. 203, which prohibits registration of a trademark that is a total or partial reproduction of a notorious mark belonging to a third party, when their use could: (1) cause a risk of confusion or association with the notorious mark; (2)cause a risk of diluting the distinctiveness of the notorious mark or its commercial value or fame; or (3) unjustly benefit from the fame of the notorious mark.
Proving that a mark is famous in Cuba, however, can be somewhat challenging for U.S. companies, since the embargo prohibits them from using their marks in Cuba. Furthermore, because many Cuban nationals have limited Internet access, evidence of online marketing is given little weight, if any, unlike in many other countries where a trademark's online presence is considered an effective method of reaching international consumers. For this reason, lawyers need to be creative in arguing the fame of a U.S. trademark under the Paris Convention. In some cases, it might work to show that a trademark has been registered and used worldwide for an extended period of time, particularly in countries where Cuban nationals often travel. Further, a mark could be considered famous in Cuba if a particular sector of the Cuban population is familiar with the trademark. For example, it may be that those belonging to a particular profession have specialized knowledge of international brands within a certain industry, due to the nature of their work.
Cuba is also a party to the Pan-American Convention. Article 7 of the Pan-American Convention offers much broader protection than the Paris Convention, as it does require that the senior trademark be famous. Under Article 7 of the Pan-American Convention, the owner of a trademark protected and used in one member state (the U.S.) may oppose an application for an interfering mark by a third party in another member state (Cuba), if the third party had knowledge of the existence and continuous use of the senior mark. (Grounds for cancelling a trademark registration are separately addressed in Article 8 of the Convention.) Thus, although the fame of a trademark may help to show that an applicant had knowledge of a senior mark, it is not essential. Moreover, the Pan-American Convention is self-executing, so the exact language of the treaty is directly enforceable in all member countries, including Cuba. Oppositions based on Article 7 have been successful in Latin America, particularly in Colombia and Peru. Although these decisions are not binding in Cuba, they may be persuasive.
Empresa CubanaHow the Cuban Trademark Office will apply the Pan-American Convention in deciding oppositions by U.S. companies is difficult to predict. An ongoing case in the U.S., (noted above), may affect how the Cuban Trademark Office interprets the treaty. Both parties in this case manufacture and distribute cigars under the COHIBA trademark, Empresa Cubana del Tabaco ("Empresa") being a nationally-owned Cuban company, and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" General Cigar Co., Inc. ("General Cigar") a U.S. company. By way of background, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" U.S. Patent and Trademark Office rejected a trademark application by Empresa for COHIBA based on General Cigar's prior registrations for COHIBA. Empresa filed an infringement action against General Cigar seeking, inter alia, to cancel General Cigar's registrations under Article 8 of the Pan-American Convention. Whether or not the registrations will be cancelled under the Convention has not yet been decided, since the matter was originally dismissed based on lack of standing. The case has been remanded to the Trademark Trial and Appeal Board of the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office ("TTAB") to decide the arguments under the Pan-American Convention, and at this writing we await a decision. Although the COHIBA case does not directly involve an opposition filed under Article 7, the outcome could well reflect the U.S.'s stance on whether the Pan-American Convention is enforceable and whether the rights of Cuban trademark owners will be recognized in the U.S. The TTAB's decision could have a lasting impact on the rights of U.S. trademark owners in Cuba, since the Cuban Trademark Office may choose to decide oppositions based on the Convention in a reciprocal manner.
Copyright infringement can also be the basis for an opposition in Cuba. Under Article 17.1 (h) of Decree Law No. 203, a mark cannot be registered when use of the applicant's trademark would infringe a third party's copyright. Since Cuba is also a contracting party to the Berne Convention, it is not necessary to obtain a copyright registration in Cuba in order to enforce the copyright. Furthermore, under the Berne Convention, a copyrighted work recognized in one member country (the U.S.) must be recognized in another member country (Cuba), and afforded the same protections as nationally-owned copyrighted works. This basis for opposing could be useful when dealing with applications for design marks/logos, as in the case of the trademark pirate who filed sixty-five Cuban applications for logo trademarks, mentioned above.
In Cuba, as a general principle of law, a trademark cannot be registered in bad faith. Furthermore, there is a presumption of good faith when a trademark application is examined, absent proof to the contrary. Although "bad faith" is not specifically listed as a ground for opposition in Decree Law No. 203, it is addressed in Article 57, which states that a trademark registration can be cancelled if the trademark is famous in Cuba and the application was filed in bad faith. Along these same lines, Article 17.1 of Decree Law No. 203 provides that an opposition can be filed when it is evident that a trademark application was filed to perpetrate, facilitate or strengthen an act of unfair competition.
We cannot predict with any certainty how the Cuban Trademark Office will approach the issue of trademark piracy as relations between the U.S. and Cuba continue to evolve. For this reason, when filing an opposition, it is best to assert all grounds available in a given case, in the hope that one of them will provide a basis for deciding in favor of the legitimate owner. As mentioned above, to avoid this issue entirely, it is important for U.S. companies to take pre-emptive action in Cuba by registering any trademarks that could be targeted by pirates. In addition to the piracy threat, when the Cuban market becomes available to U.S. companies, the Cuban Trademark Office will likely be flooded with applications, which may result in additional unanticipated obstacles. Given Cuba's well-developed legislation on the protection of trademarks, its high participation in international treaties, and the Cuban Trademark Office's apparent reputation for fairness, we have reason to hope that the first trademark pirates will be stopped in their tracks, deterring others from following in their footsteps. 
END
 
Josep Bosch, Information Officer
Information and External Relations Division
+41227395681
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.