S.Korea says imposes rice import tariff of over 500 pct, major exporters concerned
S. Korea set to begin talks on liberalization of rice market
No comment on Ukraine imposing new import duties from European Commission, WTO so far
Trade friction to ease as China axes rare earth quotas
U.S. Gives Ireland Green Light To Ship Beef, But Final Hurdle Still Remains
Mexico To Battle Undervalued Textile Imports With Minimum Reference Price
Algeria's Accession to WTO - 13th Round Planned for Q1 2015
After 8 years of membership, what has the WTO brought to Vietnam?
Agriculture lobby prepares to push Cuba trade in 2015
As World Linkages Grow, U.S. Economy Plays Smaller Role
 
S.Korea says imposes rice import tariff of over 500 pct, major exporters concerned
 
SEOUL, Jan 6 (Reuters) - South Korea confirmed on Tuesday it had begun to impose a tariff of over 500 percent on rice imports from the start of the year, but added that five members of the World Trade Organization had raised concerns over the level.

Asia's fourth-largest economy wants to protect farmers after scrapping a cap on politically sensitive imports of the main staple in line with international trade commitments made via the WTO.

In September, it set the tax at 513 percent, saying that was the highest rate possible under parameters set by the WTO.

A joint statement by the country's finance, trade and agriculture ministries on Tuesday added that Seoul would hold bilateral talks with its main foreign rice suppliers to ease concerns over how the rate was calculated. Those countries are the United States, China, Thailand, Vietnam and Australia.

South Korea is broadly self-sufficient in the grain, but under the WTO agreement, it purchased 408,700 tonnes of foreign rice in 2014, 9 percent of its demand.

Under the new scheme, Seoul is still required to import at least 408,700 tonnes a year. The import of 408,700 tonnes attracts a tariff of 5 percent, and the 513 percent applies to shipments above that level. (Reporting by Brian Kim; Editing by Meeyoung Cho) 
 
 
S. Korea set to begin talks on liberalization of rice market 
 
GENEVA/SEJONG, Jan. 6 (Yonhap) -- Five countries, including the United States, have so far raised objections to South Korea's proposed tariff rate on its rice imports, officials said Tuesday, as negotiations begin on the terms for South Korea's rice market opening.

After 20 years of waivers, South Korea liberalized its rice market through tariffication at the start of the year with a 513 percent tariff to be imposed on all non-mandatory rice imports.

The country has to import 408,700 tons of rice every year under minimum market access (MMA). Such mandatory imports are subject to only a 5 percent tariff.

The tariff rate for non-mandatory imports must be agreed upon by members of the World Trade Organization (WTO). South Korean officials say the process may take years, noting such a process for Taiwan took 57 months.

According to South Korea's Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy, five countries -- the U.S., China, Australia, Thailand and Vietnam -- have filed a complaint with the WTO, arguing that the offered tariff rate for non-mandatory imports is too high.

South Korean officials said these countries hold a special interest in Seoul's rice market.

"Of the countries that have raised an objection, four, except Vietnam, had jointly shared a country-specific quota of 200,000 tons per year in rice exports to South Korea under the MMA quota," Choi Seok-young, chief of the South Korean mission to Geneva, told reporters.

These four countries oppose South Korea's rice market opening as it has ceased the country-specific quota, meaning South Korea no longer is required to import rice from them.

Choi and the South Korean trade ministry assured that Seoul has no intention of making a concession, saying its tariff rate is more than reasonable when compared to those of Japan and Taiwan that liberalized their local rice markets before South Korea.

South Korea's 513 percent tariff is an ad valorem duty, which is tax based on the price of an article.

Taiwan and Japan, on the other hand, impose a specific tax, which fixes the amount of tax depending on the weight of rice imports.

"Japan and Taiwan liberalized their rice markets with a specific tax, which at the time of their market opening translated into an ad valorem tax of over 1,000 percent," Choi told reporters.

The South Korean trade ministry said Seoul needs to reach an agreement with each and every one of the countries that have objected to the tariff rate before obtaining an official WTO approval.

"The government will do its utmost to make sure the country's rice import tariff rate is fixed as it is, through negotiations with the countries that have filed a complaint," the ministry said.
 
 
No comment on Ukraine imposing new import duties from European Commission, WTO so far
 
Brussels, January 5 (Interfax-Ukraine) - The European Commission and World Trade Organization (WTO) have given no comment thus far over the Ukrainian parliament's decision to impose new import duties.

No comments was offered on this issue since fulfillment of these measures had came to a halt, EU Commission Spokesperson for Trade and Agriculture Daniel Rosario told Interfax-Ukraine on Monday.

He said that the WTO can't comment on the domestic decisions of its member states. A subject of dispute could be submitted to the WTO only if any country believes a trade policy of another state badly influences the worldwide trade network, in contravention of WTO Agreements, the spokesman said.

As reported, the European Commission and the Ukrainian government will hold an urgent video conference on Monday evening, to discuss the new import duties imposed by Kyiv.

Both sides will discuss the introduction of new import duties in keeping with a law on measures to stabilize Ukraine's balance of payments, adopted by the Verkhovna Rada in late December, Ukraine's Mission to the EU reported.
 
 
Trade friction to ease as China axes rare earth quotas
By Lucy Hornby in Beijing 
6 January 2015
 
New licensing regime to be introduced in wake of US victory at WTO

China has scrapped quotas on rare earths exports and will probably replace them with a resources tax, eliminating a policy that caused friction with its trading partners and heightened awareness of their importance as strategic assets.

China is home to most of the world's deposits and almost all processing of the 17 minerals classed as rare earths - elements with uses ranging from instrument panels to speciality steels.

A policy of export restrictions introduced a decade ago received worldwide attention in 2010, when a tightening of the quotas left traders scrambling and raised strategic concerns in Washington and Tokyo. The US won a challenge against the quotas at the World Trade Organisation last year.

Regulations for export quotas in 2015 issued by the ministry of commerce said that quotas for rare earths, as well as other products including tungsten and coke, would be replaced by an export licensing regime.

Metals analysts said that would probably include a resources tax. The price impact in the market would be limited, said Peng Weiwei, analyst at Beijing consultancy Asian Metal, and it was unclear which companies would receive permission to export.

More broadly, China has moved to implement resources taxes, which would allow the state to gain a simpler revenue stream from mining and energy production.

These are in place of quota systems that usually benefit well-connected companies or individuals by creating a lucrative price gap between domestic and international markets.

In some respects, China's quota policy has been a success. Implemented at a time when its rare earths were exported cheaply and processed primarily in Japan, the price differential created by the quotas inspired many Japanese companies to move their plants to the region around Baotou in Inner Mongolia, one of the centres of rare earths mining in China.

But other goals of the quotas have not been successful: there has been little let-up in the environmental damage caused by rare earths mining and processing, and the pace at which they are mined has slackened little.

The run-up in prices as quotas tightened also spurred funding for rare earths mining outside China , which had previously been unprofitable.

The volatility in prices, particularly a 2011 spike after China tightened quotas, has also led manufacturers to find other materials for applications including magnets. That has alleviated some of the strategic concerns of China's trading partners, which centred on the minerals' importance to defence and high-tech industries.

Repeated attempts to consolidate the industry have sparked territorial battles between local and national state-owned mining companies, particularly in the region around Ganzhou, in Jiangxi province. On Friday, the state-owned company that dominates rare earth production around Baotou said it had acquired nine rare earths mining companies from the Inner Mongolian government.

 
U.S. Gives Ireland Green Light To Ship Beef, But Final Hurdle Still Remains 
World Trade Online
Posted: January 5, 2015 
 
Ireland on Monday (Jan. 5) became the first European Union member state to secure approval to export beef to the United States since the Obama administration in 2013 eased a more than decade-old ban on meat from EU cattle that was implemented in the wake of a "mad cow" disease outbreak. However, exports cannot actually begin until the Irish government certifies individual meat plants as being eligible to ship to the U.S. market.
 
In a Jan. 5 statement, Ireland's Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine said the U.S. decision "clears the way for the Irish authorities to approve individual beef plants here to export to the U.S., approval for which will be based on agreed criteria with their U.S. counterparts."
 
A spokeswoman for the department clarified in an e-mail to Inside U.S. Trade that the U.S. had determined Ireland's food safety system for beef to be "equivalent" to that of the United States. This in turn gives Ireland's authorities the ability to certify that Irish meat plants are eligible to ship to the U.S.
 
But the spokeswoman said no such plants had been authorized yet to date. "The Department has been working with interested plants here in some detail over the last few months to assess their suitability for export to the U.S. market. Now that approval has been agreed, we will intensify this process and work closely with the suitable plants immediately to facilitate trade commencing as soon as possible," she added.
 
The spokeswoman declined to provide details on what kind of criteria Irish plants would have to meet, and whether they would impose many new special requirements for exporters or largely reflect existing Irish standards.
 
Officials at the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) did not immediately respond to requests to comment on the Irish announcement. As of mid-day on Jan. 5, the website of USDA's Food Safety & Inspection Service had not posted an equivalency determination with regard to Ireland.
 
The European Commission, in a separate Jan. 5 statement, also welcomed the U.S. move to allow Irish beef imports, saying it "sends an important and positive signal to the other EU Member States who have requested the U.S. to re-establish access to the US beef market."
 
The United Kingdom and the Netherlands, a large producer of veal, have also sought to gain authorization for their meat producers to ship to the U.S. At the biannual Trade Policy Review of the United States at the World Trade Organization in December, the EU complained about the delay in approving beef imports from EU member states.
 
In its Jan. 5 statement, the commission added that it is now "desirable that the U.S. acts expeditiously to extend the approval to the rest of the European Union and to fully bring their import conditions in line with international standards."
 
Brussels has repeatedly pressed Washington to treat the EU as a single entity for the purposes of determining equivalency with the U.S. food safety standards. It has made this a chief aim in the talks on sanitary and phytosanitary measures in the broader U.S.-EU free trade negotiations. Currently, USDA and other U.S. agencies like the Food & Drug Administration evaluate EU member states' various safety systems individually.
 
The announced move to authorize Ireland to ship beef comes after a change in late 2013 to U.S. rules on mad cow disease, or bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE). The new rules generally allow the import of beef from countries determined by the World Organization for Animal Health (OIE) as posing a "negligible" risk for BSE. But they also allow countries with a "controlled risk" or "undetermined risk" status for BSE to ship to the U.S., provided they can show a certification that materials posing an increased risk of transmitting the disease have been removed.
 
EU member states do not all have the same BSE risk status. For example, the Netherlands has a negligible BSE status, like the United States. The United Kingdom and Ireland, meanwhile, have a controlled risk status.
 
The U.S. market has been closed to EU beef, including deboned beef, since January 1998, when the U.S. introduced import restrictions on beef, sheep and goats and their products on the basis of BSE risks, the European Commission said in its statement. "These measures went beyond the standards of the … [OIE] according to which, for example, deboned skeletal muscle beef is safe and can be freely traded from all countries, regardless of their BSE status," the statement added.
 
 
Mexico To Battle Undervalued Textile Imports With Minimum Reference Price 
Inside U.S. Trade - 12/26/2014 
 
One of the new trade policy measures announced by Mexico to crack down on low-priced shipments of textiles and apparel from China and Hong Kong would set up a minimum reference price for the purposes of assessing duties and taxes on those products.
 
Although the details of the scheme are not entirely clear, two trade lawyers this week questioned whether it might violate the Customs Valuation Agreement (CVA) in the World Trade Organization. The CVA establishes rules for determining the value of imported goods for the purposes of calculating customs duties.
 
But Moises Kalach, president of Mexico's National Textile Industry Chamber and head of Grupo Kaltex, maintained in an interview that all of the new measures comply with WTO rules.
 
Under the Mexican scheme, shipments that enter below the minimum reference price would be subject to an investigation by the Mexican government that could lead to the imposition of additional duties and taxes.
 
Specifically, importers whose shipments entered at below the minimum reference price would have to pay the duties and value-added tax based on their declared price, but would also have to post a bond for the additional duties and taxes that would be due if the shipment had entered at the reference price, according to a Mexican industry source.
 
For example, if a shipment facing a 10 percent tariff comes in at $100 but the reference price is $200, the importer would have to pay $10 and post a bond for an additional $10.
 
The importer would then be subject to an investigation by Mexican tax agency SAT. If the importer can demonstrate to the SAT that the declared price is accurate and represents the transaction value, no further duties and taxes would be charged and the bond would not be collected, this source said.
 
But if the SAT determines that the declared price is undervalued, it could charge the importer additional duties and taxes that would be collected by redeeming the bond within three months, according to this source.
 
The trade lawyers said this scheme could run contrary to the CVA because the agreement establishes that, in general, the customs value of a shipment should be based on the "transaction value," meaning the amount actually paid or payable for the good upon exportation.
 
That said, the CVA lays out a series of other methods for calculating the customs value if the transaction value cannot be determined, such as using identical goods, similar goods, or a constructed value. It also includes a "fall-back" option in the event none of the specified methods can be applied.
 
That fall-back option, described in CVA Article 7, states that if the customs value cannot be determined through the specified methods in the agreement, then it shall be "determined using reasonable means consistent with the principles and general provisions" of the CVA and the customs valuation article of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and "on the basis of data available in the country of importation."
 
But Article 7.2 also lays out several methods that are specifically not to be used under this fall-back option, including the selling price in the importing country, minimum customs values and "arbitrary and fictitious" values.
 
Amelia Porges, a Washington-based trade lawyer and former U.S. trade official, noted that a WTO panel ruled in 2009 that Colombia violated CVA Article 7.2 by using an indicative price to calculate the customs value when the transaction value fell below the indicative price. The WTO challenge was brought by its neighbor Panama.
 

Algeria's Accession to WTO - 13th Round Planned for Q1 2015 
 
Algiers, Jan 05, 2015 (Algerie Presse Service/All Africa Global Media via COMTEX) -- The 13th round of the multilateral negotiations for Algeria's accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO) is planned for the first quarter 2015, said Minister of Commerce, Amara Benyounes in an interview with APS.

He said that this meeting "will be decisive as it will allow Algeria to be fixed on the date of its accession to the WTO which counts 160 member countries."

"The next round is going to further advance our file and most likely we will know the timetable of our accession to the WTO if it will be the end of 2015 or not," he added.

Besides, the minister said that 2015 will mark the 20th anniversary of the WTO and the holding in Kenya of its 10th ministerial conference scheduled from 15 to 18 December, "two facts that will be a good opportunity for Algeria to join the WTO."

Following his meeting last October with Alberto Pedro D'Alotto, the chairman of the working group on Algeria's accession to WTO and with Mukhisa Kituyi, Secretary-General of UNCTAD, last December, Benyounes should meet early this year, with senior officials from the United States and the European Union to discuss this accession.

"The US and the EU are the largest partners in the membership file. We need to reach bilateral agreements with these parties," he stressed.

However, Benyounes affirmed that Algeria accession to the WTO "is not an obsession" for the Algerian government: "The political decision has been made and we are discussing and negotiating at our pace. We must say that accession to the WTO is not an obsession but a well thought-out project. "

In this regard, the minister ensures that Algeria's accession to the multilateral organization "is not going to sell out the economic interests of the country", recalling that Algeria has made many investments in recent years, particularly in the industrial public sector with over $ 12 billion.

These investments "must reach maturity and start yielding fruit," he insisted. 
 
 
After 8 years of membership, what has the WTO brought to Vietnam? 
5 January 2015
Vietnam News Summary
 
The expected gains from Vietnam’s membership in the WTO (World Trade Organization) remain unclear, while the losses are more noticeable.

Under WTO commitments, Vietnam opened its distribution market fully to foreign investors in January 1, 2009. But in fact, some foreign investors made their presence in Vietnam before that time.

Big C, for example, joined the Vietnamese market in 1998 when setting up a joint venture with a Vietnamese partner, while Metro Cash & Carry got a license to set up a 100 percent foreign owned enterprise in 2002.

The limitations on the kinds of good foreigners can distribute in Vietnam have been applied since January 1, 2007. This means that the foreign distributors who came to Vietnam before that time did not have any limitations.

Vietnam did not set any limitations regarding the sources of the products to be distributed in Vietnam. This means that foreign invested distribution chains can determine what products to be displayed in their chains, even if they are made in Vietnam or sourced from other countries.

The Vietnamese logistics market has also become a playing field for foreign firms. A report from the Vietnam Shipowners’ Association showed there are only 25 operational foreign invested logistics firms in Vietnam, but they control 80 percent of the logistics market.

“Vietnam has joined the WTO, but the economy remains weak,” said Dr. Le Dang Doanh, a renowned independent economist. “This is attributed to the weak inner strength of the national economy.”

“Vietnam has been too slow in carrying out economic reforms,” he noted.

What will happen?

According to Truong Dinh Tuyen, former Minister of Trade, under the ASEAN Free Trade Agreement (FTA), Vietnam bears pressure on goods trade because it had to cut import tariffs. Meanwhile, under the WTO, the major pressure is on the opening of the service market.

Vietnam has committed to open a production-relating service market from January 11, 2015, which analysts say will start a “foreign outsourcing vs domestic outsourcing battle”.

Pham Chi Lan, a renowned economist, commented: “Vietnam, before joining WTO, had advantages in doing footwear and garment outsourcing. After joining WTO, its advantages are still in footwear, garment outsourcing and making some electronic parts.”

However, outsourcing will be no longer be the “privilege” of Vietnamese industrial enterprises, once foreign-invested enterprises can also join the playing field. The enterprises will have advantages in obtaining outsourcing contracts as nominated by multinational conglomerates.

Also from January 11, 2015, foreign investors will have full rights just like Vietnamese in hotel development and food & beverage catering. Analysts warn that if Vietnamese cannot well prepare for this eventuality, they will only get small pieces of the lucrative business field. (Viet Nam Net – January 5)
 
 
Agriculture lobby prepares to push Cuba trade in 2015 
By Bill Tomson | 1/2/15 8:32 AM EST
POLITICO
 
Congress hasn’t heard the last about opening up trade to Cuba from the U.S. agriculture industry, even after the Obama administration’s latest actions.
Spurred on by the administration’s overhaul to Cuba relations last month, the American Farm Bureau Federation, the National Corn Growers Association, the National Farmers Union, the American Soybean Association and many other groups say they are now prepared to lobby the 114th Congress to make even more substantial changes, like allowing U.S. banks to finance exports.
“It’s going to take an act of Congress to get to a point to where we can compete [in Cuba],” said Devry Boughner Vorwerk, Cargill’s vice president of corporate affairs and chair of the U.S. Agriculture Coalition for Cuba, a collection of farm and food groups.
The umbrella group is rallying its forces and planning a big push this year to get Congress to lift the 55-year-old embargo, beginning with a Jan. 8 press conference that it calls a new launch of its mission to improve trade ties with Cuba.
President Barack Obama got the ball rolling on Dec. 17 when he announced his intentions to re-establish diplomatic relations with Cuba, set up an embassy in Havana, allow Americans to send more money to family in Cuba and undo a George W. Bush administration-imposed regulation that restricted U.S. agricultural exports.
It wasn’t long after former President Bill Clinton signed the Trade Sanctions Reform and Export Enhancement Act of 2000 that agricultural exports began flowing into Cuba. Five years later, however, the Treasury Department’s Office of Foreign Assets Control quietly tightened a provision that requires Cuban importers to pay in cash in advance for shipments.
By changing the meaning of the statutory term cash-in-advance from cash-before-transfer of title to cash-before-shipment, Treasury essentially made it so payments would have to be received in advance of shipments leaving port in the U.S. rather than upon receipt at the Cuban port. It caused Cuban buyers to fear losing both their payments and their shipments, while pushing up transaction fees.
The latest White House action, which a Treasury official asserts will be implemented “in the coming weeks,” rolls back that change and takes away some of the uncertainty Cuba felt when dealing with U.S. exporters.
But National Farmers Union President Roger Johnson and University of Florida agricultural economist William Messina said the big pay off for U.S. farm exports will come only if Congress lifts the embargo completely, allowing U.S. banks to finance trade.
Because the embargo is still in place, all sales must still be made in cash using third-party financing that often forces exporters and importers to deal with added currencies and exchange rates, making trade more expensive.
While U.S. farm exports to Cuba became quite robust over the past decade, despite the cash requirements, they have begun to decline as countries, such as Vietnam, Brazil and Argentina, have begun to ramp up investment in Cuba and offer financing that U.S. exporters cannot match, Messina said.
Not having the ability to finance the shipping of rice to Cuba, for example, has given producers in Asia a tremendous advantage, Messina said. The U.S. was exporting a lot of rice to Cuba in 2006, 2007 and 2008 until exporters in Vietnam and Thailand began to offer financing for as long as two years on the rice sales, he recounted. The quality is not nearly as good as U.S. rice, and the shipping costs are much higher.
Corn shipments also have suffered. The U.S. sold nearly 800,000 metric tons of corn to Cuba in 2008 — providing nearly all of the country’s import needs for the year, according to USDA data compiled by Messina. In 2013, the U.S. sold just 200,000 metric tons to the island nation with the rest of Cuba’s imports coming from Argentina and Brazil.
Overall, U.S. agriculture exports to Cuba this year are expected to drop to just $300 million worth of commodities, the lowest amount in 10 years, Messina said. That’s far below the the apex of $700 million in 2008, according to the economist, who has worked together with professors at the University of Havana for years to research the trends.
The Obama administration “did as much as they could, but really, at the end of the day, it’s the permanent law that needs to be changed,” said Zach Kinne, director of public policy for the National Corn Growers Association.
Much of the agriculture industry’s focus and lobbying for an end to the embargo will be directed at Rep. Paul Ryan, who will be taking over as chairman of the Ways and Means Committee, and Sen. Orrin Hatch, who will get the gavel for the Finance Committee, said Dave Salmonsen, senior director of congressional relations at the American Farm Bureau Federation.
Neither lawmaker is making sounds that indicate they are in the mood to further open trade with Cuba, however.
“The president’s decision to begin talks to normalize relations with Cuba is another example of his administration’s habit of appeasing our adversaries,” Hatch said in a Dec. 17 statement. “Time and again, President Obama has predicated his foreign policy on the notion that if we simply accommodate the demands of troublesome regimes, they will cease their disturbing behavior. … Like many of my colleagues, I remain committed to a Cuba policy that continues to place pressure on the Castro regime until the Cuban people are free.”
And although Ryan advocated for an end to the embargo on Cuba early in his political career, The New York Times reported that the Wisconsin Republican made a 180-degree turn when he ran for vice president on the Mitt Romney ticket. The Times quoted Ryan in a Sept. 22, 2012, article as calling the Castro regime “brutal” and stressing that Obama’s “policy of appeasement is not working.”
Still, Johnson is optimistic.
Now that the GOP controls both chambers of Congress, Republican lawmakers will feel the need to get things done that are popular with voters, Johnson said, and lifting the embargo could well fit the bill.
“While maybe there’s a propensity to say no to whatever Obama wants, there’s also this … political need to do something that can get passed into law,” he added.
 
 
As World Linkages Grow, U.S. Economy Plays Smaller Role 
By Josh Zumbrun 
5 January 2015
Dow Jones Institutional News
 
It may seem counterintuitive in the era of globalization: The world is becoming less dependent on trade with the U.S.

In 2002, the U.S. accounted for 32% of world GDP. Since 2002, the U.S. has seen a disappointing decade with a deep recession and slow recovery. Meanwhile, many emerging economies have grown rapidly, becoming larger trading partners with one another.

The U.S. remains the world's largest economy, but now it's only 22% of world GDP, off nearly 10 percentage points.

The U.S. is also the world's largest importer, but it now accounts for 13% of global imports, down from 16% in 2005, according to the World Bank. The U.S. and the rest of the world can hardly ignore each other, but the world is growing less and less dependent on the U.S.
