TPP: Trade-deal details spark fresh debate
Pacific Trade Deal Includes Pact to Deter Currency Abuse
TPP Includes Historic Provision Protecting Health Measures from Tobacco Industry Attack
AGOA: United States to punish South Africa over farm export impasse
Apec leaders set to push for cooperation in services
WTO PACT - 'Don't make higher education tradable'
India, Africa Join Hands on WTO
France-China statement heralds progress on path to Paris climate conference
China-led investment crucial for growth
Korea's GDP to catch up to Japan's in 2020: IMF
EU forecasts growth dividends from projected 3m migrant influx
 
TPP: Trade-deal details spark fresh debate
David Nakamura
6 November 2015
The Washington Post
President Obama proclaimed that the 12-nation Pacific Rim free-trade pact made public Thursday is the "highest-standard trade agreement in history," but opponents seized on specific provisions to argue that the final deal does not live up to promises.
The administration hoped that the full release of the thousands of pages of the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), after years of negotiations behind closed doors, would help persuade wavering lawmakers to support the president's effort to rewrite the rules of trade and investment in a sprawling region to benefit the U.S. economy.
But a wide range of critics - from HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Ford Motor Co. to environmental groups - said Thursday that seeing the entire text of the deal for the first time only confirmed many of their worst suspicions. The continued opposition of these groups underscores the steep challenge Obama faces in order to win the pact's ratification in Congress before his term expires.
"I know that past trade agreements haven't always lived up to the hype. That's what makes this trade agreement so different, and so important," Obama wrote in a blog post. "If you take a look at what's actually in the TPP, you will see that this is, in fact, a new type of trade deal that puts American workers first."
The next step is for congressional leaders to schedule a vote, but even Republicans who have been supportive of Obama's trade push reacted cautiously Thursday and gave few clues as to when the deal might be considered.
"Enactment of TPP is going to require the administration to fully explain the benefits of this agreement and what it will mean for American families," House Speaker Paul D. Ryan (R-Wis.) said in a statement. "I continue to reserve judgement on the path ahead. But I remain hopeful that our negotiators reached an agreement that the House can support because a successful TPP would mean more good jobs for American workers and greater U.S. influence in the world."
Shortly after the text was released, Obama formally notified Congress of his intent to sign the agreement, but he must wait 90 days before doing so under the terms of the "fast-track" trade powers that lawmakers granted him in the spring. This authority allows the deal to be considered without threat of amendments or filibuster.
White House aides said they were fearful that any delays could jeopardize the carefully negotiated agreement with countries, including Canada, Mexico and Australia, that account for about 36 percent of the world's gross domestic product.
The political climate around the 2016 presidential campaign - with several leading candidates on both sides publicly opposing the deal - could persuade lawmakers to delay a vote until after the general election or even until a new president takes office.
"We don't believe that Congress should wait a year before acting," White House press secretary Josh Earnest said, "but we are respectful of the need to give time to Congress and to the American public to consider the details."
Obama has said the deal includes the strongest and most enforceable provisions to protect workers and the environment of any trade deal in history and is far stronger than past U.S. deals such as the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" North American Free Trade Agreement in 1993.
For example, the agreement calls for a phaseout of subsidies some governments now give operators in fisheries that are either overfished or overcapacity, as well as an end to subsidies for vessels engaged in illegal fishing. The parties to the treaty account for a quarter of the global seafood trade, and countries such as Japan have traditionally helped offset the cost of fishing for their domestic industry.
But HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" the Sierra Club blasted the environmental chapter, calling it "toxic" and "rife with polluter giveaways that would undermine decades of environmental progress, threaten our climate and fail to adequately protect wildlife because big polluters helped write the deal. The words 'climate change' don't even appear in the text."
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" John Sifton, Asia advocacy director at Human Rights Watch, said special enforcement plans between the United States and Malaysia, Vietnam and Brunei lack strong enough measures to ensure those nations will comply with new rules to allow collective bargaining and outlaw forced labor.
"What you need is a government that's incentivized to go after forced labor by enforcing the laws they already have," Sifton said. "That's what's not happening that needs to happen, and nothing in the consistency plan obligates Malaysia to do that."
Cigarette companies are angry about a last-minute compromise that denies them access to a new international dispute-settlement panel that would allow multinationals to pursue damages against TPP nations that hurt their profits by altering policies. And the pharmaceutical industry has objected to a compromise that limits patent-style protection on the data underlying the creation of next-generation biologic drugs to about eight years instead of the 12 they currently receive in the United States.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Ford Motor Co. denounced the terms governing currency manipulation, which are not contained in the main agreement but are separate guidelines issued by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" U.S. Treasury Department.
"The currency forum does nothing to change the status quo," the company said in a statement. "It falls outside of TPP, and it fails to include dispute settlement mechanisms to ensure global rules prohibiting currency manipulation are enforced."
Opposition groups have complained about the secrecy of the negotiations, which have spanned several years. But David Adelman, who served from 2009 to 2013 as U.S. ambassador to Singapore, which is among the 12 TPP nations, said the final agreement shows that there "are no big surprises in the text. Much of this has been debated as a matter of policy over the last few years. That's a good thing."
"The deal is a winner for American interests," Adelman added. "There are always trade-offs in a negotiation. As the debate matures, I hope American politicians, and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" U.S. Congress in particular, do not allow the perfect to become the enemy of the good."
But HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Leo Gerard, president of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" United Steelworkers, said that "the devil is in the details" and that an initial review by his group has concluded that the TPP is "a knife in the heart of manufacturing."
In a glossy rollout, the administration distributed slick brochures touting 18,000 tariff reductions on U.S.-made beef, pork, dairy, automobiles and apparel as a centrepiece of the agreement, opening new markets for American exporters to nations including Japan and Vietnam. Some of the tariff reductions are made immediately, but others are phased in over several years.
The accord also aims to extend copyright protections for Hollywood entertainment studios and Silicon Valley Internet firms, efforts Obama has said will help the United States maintain a global edge in high-tech industries.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Motion Picture Association of America praised the deal, saying it "reaffirms what we have long understood - that strengthening copyright is integral to America's creative community and to facilitating legitimate international commerce."
Mike DeBonis and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Lydia DePillis contributed to this report.
Washington Post 
Pacific Trade Deal Includes Pact to Deter Currency Abuse
By William Mauldin
6 November 2015
Dow Jones Newswires 
WASHINGTON--An unusual currency pact accompanying a major Pacific trade agreement unveiled Thursday will give Washington a new set of tools to prevent trading partners from manipulating their currencies to gain trade advantage, U.S. Treasury Secretary HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Jacob Lew said.
Led by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Ford Motor Co., many U.S. manufacturers and lawmakers had pressed for rules in the Trans-Pacific Partnership that would punish countries for manipulating their currencies to gain a trade advantage, since such moves can wipe away the benefits trading partners would otherwise gain through lower tariffs.
A "joint declaration" on currency, negotiated by the finance ministries of Japan and the other countries in the TPP and released Thursday, reaffirms countries' commitments through the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" International Monetary Fund not to cheapen currencies for competitive advantages. It also requires the publication of data on reserves and foreign-exchange interventions, currently absent from some TPP countries, and sets up annual consultations to discuss the issue.
The currency accord is the first to accompany a free-trade deal. While the currency agreement offers no sanctions or other enforcement mechanisms, officials involved in the negotiations say it will provide ammunition to dissuade policy makers from cheapening their currencies to win a trade advantage.
"These are mechanisms that we think will actually work to hold parties accountable," Mr. Lew said in an interview ahead of the release of the agreement's text. "We have more tools with this joint declaration than we have under the pre-existing set of understandings."
A majority of lawmakers in both chambers of Congress has expressed concerns about the possibility of unfair currency practices in the TPP, especially as Japan formally joined the talks in 2013. Japan hasn't intervened directly in currency markets for years, but Detroit auto makers, worried about a weak yen due to quantitative easing, want to rein in the possibility of direct foreign-exchange interventions in Japan and other countries.
After Congress complained, Mr. Lew and other members of the Obama administration two years ago set about determining what kind of currency pact would be achievable alongside the TPP, since most countries didn't want to sign up for rules that could hamper the independence of their central banks and monetary policy.
The result was the current agreement, largely finished out this summer by Mr. Lew and his deputies in meetings around the globe, from Paris to the Hawaiian island of Maui.
Mexico, Canada and other countries signaled they were open to the deal when they realized it wouldn't include binding currency rules that could lead to trade sanctions through the TPP. "When they were comfortable with the approach, they were willing and active in reaching out to other members of the negotiating group," Mr. Lew said.
Still, the lack of enforceable rules means many critics of the TPP will likely withhold their votes when the trade agreement reaches Congress, likely next year.
Labor unions, Ford and other manufacturers with a heavy U.S. presence are already airing their discontent with the currency pact. Some, like Detroit auto makers, are also upset that tariffs on U.S. imports will be removed over time.
"The currency forum does nothing to change the status quo," a Ford spokeswoman said in a statement Thursday. "It falls outside of TPP, and it fails to include dispute settlement mechanisms to ensure global rules prohibiting currency manipulation are enforced."
Dow Jones & Company, Inc. 
TPP Includes Historic Provision Protecting Health Measures from Tobacco Industry Attack
5 November 2015
PR Newswire (U.S.)
WASHINGTON, Nov. 5, 2015 /PRNewswire-USNewswire/ --  Today, the United States and 11 other countries published the text of the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) trade agreement reached last month. In a truly historic step for public health, this agreement includes a provision that protects the right of participating nations to adopt public health measures to reduce tobacco use and prevents tobacco companies from using the TPP to launch legal attacks on such measures, according to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Matthew L. Myers, President, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids.
This provision is a critical step toward ending the tobacco industry's growing abuse of trade agreements to challenge life-saving tobacco control measures all over the world. It sets a precedent for other trade agreements and boosts efforts to combat a global tobacco epidemic that kills millions each year.
Until Congress approves this agreement, the tobacco industry and its allies are certain to make every effort to defeat or weaken the provision protecting tobacco control measures. We urge President Obama and members of Congress to stand firm and reject these efforts.
The tobacco industry and its political allies claim this provision would harm tobacco farmers. Make no mistake: This provision would not impact and explicitly exempts trade of tobacco leaf. Indeed, the agreement as a whole is helpful to tobacco farmers and many other agricultural interests. The tobacco provision is focused on preventing tobacco manufacturers' abuse of the international trade system and addresses the actions of these manufacturers, not growers. It is shameful that tobacco companies are hiding behind tobacco growers to disguise their own wrongful and abusive behavior.
The tobacco provision protects the sovereign right of the United States and the 11 other TPP countries to adopt public health measures to reduce tobacco use and its devastating toll. It warrants strong support as Congress considers this agreement. For members of Congress supportive of the Trans-Pacific Partnership, it provides one more reason to do so. Those still evaluating the agreement should consider the important protections this provision provides for public health in the United States and around the globe.
This safeguard for tobacco control measures is necessary and appropriate given the conduct of the tobacco industry and the uniquely harmful nature of tobacco products. Tobacco products are unique. They are the only consumer products that kill when used as intended. Globally, tobacco kills about six million people each year and is projected to kill one billion people this century unless governments implement effective tobacco control policies. Indeed, there is a global consensus that nations must protect the health of their citizens from the harms of tobacco -- the World Health Organization Framework Convention on Tobacco Control has been ratified by 179 nations and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union. This is the only international public health treaty and reflects the global commitment to ending the tobacco epidemic.
The tobacco industry has fought back by filing -- or threatening to file -- costly trade lawsuits with the aim of defeating effective tobacco control measures or intimidating government into inaction. Australia and Uruguay are currently battling such lawsuits, and other countries have been threatened with them. The tobacco industry's behavior is a real and direct threat to public health around the world, and it must be stopped.
Dozens of public health groups in the U.S. and worldwide, as well as many members of Congress, have urged that tobacco control measures be protected under the Trans-Pacific Partnership. We commend the Obama Administration, led by United States Trade Representative Michael Froman, and the other TPP countries for achieving this goal.
PR Newswire Association, Inc. 
AGOA: United States to punish South Africa over farm export impasse
6 November 2015
Reuters News
WASHINGTON, Nov 5 (Reuters) - The United States moved to suspend trade benefits for South African farm products on Thursday, escalating a drawn-out dispute over U.S. chicken and meat exports.
U.S. President Barack Obama said he planned to revoke duty-free status for South African agricultural goods in 60 days under a program set up to help African exporters.
"I am taking this step because South Africa continues to impose several longstanding barriers to U.S. trade, including barriers affecting certain U.S. agricultural exports," he said in a letter to Congress.
U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman said South Africa could still avoid the suspension, which could cost it up to $7 million in lost benefits, if it met benchmarks to eliminate barriers to U.S. poultry, pork, and beef.
South Africa has banned U.S. poultry imports since last December after an outbreak of bird flu. The measure came on top of 15 years of punitive import duties on some U.S. chicken products.
The country missed an Oct. 15 deadline to agree on new animal health and food safety rules, which also affect U.S. beef and pork exports, prompting the United States to warn that its eligibility for the African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) trade program was at risk.
Eliminating barriers to U.S. trade and investment is one of the criteria for membership of AGOA, which was renewed earlier this year and provides duty-free access to goods from sub-Saharan African countries, ranging from crude oil to clothing.
"We do not take this decision lightly, and, in fact, have been working hard over many months - indeed years - to help South Africa avoid such action. Unfortunately, the issues persist," Froman said in a statement.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" National Chicken Council President Mike Brown backed the move and said it made no sense for the United States to give special preferences to countries that treated it unfairly.
"This should send a clear message to South Africa and their poultry industry that they will not be given a 'Get out of jail free' card every time AGOA rounds the turn," he said.
South Africa exported $176 million in agricultural products to the United States under AGOA in 2014 and potential lost benefits are estimated to total $4 million to $7 million.
Thomson Reuters (Markets) LLC
Apec leaders set to push for cooperation in services
6 November 2015
Business Times
KUALA LUMPUR: LEADERS from the Asia-Pacific economies are expected to push for greater regional cooperation in the services sector at the annual HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Apec) Summit in Manila later this month.
The 21 member economies of Apec will be looking to kick-start their cooperation in the area of services, which includes banking and telecommunications, by endorsing a new framework on the sector at the two-day summit starting November 18.
Apec Secretariat executive director Dr Alan Bollard said the framework, along with a new strategic plan on micro and small- and medium enterprises, would be among the key items on the agenda of this year's summit.
Prime Minister Datuk Seri Najib Razak and United States President Barack Obama are expected to be among the leaders attending the Apec Summit, sandwiched between the G20 meeting in Turkey and the Asean Summit in Kuala Lumpur, where Obama will also attend.
"The Philippines (Summit) is trying to promote a number of initiatives to make it easier for services to flow across borders and this relates to virtual transmission," Dr Bollard said, adding that this would require new technology and software.
He said the services framework would deal with restrictions on people and capital flow growth rather than focus on merchandise.
"A lot of that relates to electronics technology and education, among others. It all comes down to regulations in each country and best practices across the board," Dr Bollard said in a telephone interview from Singapore, where he is based at the Apec Secretariat.
Dr Bollard said the services sector was a major contributor in developed economies, and was rapidly growing in developing economies.
"We're in a middle of a big change as many economies are moving from agriculture to manufacturing and from manufacturing to services. We see middle-income growth in Malaysia and in other developing economies. We would expect services to grow very fast, going forward," he added.
Prior to joining Apec, Dr Bollard was the governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand from 2002 to 2012. In that position, he was responsible for monetary policy and bank regulations, helping steer New Zealand through the global financial crisis.
Dr Bollard said one of the main impediments to services integration in the region had been the domestic regulations in each Apec member country.
"It's not like trade and goods where you worry about tariffs. Each country regulates its industry for the benefit of the consumers. They tend to do it purely for national focus," he added.
Another issue at the Apec Summit will be how to integrate various trade agreements involving its members.
"This is relevant to Malaysia, of course. Malaysia is in the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) and is also part of the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) trade arrangements.
"HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Apec doesn't want to see them going off in different directions. We want to see them integrated as far as possible and that is partly the purpose of a study on a free trade area for Asia and the Pacific, led by China and the US. Malaysia is working on some of the chapters. So, we will be discussing that," he said.
The theme for the Apec Summit 2015 is "Building Inclusive Economies, the Road to Financial Resilience".
"Generally speaking, more trade helps growth, but it doesn't always help equitable growth. There will be a lot of discussion about the right sort of ways on improving that," said Dr Bollard.
On the region's economic prospects, Bollard said this year had been a "mildly disappointing year" for Apec member economies.
"We've had to mark down our forecast slightly. It is mainly due to slowdown in Europe. Overall, there is slowing global trade growth. We're not expecting that to suddenly turn. We are expecting it to turn gradually," he said.
The Apec economies are Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Japan, South Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Russia, Singapore, Chinese Taipei, Thailand, US and Vietnam.
New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad
WTO PACT - 'Don't make higher education tradable'
6 November 2015
The Times of India - Delhi Edition
Educationists on Thursday voiced concern over the Centre's move to offer education as a tradable service under the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization's General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS), stating that the higher education system would be compromised if the government signed the agreement. The move will enable educational traders from 160member nations of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO to establish colleges, universities and other institutions in the country as commercial ventures, they said. Speaking at a national seminar, 'Challenges Facing Higher Education', organised by the State Platform for Common School System and Tamil Nadu Science Forum, Delhi University former dean, faculty of education, Anil Sadgopal said bringing educational services under GATS would lead to complete privatisation and extinction of government-funded institutions. This, he said, would lead to social injustice. "Education is being treated as a service and not as a constitutional right.
With such commercialisation of education, students will no longer remain students and will be consumers of 'education services'. Corporates will be 'service providers' and vice-chancellors may be considered as CEOs n the future," Sadgopal said, appealing for a transformation al education agenda for the country .
Bennett, Coleman & Co., Ltd.
India, Africa Join Hands on WTO
22 November 2015
Business Today
Between December 15 and 18, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) member countries will meet in Nairobi, Kenya, for its 10th ministerial conference. According to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevedo, Director-General, WTO, the meeting "will be a milestone" for the future of the organisation for multiple reasons.
There are growing challenges from within HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO, as well as outside, that could undermine the supremacy of the multilateral trade body in negotiating global norms. Tiding over such challenges will thus be of prime importance to member countries, especially India and the African nations, with whom Delhi has just concluded the biggest ever partnership summit.
The major problem plaguing HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO from within is the increasing difficulty in decision-making. The consensus-based decision-making process followed by the organisation necessitates all 161 members - rich, poor and developing nations - to approve a decision. And there is a clear divergence among the developed and developing nations on the current round of negotiations going on since 2001. While developed countries find this round - Doha Development Agenda (DDA) or Doha round - less interesting, third world countries consider this as critical to their growth.
The Doha round was supposed to focus on helping developing countries enter global markets through reduced tariffs and preferential treatment. As part of the initiative, developed countries were supposed to work towards opening up their markets through rationalisation of agricultural subsidies and allow a level-playing marketplace for agricultural products to the poorer nations.
WHY THE DOHA ROUND IS IMPORTANT
Agriculture
OBJECTIVE: Reduce distortions in agricultural trade caused by high tariffs and other trade barriers. Rationalising export subsidies and domestic support
WHY IT MATTERS: India must ensure that rationalisation of domestic support does not hamper its existing public procurement policy for food grain to ensure food security, or come in the way of farmers' sustenance
Non-Agricultural Market Access (NAMA)
OBJECTIVE: To cut tariffs, give flexible options to developing countries and special treatment for poor nations on 90 per cent of the world's merchandise exports
WHY IT MATTERS: Unless discussed, NAMA proposals may severely limit domestic industrialisation and job creation prospects in India
Intellectual Property and Biodiversity
OBJECTIVE: Reconcile Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) Agreement with convention on biodiversity
WHY IT MATTERS: It will prevent bio-piracy
The only issue that was of interest to the developed country block led by the US and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union was a Trade Facilitation Agreement that called for modernisation of ports and streamlining of customs procedures. This was approved during the last ministerial conference held in Bali, Indonesia, two years ago.
Developed countries were supposed to work towards opening up their markets and allow a level-playing marketplace for agri products from poor nations
On October 21, at a meeting of trade ministers from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States in Brussels, Azevedo had made it clear that, as it stands today, "we will not be able to deliver (in Nairobi) on many of the major DDA issues such as agricultural domestic support or on market access". He had also hinted at the possibility of developed countries agreeing to take forward the pending issues in the DDA as and when HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO enters into a new round of negotiations to discuss fresh ideas. "It seems to me that all members had agreed to continue negotiations in the future on all DDA core issues, such as agriculture, market access and services. They would remain on the agenda. I think there is consensus on that. However, there is no agreement on how these negotiations should take place: whether under the present Doha framework or under some new architecture," he says.
Besides, the developed country block wants to push the poorer nations to sign a mega trade pact, the Trans Pacific Partnership, or TPP, involving the US and 11 other countries. However, several issues which are part of the TPP, including one that deals with higher intellectual property rights for medicines, have been opposed by developing countries. Trans-Atlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP), another mega trade pact between the US and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union, is yet another example of an emerging external threat that can impact the relevance of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO. Despite the challenges, India will have to be very clear about the position it wants to take in Nairobi.
Dumping the Doha Agenda will not be in India's interest as it has always maintained that addressing all issues in the current round of negotiations, including a permanent solution for public stock holding of grains for food security purposes, is critical not just for India, but for all developing and least developed nations.
Agreeing to more global rules and regulations that bind its trade, industry and services, will also not be in India's interest as it is looking to strengthen manufacturing by leveraging the potential of its domestic market and increased access to emerging markets that continue to grow in the midst of a global economic slowdown.
The joint press conference by African Union representative Mike Bimha (Minister of Industry and Commerce, Zimbabwe) and Commerce Minister Nirmala Sitharaman on October 23, therefore, seemed reassuring. Both sides maintained that India and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" African Union are on the same page with regard to their HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO positions. If the bonhomie generated between India and 54 African countries during the summit sustains for a few more weeks, developing countries could be in a position to take a strong position in Nairobi.
The continuation of the Doha round until all core development issues are addressed is in the interest of India as well as Africa.
India Today Group Online
France-China statement heralds progress on path to Paris climate conference 
Lara Marlowe
6 November 2015
The Irish Times
A joint statement on climate change signed by France's president, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" François Hollande, and his Chinese counterpart, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xi Jinping, this week has been hailed as a major step towards agreement at the November 30th-December 11th COP21 climate conference in Paris.
China is watched closely by developing countries which are eager to replicate its rapid economic growth, while avoiding environmental damage.
The November 2nd statement "could inspire compromise", says a source close to France's foreign minister, Laurent Fabius, who will preside over the conference.
"China is a really important player in this game," says Céline Ramstein, head of the COP21 project at SciencesPo. "To have them signing on is a powerful political symbol."
The 21-article text painstakingly respects the delicate balance between the interests of developed and developing countries. The French are determined not to repeat the Danish mistake at the last climate change summit in 2009 of attempting to impose its own text at the conference.
China has positioned itself as an arbiter between the G77 (in fact, 134 developing and emerging countries) and the developed countries of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD).
In the past, Beijing refused to consider any deadlines before 2030, when it has promised its carbon emissions will peak.
In a major breakthrough, Xi this week signed on to a review clause that would require all parties to increase their commitments every five years.
The clause is one of the main ambitions of the French, because without it there is no hope of limiting the rise in world temperatures to two degrees by 2100.
Opposition
The review clause is opposed by India, Saudi Arabia and Turkey, but with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU, US and China supporting it, they may be forced to concede.
If an accord is announced on December 11th, it will not take effect until 2020. Paris also obtained Chinese acceptance of a "facilitating dialogue" to take stock of progress in 2017-18. China's endorsement of the call for a "legally binding" accord is also seen as significant progress.
Article 5 begins to break down the rigid delineation between developed and developing countries, as defined in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN Framework Convention on Climate Change.
Until now, only developed countries had obligations, while developing countries were asked to act on a voluntary basis. The Franco-Chinese statement foresees that the latter will "progressively orient themselves towards quantifiable reductions or limitations in emissions".
In other signs of compromise, China allowed an HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD report which was rejected by the G77 to be mentioned, and supported the position that funding for energy transition in the developed world must be private as well as public.
The joint statement "didn't just happen", notes the source close to Fabius. The French foreign minister has visited China 12 times in 18 months.
In the run-up to the Beijing signing, he received Chinese negotiators twice in person, then had two 45-minute sessions on the telephone with them, going through the text, word by word. "It was touch and go," says the foreign ministry source.
The day after the joint statement, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" New York Times revealed that China has for years underestimated the amount of coal it burns by up to 17 per cent. French officials see the news in the context of the Franco-Chinese call for "improved transparency".
"The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" International Energy Agency said that in 2014, global emissions did not increase, for the first time," notes a French diplomat. "The main reason is because China is slowing its coal carbon emissions."
Verification measures
At the same time, Chinese statisticians are improving their methods. "What happened in China will strengthen the debate [at COP21] on verification measures," the diplomat predicted.
"The Chinese want to be dealmakers at COP21," she continued. "They've been positioning themselves for the past year.
"They were telling us for a long time that they wanted to make a really substantial joint declaration that would create a decisive impetus."
Xin Wang, China researcher at SciencesPo's COP21 project, notes that China has adopted a much more assertive foreign policy under President Xi.
However, severe air, ground and water pollution is the main motivation for the country's recent espousal of an "ecological civilisation", enshrined in the Communist Party's five-year plan.
"Pollution has become a threat to social stability, which is the leading concern of the party," Wang says. China's economic slowdown is also a factor. "The transition to a low carbon, green economy is considered a sustainable driver for economic growth."
The Chinese public are being reminded that nature was respected in ancient China. "It makes the idea more acceptable, because people say, 'This is something from our ancestors'," says Wang.
Ramstein says the Chinese feel aggrieved to be constantly denounced as the world's leading carbon emitter when, on a per capita basis, they rank seventh.
In a related debate, she asks: "Can we really blame China for the emissions they create producing goods we consume?"
Itronics Limited
China-led investment crucial for growth
Cecily Liu
6 November 2015
China Daily-Europe Weekly
European bank chief sees more room for collaboration in multinational development
China-led infrastructure investment vehicles will be a crucial partner for existing multinational development banks in accelerating global economic growth, says Mattia Romani, managing director for country and sector economics at the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Multinational development banks can greatly help newly created investment vehicles linked to China-led outbound infrastructure, but they can also learn about efficiency and sustainable investment methods from their Chinese partners, Romani says.
China-led outbound infrastructure investment vehicles are mainly related to the country's Belt and Road initiative, which President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xi Jinping proposed in 2013 with a view to promoting infrastructure investment, trade and growth, and increasing global connectivity.
To achieve this integration, China has already allocated funds totaling about $100 billion, consisting of $40 billion for the Central Asia-focused Silk Road Fund, $50 billion for a new HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank and $10 billion to the BRICS-led New Development Bank.
According to an estimate by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Standard Chartered Bank, official funding for infrastructure from the AIIB, the New Development Bank, the Silk Road Fund and China's state banks may total $1 trillion over the next 10 years.
A research paper in 2012 that Romani co-authored estimates that between $800 billion and $900 billion is spent on infrastructure in developing countries each year. To meet the development requirements of emerging economies for infrastructure, that figure will need to more than double by 2020.
Romani says the high amount of investment required globally means the addition of China-led investment vehicles will leave plenty of room to explore investment opportunities, and there are two areas in which these organizations have great expertise from which multinational development banks can learn.
The first is China's expertise in infrastructure building, and the second is expertise in investing in sustainable infrastructure.
"Very few cities have had the experience that China has had, particularly with an eye on environmental sustainability," Romani says.
"China has prioritized the issue of sustainability, taken a fresh look on infrastructure, and laid out the foundations for a green economy. China has a desire to play a global role in the fight against climate change, demonstrated through policies such as the establishment of carbon markets, which are very promising."
In September, President Xi announced the launch of a nationwide emissions trading program in 2017. The program, expected to be the world's largest emissions trading platform, will cover the power, iron and steel, chemicals, cement, paper and nonferrous metals sectors.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" China's National Development and Reform Commission has done a lot of preparatory work to launch the nationwide program. From January last year it set a procedure requiring entities emitting 13,000 metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent or consuming more than 5,000 tons in 2010 to report their carbon emissions annually.
China has also pledged to cap its emissions by 2030 and reduce carbon intensity by 60 to 65 percent from 2005 levels by the same year.
"China has tested firsthand the huge environmental and social consequences of environmental degradation, which is another reason China has prioritized its thinking about the future of economic growth and investment," Romani says.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, founded in 1991, is a multilateral investment bank that initially focused on countries in the former Eastern bloc. Over time it has expanded to support development in 30 countries, from Central Europe to Central Asia.
Last month, China expressed interest in becoming a member of bank, in an attempt to further participate in funding infrastructure and other investments in Europe.
China's application will lead to further discussions by both sides and eventually may lead to a vote by shareholders of the European bank before it can be approved. The bank's existing shareholders are 64 advanced and developing nations.
Romani says China's interest is welcome, and he sees many benefits from having China joining the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Bank for Reconstruction and Development formally.
"Mostly because of the experience they have, which we can easily benefit from. We'll look into opportunities for knowledge sharing, because a lot of the experience in infrastructure investment in China is recent and untapped."
As well as helping one another, the room for co-investment between the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Bank for Reconstruction and Development and other institutions relating to the Belt and Road Initiative is immense, Romani says.
In particular, the two parties could work together on the preparation of and early investment in projects, as well as mobilizing their resources to work with governments on aligning investment standards and policies.
For example, tariffs of cross-border trade and investments could be further eliminated, information and data on investment opportunities could be made more freely available for the private sector, and legal paperwork could be standardized for investors to better understand and assess the profitability of cross-border infrastructure projects, he says.
Romani also identified three key lessons that multinational development banks can give to their Chinese partners: to attract more Chinese-sector investment, to structure investments in a method that allows private-sector investors to better judge their risk return profiles, and to back efficient and sustainable projects.
First, due to the large scale of infrastructure investment needed, multinational development banks need to focus on attracting private investment into infrastructure projects they support, as opposed to investing a lot of the money themselves.
At the moment, about 90 percent of the world's infrastructure investments are made through public budgets. Although public-private partnerships are considered a good way of encouraging private investment, this type of investment is still limited. In a country like the United Kingdom, which leads the world on PPP-type projects, only 15 percent of the country's infrastructure investment is channeled through the private sector.
Against this background, it is important for multinational development banks to help reduce the risks of infrastructure projects to a minimum, making projects attractive to private investors. This could be done by making the cost of a project's loans cheaper, and by government collaboration to align policies and for multinational development banks to help reduce the complexity of legal paperwork for cross-border investments, Romani says.
Second, it is important for multinational development banks to back projects that have long-term sustainability and environmental credentials.
"The type of infrastructure we lay out over the next decade will determine the sustainability of the next decade, especially the emissions intensity and consequences for climate change. For example, how much water is used, how much land is used, and what mode of transport infrastructure we are facilitating. All these need to be answered."
He says investing in long-term sustainable projects may cost slightly more at the outset, but over the long term it makes economic sense as energy conservation will bring down the overall project costs, and it is important for multinational development banks s to emphasize these benefits to the private sector.
Third, Romani says, multinational development banks should lead on structuring the financing element of infrastructure investment in a way that its risk return profiles are in line with that of private and institutional investors.
"The fundamental thing for institutional investors is that the funding needs to be standardized to what they are used to investing in. The level of guarantee and security is sufficiently strong to allow them to participate."
For example, if a multinational development bank steps in as the first investor in a project, it could use its high credit rating to bring down the overall cost of finance, making it more commercially profitable for private sector investors, he says.
China Daily Information Company
Korea's GDP to catch up to Japan's in 2020: IMF
5 November 2015
Korea Times
By Yoon Ja-young
Korea’s per capita gross domestic product (GDP) is expected to near $37,000 in five years, catching up to Japan.
The report comes from estimates by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" International Monetary Fund (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF) World Economic Outlook Database, but experts point out that it would be difficult for ordinary people to feel as if they are better off unless their quality of life improves.
According to the estimates, Korea’s nominal per capita GDP will likely reach $36,750 in 2020, up 31.4 percent from last year’s $27,970.
Japan, meanwhile, will see its per capita GDP grow a mere 6 percent to $38,174 from $36,222 in the same period.
It compares with a decade ago when Japan’s per capita GDP was double that of Korea: Japan’s per capita GDP was $35,785 in 2005, while that of Korea stood at a mere $18,658.
On top of the narrowing gap in per capita income, the Swiss-based HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" International Institute for Management Development (IMD) evaluated Korea as more competitive than Japan in its World Competitiveness report, ranking Korea 25th, two notches higher than Japan.
However, not many Koreans seem to think that they will be as well off as the Japanese in five years.
“They say they would have no problem living with only part-time income in Japan. In Korea, even those with regular jobs can barely make ends meet,” said Park Jun-ho, an office worker in Gyeonggi Province.
Park Jong-kyu, a senior research fellow at the Korea Institute of Finance, said that if such estimates become reality, it would be mostly due to a favorable foreign exchange rate.
“It could happen if the Korean won continues to get stronger and the Japanese yen continues to get weaker. Without the favorable foreign exchange rate, it would be difficult to narrow the gap in only five years.”
As the estimates are affected by the foreign exchange rate, he said it would be difficult for ordinary citizens to feel Korea’s prosperity, except for Koreans who often travel or live abroad.
While he agreed that the per capita GDP is the most comprehensive evaluation of a country’s economy, he stressed that it isn’t necessarily how the people of the country would evaluate their economic conditions. He took Japan as an example, where per capita GDP surpassed $40,000 in 1995, thanks to the strong Japanese yen, even though the country had entered the so-called lost decade.
The fair distribution of income also matters. If the wealth of a country is concentrated only with a few, the majority of the people wouldn’t feel they are rich even if the per capita GDP has risen. “The income distribution has worsened in Korea during the past few years. It is more evenly distributed in Japan,” Park said.
Last year, the Hyundai Research Institute released a report that expects Korea will surpass Japan in 2016 thanks to higher economic growth, but it pointed out that the quality of life is poorer in Korea.
“According to the Better Life Index by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD), Korea ranked lower than Japan in sectors such as jobs, community, environment, leisure as well as evaluation of income based on assets and disposable income,” said Choi Seong-keun, a senior researcher at the institute.
He said that the country should make greater efforts to improve the quality of life in addition to securing economic growth.
Korea Times
EU forecasts growth dividends from projected 3m migrant influx
By Jim Brunsden in Brussels and Stefan Wagstyl in Berlin
5 November 2015
Financial Times (FT.Com)
An HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU already grappling with the biggest mass migration since the Second World War is expected to receive 3m migrants by the end of 2017, but could enjoy higher growth as a result, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Commission has said.
In its twice-yearly economic forecast, released on Thursday, the Brussels commission said “an additional 3m persons is assumed to arrive in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU” over the three years from the start of 2015 — with arrival rates unlikely to slow before 2017.
The influx has sparked calls from Italy and other eurozone nations for HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU budget rules to be applied in a flexible way that takes into account the costs of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" migrant crisis, although the commission said that it expected the impact on the public purse to be “limited” in most cases.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Wolfgang Schäuble, the German finance minister, said his country, which is bearing the brunt of the arrivals, was expected to incur refugee costs of €20bn, or around 0.6 per cent of gross domestic product, next year.
The figures are based on 800,000 people coming this year and 800,000 next year, with an unspecified number leaving because their asylum applications are rejected.
But Mr Schäuble pledged to stick to his zero-deficit target this year and next despite the additional spending pressures.
“In Germany, we are altogether in a position, as far as financial policies are concerned, to manage this extraordinary challenge [of the refugee crisis],” he said.
Berlin indicated these projections were tentative and subject to change, depending on refugee inflows.
The commission estimates that overall migrant inflows will add additional regional growth of 0.2 to 0.3 per cent of GDP by 2020. It argues that extra public spending linked to the crisis will increase GDP in the short run, while medium-term growth should be boosted by the increase in labour supply.
Pierre Moscovici, the EU commissioner responsible for economic and financial affairs, said that how much of this potential benefit would be realised depended on how far nations were prepared to open their labour markets to newcomers.
“This is a public policy issue. It is not going to be spontaneous economic impact; it’s up to the member states to make an effort,” he said.
The findings are similar to a stance taken by some other leading economists — including at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD group of mostly wealthy nations — who say that Europe stands to reap benefits from increased immigrant numbers if it makes reforms to accommodate them.
However, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Bank for Reconstruction and Development has cut its own growth projections for Croatia, Hungary, Slovenia and Greece — transit countries for the huge migrant inflows. The bank also points to the heavy economic toll incurred by Turkey, which hosts many of the refugees from war-torn Syria, who either stay or move on to Europe
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EBRD said that its downward revisions were not entirely due to migration, but that these countries were bearing the costs of refugee camps, security and transport, without getting the benefit of new workers.
The refugee crisis has overwhelmed the asylum systems of frontline nations, such as Italy and Greece, while cracking open deep political faultlines between eastern and western EU countries.
The haphazard response of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU leaders has also brought a heavy political fallout, thrusting Chancellor HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Angela Merkel of Germany into the biggest crisis of her premiership.
The commission specifically modelled the economic implications for Germany, concluding that a scenario where the new arrivals were highly skilled would bring an increase in GDP of about 0.2 per cent this year, rising to 0.4 per cent in 2016 and 0.7 per cent by 2020.
In the other extreme case, where the influx consists of low-skilled workers only, the country would reap lower growth of 0.4 to 0.5 per cent in the medium term.
According to figures from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU’s border management agency HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" Frontex, more than 710,000 asylum seekers and irregular migrants entered the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU in the first nine months of 2015, up from 282,000 in the whole of 2014.
Meanwhile, the commission said the eurozone was continuing its slow recovery from crisis and that this resurgence was proving resilient in the wake of the downturn in China and other emerging markets.
It predicts that the euro area will grow by 1.6 per cent in 2015, rising to 1.8 per cent next year and 1.9 per cent in 2017. The growth figure for 2016 is slightly down from the 1.9 per cent the commission predicted in its spring forecasts.
The country with the highest predicted growth rates in the eurozone is Ireland — 4.5 per cent in 2016 and 3.5 per cent in 2017 — while Greece is the only country forecast to be in recession.
Other parts of the report pointed to stubbornly high unemployment in France, where the jobless rate is expected to remain in double digits over the coming two years, and continued steady growth in Germany, which nevertheless should see its unemployment rate rise from 4.7 per cent in 2015 to 5.2 per cent in 2017.
The Financial Times Limited (AAIW/EIW) 
