Headlines:

WTO rules against India in solar dispute with U.S. -newspaper
OECD Sees Second-Quarter Slowdown
Trade: TPP Looking Less And Less Likely
Abe, Obama discuss stock prices, global economy over phone
OSCE supports trade facilitation in Central Asia and Afghanistan
World economic order needs shaking up for stabilization
West predicts BRCIS’ demise, experts disagree
E Africa resolves to explore regional tourism cooperation
Montevideo calls for greater regional integration
Smoke and mirrors: do Brussels and Big Tobacco have something to hide?

 

Details:

WTO rules against India in solar dispute with U.S. -newspaper

26 August 2015

Reuters News

WASHINGTON, Aug 26 (Reuters) - The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO) has ruled against India in a dispute with the United States over its solar power program, Indian business newspaper Mint reported on Wednesday.

Mint quoted an unnamed official from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Indian commerce ministry as saying the country planned to appeal the decision, made after the United States complained about domestic content requirements in a program aimed at easing chronic energy shortages in India, Asia's third-largest economy.

India has said it expects peak power demand to double over the next five years from around 140,000 megawatts today. To help meet that demand, India wants 100,000 MW of new capacity from solar panels, with at least 8,000 MW from locally made cells.

The newspaper said the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO dispute settlement panel, in a confidential report to New Delhi and Washington, found India violated global trade rules by imposing local content requirements for solar cells and solar modules, and also struck down incentive policies such as subsidies provided for domestic solar companies to manufacture cells and solar modules.

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO typically circulates decisions on disputes to the parties before they are made public. (Reporting by Krista Hughes; Additional reporting by Tom Miles in Geneva; Editing by Steve Orlofsky) 

Thomson Reuters (Markets) LLC

OECD Sees Second-Quarter Slowdown

By Paul Hannon 

27 August 2015

The Wall Street Journal Asia

Economic growth in developed countries slowed during the second quarter of 2015, largely as a result of Japan's slide into contraction, figures released by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development showed Wednesday.

The slowdown in the April-to-June period will add to concerns about the strength of the global economy's performance this year, as tumbling stock markets around the world threaten to weaken investment spending by businesses and consumption by households.

The Paris-based research body said the combined gross domestic products of its 34 members was 0.4% higher in the second quarter than it was in the first three months of 2015. That marked a slowdown from a 0.5% rate of growth in the first quarter. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD members account for 60% of total global economic output.

The slowdown shows that the recovery from the 2008 financial crisis remains weak and patchy among developed economies.

While the U.S. economy picked up, Japan's slid into contraction. The U.K.'s economy accelerated, while the eurozone's slowed as France stalled.

Figures already released show that while China's slowdown paused in the second quarter, other large developing economies also lost momentum, as South Africa experienced a surprise contraction and Russia's economy continued to shrink.

The weakness of global economic activity was underlined by figures released Tuesday by the Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis, also known as the CPB, showing world trade flows fell 0.5% in the second quarter from the first three months of the year, having slumped 1.5% in the first quarter. The sharpness of that decline partly reflects falling commodities prices.

The CPB's figures also recorded a slowdown in global industrial output, which increased by just 0.1% on the quarter, having expanded by 0.3% in the first three months of the year.

A further slowdown in global economic activity in the third quarter seems increasingly possible as a result of the turmoil in world financial markets sparked by a sharp drop in Chinese share prices during July and August.

Declines in global stock markets appear to be driven by fears of a deepening Chinese economic slowdown. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"China's central bank on Tuesday stepped up its credit-easing efforts by cutting interest rates and flooding its banking system with new liquidity, its second such combo move in two months.

Global central bankers are preparing to converge this week for the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Federal Reserve's annual retreat in Jackson Hole, Wyo., and will likely discuss the appropriate response to the turmoil in financial markets, and its possible impact on an already anemic economic outlook.

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Dow Jones & Company, Inc. 

 

Trade: TPP Looking Less And Less Likely

27 August 2015

Trans Tasman Political Alert

Is the Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement trade pact dead in the water? NZ’s trade negotiators are rapidly coming to this point of view. Trade Minister Tim Groser concedes there has been no progress since the aborted Hawaii negotiations. Dairy exports remain one of the principal road blocks. Canada, which opposes opening its dairy industry to competition, goes to the polls on October 19. PM HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Stephen Harper’s Conservative Party is trailing Tom Mulcair’s New Democratic Party in the polls.

Observers say he is unlikely to bend on access to Canada’s dairy markets at this point of the election cycle. The longer the stalemate continues the closer it will impact the November 2016 US presidential elections which negotiators agree will bury the issue for at least two years.

At home the Govt is coming under increasing attack. Ministers believe there is an orchestrated campaign against the agreement. They detect similarities with earlier campaigns which derailed HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO attempts to conclude the Doha global trade round. Groser is puzzled because secrecy is a vital element in trade negotiations and none of NZ’s earlier trade pacts was subject to public scrutiny. However, some of the Govt’s supporters have become unnerved at what they regard as Groser’s abrupt dismissal of protests. While acknowledging his international pre-eminence as a trade negotiator, they wonder whether his evident impatience has only fueled the anti-TPPA campaign.

The Main Report Limited

Abe, Obama discuss stock prices, global economy over phone

27 August 2015

The Japan News

Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Shinzo Abe and U.S. President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Barack Obama discussed the disarray on world stock markets over the telephone Wednesday morning and agreed that they would closely cooperate with other Group of Seven nations to deal with the issue.

During the conversation, which lasted about 40 minutes, the two leaders reconfirmed that the two countries would make an effort to conclude negotiations for the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) free trade agreement as quickly as possible.

In the telephone conversation, which was proposed by the U.S. side, Obama expressed hope that Japan and the United States would jointly tackle global tasks.

Obama told Abe that he welcomed Abe's statement to mark the 70th anniversary of the end of World War II, which Abe released on Aug. 14.

The suspicion that the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"U.S. National Security Agency had listened into communications of the Japanese government and other public entities was also discussed. Obama apologized over the issue by telling Abe that he felt deeply sorry for having caused trouble to the prime minister and the Japanese government.

Obama told Abe that the United States was not conducting any actions that could damage the relationship of trust in the Japan-U.S. alliance.

Abe replied, "If it [the suspicion] is true, it may shake the our relationship of trust. I'm deeply concerned about this."

He asked the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"U.S. government to investigate and explain the results.

About high-ranking officials of South Korea and North Korea reaching an agreement over a recent incident, Abe and Obama both said they welcomed the outcome, and confirmed that they would continue cooperating on matters affecting the Korean Peninsula.

As Chinese President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Xi Jinping is scheduled to visit the United States in September, Abe and Obama also discussed the overall situation in East Asia.

The Yomiuri Shimbun

OSCE supports trade facilitation in Central Asia and Afghanistan

26 August 2015

Asia-PLUS Daily Blitz

A three-day workshop for participants from Afghanistan, Kazakhstan and Tajikistan on trade facilitation instruments and challenges was opened at the OSCE Office in Tajikistan on 24 August 2015.

Nineteen representatives from ministries of economy, finance, energy, customs’ services, and the business sector from the three countries will participate in the workshop. It is co-organised by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"UN Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE) and the Border Management Staff College (BMSC.)

The workshop is focused on the UN “Trade Facilitation Implementation Guide ” as an information and capacity-building tool for trade facilitation implementers, including those working on applying the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO Agreement on Trade Facilitation. The participants will enhance their knowledge on the key trade facilitation instruments and related concepts. This event will provide material for developing national and regional road maps for trade facilitation, including for Afghanistan and the Central Asian countries.

The workshop will cover the domains and instruments included in the UNECE “Trade Facilitation Implementation Guide ” and the joint OSCE-UNECE “HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"Handbook of Best Practices at Border Crossings – A Trade and Transport Facilitation Perspective. ” Participants will be trained on such topics as Coordinated Border Management, Authorised Economic Operators, National Trade Facilitation Committees, Single Window implementation, as well as key trade facilitation tools, approaches and methodologies.

“This workshop will allow governmental and private business representatives to increase their working skills in trade facilitation and implementing international best practices in their daily work,” said Martin Rossmann, Head of the Economic and Environmental Department at the OSCE Office in Tajikistan. “Commitment of both government and business is of key importance for the success of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement. These three countries lie at the very centre of Eurasia and are eager to lift up regional and international trade.”

Mario Apostolov, UNECE Regional Adviser, said: “The accession of Tajikistan to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO, and the Government’s recent ratification of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement, brought new and positive developments to the region. This workshop perfectly symbolises the spirit of the OSCE-UNECE co-operation, as this joint event will allow participants to raise their knowledge and share respective experiences in achieving the uneasy objective of trade facilitation.”

Information Agency Asia Plus Ltd. 

World economic order needs shaking up for stabilization

26 August 2015

Nikkei Report

The world economic order sustained mainly by the U.S. and other major countries faces many problems 70 years after World War II. The current environment reflects cracks in the system revealed by the growing influence of China and other emerging countries, as well as the lingering aftershocks of financial and debt crises originating in the West.

The open economic structures that have supported postwar prosperity must be maintained and advanced. At the same time, decision-making mechanisms must be capable of adapting to changes, including the rise of emerging countries. It is time to rebuild the world economic order.

After the war, the world economy was carved into Eastern and Western blocs by the Cold War. The Western bloc economy regained prosperity led by the U.S., empowered by the dollar's status as the world's key reserve currency and the country's strong economy.

Part of this new structure collapsed when the U.S. suspended convertibility of dollars into gold in 1971, leading to the end of fixed exchange rates. However, the global financial system focused around the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"International Monetary Fund and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Bank, both U.S. initiatives created after the war, continues. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Group of Seven system, in which Japan and Western nations discuss macroeconomic policy, has also played a leading role.

Emerging voices

Problems hindering these systems have become more obvious over the past 10 years. One such issue is that while emerging countries have become more important, their voices often go unheard.

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"IMF decided in 2010 to reform its voting rights to reflect the rise of emerging countries, but the reform has not yet been implemented due to opposition from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"U.S. Congress.

The first HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Group of 20 summit, held in 2008, just after the global financial crisis, attracted much attention as a new forum for developed and major emerging economies. The first couple of meetings produced results, including an agreement on measures to overcome the crisis, but subsequent G-20 summits have not yielded significant outcomes due to the diverging interests of member states.

Another problem is that the leadership of developed countries has declined since the financial crisis. The U.S. and European countries have been under pressure to rebuild their own economies, doing so by focusing on their own interests. They helped guide emerging nations gripped by crisis until the 1990s, but since the crisis created by themselves, their prestige has fallen.

Meanwhile, emerging nations are challenging the existing system with new institutions, such as the establishment of China's initiative, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank.

How should these new developments be dealt with?

First, it is necessary for emerging countries to play a greater role and have more responsibility in decision-making related to the global economy. Raising their voting rights at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"IMF, as well as enhancing G-20 functions, are important. Organizations like the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Financial Stability Board, composed mainly of finance regulatory authorities from G-20 countries, should also be established in other policy areas.

Although emerging country-led moves to found new organizations are welcomed, major economies also need to encourage such organizations to operate fairly and transparently. In this respect, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"G-7, whose members all believe that the current economic order of openness should be preserved, still has an important role to play.

There are two major tasks to ensure stability and prosperity for the world economy.

The first is to prevent a recurrence of a large-scale economic crisis. Discussions about international regulation and supervision of financial institutions are in progress, but they are still halfway to finalization. While excessive borrowing and risk-taking investment should be checked, careful system planning is required so that economic vitality will not be lost.

Now, it is important to prevent crises from starting in emerging countries. International discussion will also be needed on how China, which is at risk of its bubble bursting, and countries suffering from "twin deficits," both in their budgets and current accounts, can overcome the problems.

Another task is to advance rule-making for trade liberalization and investment. Postwar multilateral trade negotiations saw many successes, but the Doha Round of trade talks, which began in 2001 under the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization, has not produced results. As a second option, high-quality free trade agreements should be promoted. The fate of the Trans-Pacific Partnership negotiations will be the test of that course of action.

Negotiating agreements in specific fields is also needed, like the abolition of tariffs on technology products that was recently agreed on by major HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO members.

The Japanese economy has benefited from an open, transparent world order during its postwar development. Japan must actively enhance this structure. It is important that Japan itself become more open in terms of foreign direct investment and foreign talent. This would also help revitalize the country. Japan should positively contribute to developing a new order in which both developed and emerging countries carry out their responsibilities.

Nikkei Digital Media Inc. 

West predicts BRCIS’ demise, experts disagree

26 August 2015

ITAR-TASS World Service

MOSCOW, August 26. /By TASS World Service writer Lyudmila Alexandrova/. The Western media paints the prospects of the BRICS grouping (Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa) in dark colors, predicting its hard days and inevitable demise but Russian experts say these predictions have nothing to do with reality. They say that a deliberately planned information campaign is underway.

Some Western media sources say the upcoming crisis will inevitably put an end to the association of the world’s five most rapidly developing economies. Thus, the UK newspaper, The Independent, reported recently that capital outflow from the BRICS group had reached $1 trillion in the past 13 months. The author of the article said this suggested that BRICS was doomed.

The US Investor’s Business Daily believes that BRICS has not lived up to the expectations as it has failed to become the engine of global economic development. India is the only country in the BRICS grouping, which is in a good economic condition, it said.

However, it is absurd to make conclusions about the BRICS’ death on the grounds that China’s growth has slowed down: it has been observed to accelerate and decelerate several times since the early 1980s, Professor of the Diplomatic Academy of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Russian Foreign Ministry Andrei Volodin said.

"The crisis manifestations in the world economy, the consequences of which are felt in Russia, China and Brazil, will, on the contrary, facilitate the development of regional cooperation because old financial institutions have already become obsolete," the expert said.

The BRICS countries remain a promising grouping, although risky for investments, Free Press web portal cited Head of the Finances and Economy Sector at the Institute of Modern Development Nikita Maslennikov as saying.

"Structural transformations are taking place in the economies of these countries. Recent developments, including among the BRICS countries, are a general global trend," he said.

About $940 billion worth of capital quit the emerging markets from July 2014 to July 2015, the expert said.

"But it is not quite right to say that only the BRICS countries have lost a trillion US dollars. The Asian region and Latin America are also losing money," he said.

Professor of the Higher School of Economics Marina Larionova said she "completely disagrees" with the statements about the BRICS’ dark prospects. Crisis manifestations in some BRICS countries and the recession in others won’t compel them to give up the consolidation of their efforts, she told TASS.

"This can be evidenced by closer cooperation, including the Strategy of BRICS Economic Partnership adopted recently at the Ufa summit, and also the closer bilateral relations," the expert said.

"When the G20 emerged, everyone spoke about the imminent death of the G8. However, this did not happen," she said.

"The institutes have their significance and continue operating. Likewise, BRICS also has its significance, even if someone may not like it," the expert said.

"As for capital outflow, this is exactly one of the reasons explaining the desire of this grouping of countries to unite and safeguard their interests in the global economy," Professor of the Russian Presidential Academy of the National Economy and Public Administration (RANEPA) Valery Abramov told TASS.

For the purpose of strengthening their national currencies, the BRICS countries have established such financial institutions as the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"BRICS Bank, which is perceived as an alternative to the existing international financial organizations, the expert said.

"Developed countries do not like the attempt of these countries with major emerging markets to conduct their coordinated and agreed policy. Hence information campaigns against BRICS: all this is a reflection of financial wars and global competition," the expert said.

"Prospects for BRICS undoubtedly remain," RANEPA Associate Professor Alexander Savchenko told TASS.

"This is not a bloc, this is an agenda. Consequently, its existence consists in filling the agenda with ever new specific projects,’ the expert said.

The information campaign against BRICS was not launched accidentally, Savchenko said.

"That is why, the Ufa summit signed documents on cooperation in information policy and culture aimed at disrupting the Western information monopoly. BRICS has strengthened its agenda and influence potential very powerfully," the expert said.

ITAR-TASS Information Telegraph Agency of Russia

E Africa resolves to explore regional tourism cooperation

Deng Yaomin 

26 August 2015

Xinhua News Agency

NAIROBI, Aug. 26 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Xinhua) -- East African countries have resolved to advance regional tourism cooperation to help unlock potential in the region.

UN World Tourism Organisation (UN WTO) said in a statement received on Wednesday following the conclusion of the three-day meeting in Kenya's coastal city of Mombasa that ministers and representatives from East Africa and the Vanilla Islands also outlined the East African tourism agenda.

"The Agenda will include agreements on regional priorities and concrete actions for cooperation," said the statement.

In an effort to unlock the tourism potential of East Africa, the first UNWTO East Africa Tourism Development Forum gathered regional tourism leaders and stakeholders to identify opportunities to maximize sustainable tourism development through regional collaboration.

Kenya's Deputy President William Ruto, who officially opened the conference last Friday, said tourism is a critical component of the East African economy and an important part of the region's common destiny. 

"Our biggest challenge is to work together to improve every aspect of the experience we offer to our visitors, from their arrival at the airport, their movement within and across our countries, the accommodation and facilities that we offer, and the affordability across all income brackets," he said. 

UNWTO Secretary-General Taleb Rifai said the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"UN tourism agency maintains great confidence in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"East African Community's ability to position itself as a leading tourism destination, by delivering one compelling, highly competitive offering. 

"I wish to welcome the recent introduction of the East Africa Tourist HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Visa, which allows travel between Kenya, Rwanda and Uganda, boosting regional tourism and creating opportunities for tourists to explore the diversity of multiple destinations in the region," said Rifai.

The meeting, which was attended by tourism ministers of Seychelles, Sudan and Uganda, as well as senior officials from the ministry of tourism of Tanzania, resolved to further explore areas of tourism cooperation.

"The ministers also agreed to work towards further mainstreaming tourism in the agenda of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"African Union stressing that the sector can make a key contribution to the peace and development objectives of Africa," the statement said.

According to UN WTO, Africa welcomed 56 million international tourists in 2014, representing an increase of 2 percent compared to 2013, and generating 34 billion U.S. dollars in exports or 7% of total exports in Africa. 

The meeting comes as Kenya prepares to host UN WTO meeting in December this year to help woo more tourists who had abandoned the country due to increased terror attacks.

The December conference, which is expected to attract 6,000 delegates from 160 member states, will also showcase the dynamic development that is taking place in Africa.

Xinhua News Agency

Montevideo calls for greater regional integration

26 August 2015

Buenos Aires Herald

MONTEVIDEO — Uruguay's Foreign Minister Rodolfo Nin Novoa said in a public speech yesterday that it is no longer viable for the country to be “closed to the world and have pretensions of autarky,” as he marked the country's 190th anniversary of independence from Brazil at a government ceremony.

“Provincialism is a vice and it is a (trait) Uruguay cannot afford to have,” he added.

The foreign minister appealed to his fellow countrymen to look beyond their borders, toward the wider world.

Nin Novoa highlighted the importance of regional integration, calling for the process in Latin America to go further, particularly now when the world order is shifting more and more toward decisions made in blocs.

The remarks will have greater resonance considering the different agendas put forth by the Mercosur trade bloc, which has seen some members call for a more open attitude toward trade with the wider world.

Nin Novoa also said yesterday that in order for a country to show strength in terms of national sovereignty, it has to be be successful and dynamic in the international arena.

“Either Uruguay is international or it is not,” Nin Novoa told the state's 3.5 million inhabitants via broadcast during the commemorative event in the town of Florida, located in southern Uruguay.

Nin Novoa called on Uruguayans living abroad to be good “ambasadors” and “wrap themselves with the blue-and-white flag.”

The government's anniversary celebrations was led by Uruguayan President Tabaré Vázquez, who was accompanied by all Cabinet ministers and the head of the Supreme Court Jorge Chediak.

The Foreign Affairs minister called on Uruguayans to defend the significant rights that were born on August 25, 1825, the day it declared itself independent from Spain and Portugal.

Separately, Uruguay celebrated National Day yesterday at the Expo Milan 2015 with a concert offered by popular Uruguayan singer Jorge Drexler and several other events displaying the country's cultural and gastronomic delights.

This year's universal exhibition is hosted by the Italian city of Milan under the motto “Feeding the planet, energy for life.” Heraldo de Buenos Aires Ltd

Smoke and mirrors: do Brussels and Big Tobacco have something to hide?

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Paul Gallagher

27 August 2015

The Independent

Campaigners fear that a controversial transatlantic trade deal will be a stitch-up on behalf of big business. Yesterday, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Commission released documents that might have put their minds at rest. There was just one problem... Secrecy fuels fears that firms will use TTIP to sue nations

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Commission has been accused of a cover-up after refusing to release details of talks between its officials and the tobacco industry during negotiations over the proposed Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) treaty.

Corporate lobbying campaigners published documents yesterday that revealed the EU's executive body had met and corresponded with lobbyists from HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"British American Tobacco (BAT) and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Philip Morris. But the documents, as released, revealed little else.

Almost all the content, including the names of officials and tobacco lobbyists involved, the issues discussed and even the dates some meetings took place, had been redacted.

The documents relate to ongoing talks between the EU and the United States over the proposed TTIP free trade deal, as well as separate talks between the EU and Japan. Critics of the trade talks, which centre on reducing the regulatory barriers to international trade for big business, said the documents back up fears that TTIP will allow tobacco giants to take legal action against the UK and other European governments who attempt to tighten smoking legislation. So-called "Big Tobacco" firms have already used similar legislation to sue countries around the world: HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Philip Morris used a comparable trade treaty to take legal action against Australia over mandatory plain cigarette packaging and is also suing Uruguay in a $25m (£16m) lawsuit over its attempts to enlarge health warnings on cigarette packets.

The heavily redacted documents were released by Catherine Day, Secretary-General of the European Commission, in reply to a freedom of information transparency request by the research and campaign group HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Corporate Europe Observatory (CEO).

They include a 14-page letter from BAT, written on 15 May last year from the company's London office, which sets out its "serious concerns with the consistency of [redacted]".

The remaining 13 pages are blacked-out entirely with the exception of some perfunctory closing remarks. A previous letter from Commission officials to the tobacco company is also almost entirely redacted with the exception of a reference to "allegations" made by BAT, presumably over the trade talks. In another document - a one-page summary of a meeting between Commission officials and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Philip Morris - even the date of the meeting is removed.

CEO had argued for full disclosure of the documents citing the EU's freedom of information law and the World Health Organisation's Framework Convention on Tobacco Control. The latter's guidelines oblige governments to limit interactions with the tobacco industry to a minimum and to ensure full transparency of those interactions that occur.

Ms Day refused the request allowing only "partial access" stating that the documents "contain elements that relate to the Commission's negotiating position with regards to tobacco in the ongoing bilateral negotiations for a free trade agreement with the USA and Japan." She said: "Whilst I fully recognise the importance of transparency in enabling citizens to follow trade negotiations, I take the view that this public interest does neither outweigh the public interest in protecting the Commission's international relations and decision-making process, nor the commercial interests of the companies in question in this case."

The Secretary General said disclosure of the discussions with BAT would reveal the Commission's negotiating positions and tactical considerations which, in turn, would weaken the EU's position in the ongoing trade talks.

Last night, the CEO campaign group said it was "deeply concerned about the Commission's secrecy around its relations with tobacco industry lobbyists" and is preparing a complaint to the European Ombudsman. Campaigners fear that a system of international-state dispute settlements (ISDS) created by TTIP will allow multinational firms, including the tobacco companies, to sue European governments in tribunals ruled upon by lawyers.

Reacting to the publication of the redacted documents, TUC General Secretary Frances O'Grady said: "EU trade negotiators must operate on the principle that their negotiations should be public unless there is a good reason for confidentiality."

Labour leadership candidate Andy Burnham told The Independent he would give "no guarantee of support" for the TTIP deal if he was elected. He said: "The alarming lack of transparency in the TTIP negotiations has damaged public confidence in the entire process. In particular, the involvement of Big Tobacco in those discussions raises serious concerns."

Blanche Jones, Campaigns Director at political activist group 38 Degrees, said: "These redacted documents prove that the officials behind TTIP, a deal that will affect millions of people, are laughing in the face of democracy."

A spokesperson for BAT said: "The letters that were shared do not relate to any tobacco control measures nor do they attempt to influence tobacco control regulations; but rather contain commercially-sensitive information relevant to the Commission's various negotiations regarding free trade agreements.

"Commission officials have the right to hear all views that impact the whole of the EU business community when formulating new trade agreements. We advocate transparency in all of our communications where it does not conflict with commercial confidentiality and sensitivities."

SMOKING GUN?

WHAT AN FOI REQUEST REVEALED

Responding to a Freedom of Information request from an EU watchdog regarding contacts between officials and the tobacco industry, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Commission yesterday released a set of documents that had been so heavily redacted as to be meaningless. In this 14-page letter from HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"British American Tobacco, from its London HQ, outlining its "serious concerns with the consistency of [redacted]", only 5 per cent of the text is visible.

Independent Print Ltd. 

END

 

 

cid:image001.png@01CC55E4.A4F90770

 

Josep Bosch, Information Officer

Information and External Relations Division

+41227395681

 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.
