Headlines:

WTO tech tariff agreement a sign of hope for Doha Round; 
Adaptation of Tajik economy in terms of WTO membership discussed in Khujand 
Trade deals: Bargaining chips
India’s import duty hike raises red flag at WTO
Li: China poised to maintain growth
Argentina: Exports drop 18 percent in first six months
The Trans-Pacific Partnership: Into the home stretch
U.S. Lawmaker Expresses Serious Concerns over TPP
Pacific Rim free trade deal seen within reach in Hawaii
Japan, U.S. eye compromise on rice ahead of TPP talks
Access to affordable medicines in middle incomes countries under threat: MSF

 

Details:

WTO tech tariff agreement a sign of hope for Doha Round; 

More than 10 per cent of global merchandise will come under ITA-II, which demonstrates what can be achieved in the current bleak landscape

Patrick Low 

23 July 2015

South China Morning Post

Unless something goes badly wrong, a subset of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO signatories will seal an important tariff reduction agreement tomorrow.

The deal strips tariffs down to zero on some 200 hi-tech products, adding to and updating the 1997 Information Technology Agreement. This is only the second successful tariff-cutting outcome in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organisation's 20-year history, the first being the original ITA.

The ITA-II result is an important institutional landmark, given the deadlock that has characterised the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO's negotiating efforts under the Doha Round for nearly a decade and a half - a deadlock broken only by the Trade Facilitation Agreement concluded late last year. This new deal should not be seen just as a plaudit for the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO. It is also a demonstration of the possible in a bleak landscape.

As a single sectoral agreement, its coverage is large and its impact non-trivial. More than 10 per cent of global merchandise trade, or transactions worth over US$1 trillion, will come under ITA-II. Zero tariffs will replace some high rates of as much as 20 per cent to 30 per cent in some economies.

The agreement encompasses a broad range of new hi-tech products and modernises the 18-year-old ITA. These products represent fast-expanding, dynamic elements of modern economies, contributing disproportionately to growth.

Beyond its immediate success, though, ITA-II sends a message on the art of the possible to governments stuck in the Doha Round. If there is no movement in the Doha negotiations this year, even by way of agreement on a credible pathway out of the morass, some say the round will be dead and the future of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO uncertain.

Already, it is clear that a July 31 deadline to establish a roadmap for completing the Doha Round will pass without incident. So the painfully obvious message to governments of a successful ITA-II is that if they want the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO to remain relevant in the foreseeable future as a negotiating body, only one option exists. It is to get on with the job at hand.

A noteworthy feature of ITA-II's path to success was a bilateral deal between China and the United States struck at the end of last year. This freed a lingering logjam and made possible further negotiations to broker ITA-II. If the Doha Round is to move ahead, China-US rapprochement is a necessary condition.

A final consideration adding significance to ITA-II lies in the fact it involves only a minority of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO's total membership of 161. As with its progenitor, however, the results apply to all HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO members without discrimination. In HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO parlance, it is a "critical mass" agreement.

Why do governments agree to non-discriminatory outcomes for all in a world hidebound by the politically motivated but economically nonsensical notion that without reciprocity from trading partners the benefits of trade liberalisation are best foregone?

Could it be they have bought the well-known and proven proposition that gains from trade are of greatest benefit to the liberalising party?

Sadly for sound economic reasoning it is not a rejection of the reciprocity mantra. Rather it is because signatories to ITA-II account for well over 90 per cent of the trade.

Even if "critical mass" does not shed reciprocity, it can help to disrupt the hypersomnia afflicting the Doha Round. The attraction of "critical mass" is its contrast with a world where select groups cut exclusionary deals that fracture the multilateral trading system and turn trade relations into geopolitics.

Patrick Low is a Fellow at the Asia Global Institute at the University of Hong Kong

South China Morning Post Publishers Limited

Adaptation of Tajik economy in terms of WTO membership discussed in Khujand 

23 July 2015

Central Asia News

The meeting on coordination of activity of government authorities and international organizations was held on implementation of the obligations of Tajikistan to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO) in Khujand on July 21, reported press service of the Ministry of Economic Development and Trade of the country.

The purpose of the program is to create favorable conditions for the development of small and medium enterprises, attracting foreign investment, strengthening bilateral and multidimensional cooperation with the state members of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO, providing benefits of membership in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO by taking necessary measures to speed up reforms in various sectors of the economy.

Tajik authorities are confident that the program will reduce unemployment rate by creating appropriate conditions for the creation of new jobs, reduce poverty and improve the welfare of the population.

The meeting provided detailed information on the priorities, objectives and need for the program and the results of the action plan of the program.

The meeting was organized within the framework of an agreement between the Ministry of Economic Development and Trade of Tajikistan and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"UNDP regional project "Wider Europe: Aid for Trade for Central Asia".

Trade deals: Bargaining chips

25 July 2015

The Economist

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organisation draws close to its first deal for nearly two decades

"WHEN you've already settled the price of the car, there's no point quibbling over whether the gas tank is full." Thus did HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Roberto Azevedo, director-general of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organisation, urge WTO ambassadors this week to conclude the second Information Technology Agreement (ITA-II). They duly agreed to eliminate import tariffs on 201 new electronics products, such as high-end semiconductors, medical equipment and game consoles.

The 54 countries involved cover 90% of the trade in such goods, which in turn amounts to 10% of all world trade. The deal extends the product list of the original ITA, in 1996, which included floppy disks and tape recorders, to include modern technologies such as the flash drives for smartphones. A final agreement was expected on July 24th.

ITA-II is the first big HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO trade deal since the original ITA and has been haggled over for three years. The slowness of progress was largely due to China, Japan, Taiwan and South Korea fighting over the inclusion of goods produced by infant industries they had been protecting from international competition. India stayed away from the talks altogether, citing the impact that the first ITA had on its fledgling electronics sector. China left early on, worried that South Korean flat-screen TVs and Japanese car radios would outcompete its domestic firms.

The final push for ITA-II came last November, when China agreed its own bilateral extension of the ITA with America, spurring the rest of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO to finish its deal. China, which has rejoined the deal, has been building up its domestic computer-chip industry for at least 15 years. In 2013 it imported more than $230 billion-worth of materials for its semiconductor industry--more than it spent on oil.

The deal is likely to save $13.8 billion a year in tariff payments on the $1.3 trillion global trade in electronic goods, says the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO. Removing tariffs will open up new markets, particularly China, which has the highest levies on such goods. Tariffs on semiconductors, used in electronic circuits, are as high as 25% in some countries. Although the precise effects of the deal have not yet been studied, it will increase trade in electronics between East Asia, Europe and North America. All three regions both import and export large amounts of electronics--the EU exports EUR82 billion ($90 billion) and imports EUR68 billion.

Few African or South American countries participated in the negotiations, but the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO believes that all will benefit. More trade should be good news for a global electronics supply chain that buys materials and labour from around the world. As tariffs fall on inputs like semiconductors, the rest of the developing world ought to enjoy cheaper finished electronic goods, which could very well speed innovation at home. High-tech industries played a big part in the South Korean and Taiwanese development miracles. These took place behind tariff barriers, however. Whether those developing countries that adopt ITA-II can advance without such shelter is unclear.

The Economist Newspaper Limited (The Economist)

India’s import duty hike raises red flag at WTO

Sidhartha 

24 July 2015

The Times of India

NEW DELHI: For years the government has been talking about moving to Asean rates of import duty, which is around 5%.

But, a recent review of India’s trade policy has showed that the average applied customs duty rate went up to 13% in 2014-15, compared to 12% at the time of the last review in 2010-11 — a move that has seen some red flags go up at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization. This means that the applied rate is much higher: Between 10% and 300% for farm products and up to 150% for industrial goods. On an average the average applied customs tariff was around 9.5% for non-farm goods.

For years, the developed as well as some of the developing countries have been pressing India to lower tariff barriers, arguing that the economy has developed. But given local sensitivities, the government has failed to go for a sharper reduction.

“In UPA-I, the focus was to aggressively towards Asean rates but some of the decisions didn’t come through,” acknowledged an officer, who was involved with the deliberations. Sources pointed out that one of the key reasons for the increase in average tariffs was a hike in duty on farm goods as well as items such as gold, silver and even crude oil.

In addition, specific duty in sectors such as textiles — which was an important element of the move towards Asean rates — did not materialize as the domestic industry has managed to get the government to retain protection as well as subsidies. In sectors such as automobiles, despite the reduction in recent years, tariffs remain the highest in the world, although domestic production has gone up significantly and almost all the major auto makers have now set up shops in the country.

For long, the domestic industry has managed to convince successive governments that import barriers in the form of high customs duty are needed to ensure that Indian industry is not adversely impacted by higher costs on account of poor infrastructure and transaction problems.

In any case, reduction in import duty on agricultural products is politically unpalatable. But, all these have not gone down well at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO with several countries, ranging from Argentina and South Korea to Oman and the US, demanding lowering of barriers to trade.

The average tariff on agricultural products is 36.4%, Argentina pointed out. Oman said 25% of India’s tariff lines remain unbound, adding to the complication.

For Reprint Rights: timescontent.com

Bennett, Coleman & Co., Ltd. 

Li: China poised to maintain growth

Zhao Yinan 

24 July 2015

China Daily

Premier says creativity, new business models boost economic vitality

Premier HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Li Keqiang said on Thursday that China has the confidence and ability to handle the risks and challenges ahead as it maintains mid-to-high-speed growth.

The Chinese economy grew a better-than-expected 7 percent in the first six months of this year, in addition to creating an adequate number of new jobs. People's incomes also grew in line with the national economy, Li said.

He made the remarks during a meeting in Beijing with K.V. Kamath, president of the newly formed HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"BRICS New Development Bank.

The premier said all this was only possible with the support of three measures.

First, reforms and incentives for innovation have inspired people to start new businesses, and this has led to greater market vitality and social creativity.

Second, new business models that emerged during China's economic restructuring have become the economic driving force alongside traditional industries.

Third, China has continued its opening-up policy to attract overseas investment.

With such measures, Li said, it was possible for the Chinese economy to survive the challenges facing domestic and overseas markets.

Li said he hoped the NDB would become a great support to international capacity cooperation and interconnectivity as a professional, efficient, transparent and green multinational development institution.

"The birth of the NDB is a major step forward for BRICS cooperation, and also an important outcome of financial cooperation among developing countries and emerging market economies," Li said at the meeting with Kamath, who is from India, and other vice-presidents from China, Brazil, South Africa and Russia.

"We also believe that the bank represents an important improvement of, and a supplement to, the existing international financial system," the premier said.

"The BRICS countries are all in a process of industrialization," Li added. "We hope there will be robust financial service support to boost our industrial process and achieve economic upgrading.

"We also want to use this opportunity to enhance our international capacity cooperation among ourselves and among a large group of emerging countries."

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"BRICS New Development Bank opened in Shanghai on Tuesday.

The bank, launched jointly by Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa, will provide financial support for infrastructure construction, mainly in emerging countries.

Kamath said the NDB was expected to give its first loans by April next year.

In an earlier interview with Chinese financial website yicai.com, Kamath said he expected the first loan to be issued under a public-private partnership and very likely to be renminbi-denominated.

Wang Lei, a researcher at the Center for BRICS Studies at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Fudan University, said: "The NDB and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, both committed to improving infrastructure conditions in emerging market economies, are a step forward to explore a new model of global governance."

zhaoyinan@chinadaily.com.cn

China Daily Information Company

Economy

Argentina: Exports drop 18 percent in first six months

964 words

23 July 2015

Buenos Aires Herald

Trade surplus plunges 62 percent in January-June period, compared to last year

Exports dropped 18 percent in the first six months of the year compared to the same period in 2014, totalling US$30.2 billion, turning June into the 20th consecutive month of negative figures, according to the INDEC statistics bureau.

In June, exports dropped 14 percent.

Both experts and INDEC linked the lower exports to the decline of the price of commodities, while warning the negative figures are set to continue in the second half of the year.

Meanwhile, the country's imports dropped 13 percent in the first part of the year and reached US$28.9 billion, after a seven percent drop in June. The decline is lower than in previous months and will continue to improve in the next few months, experts agreed.

The country's trade surplus shrank 62 percent from January to June when compared to the same period in 2014, reaching US$1.2 billion after a 57 percent drop in June.

“It's the same trend we have been seeing all semester. Exports continue on a more negative path than imports, mainly due to a decrease in the prices of commodities. The surplus has dropped almost a third compared to last year,” Lorenzo Sigaut Gravina, chief economist of Ecolatina agency, told the Herald. “Imports might even grow before the end of the year, while exports will continue to be in the red.”

A drop in the prices of commodities was the main reason for the reduction in the surplus, according to INDEC, which said that if prices had remained stable, the country would have obtained a US$3.87-billion surplus instead of closing at US$1.2 billion. The same would apply to June, as the country would have seen a US$1.07 billion surplus instead of a US$725 million.

“The deterioration of the trade surplus could be worsened by the commitment Argentina took with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization to bring its trade policy into line,” a report by Abeceb consultancy said yesterday. “Nevertheless, the intensity of the import controls will depend on the strength of the foreign exchange balance. The next government might need to look for an alternative strategy to protect the surplus.”

Argentina has until the new year to comply with a ruling from the Dispute Settlement Body of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization (WTO) against import restrictions, which said the country's DJAI import permits and other non-tariff barriers (including national licensing rules) breached international trade rules.

Exports decline

An across-the-board decline was seen in the country's exports in the first six months of the year, with the exception of grain shipments that rose 13 percent due to the record harvest. Fewer shipments of soybean meal account for 30 percent of the fall in exports. Fuel and energy exports dropped 57 percent, with a 63 percent reduction in crude oil, 96 percent in electricity and 51 percent in natural gas.

Similar negative figures were seen in industrial exports which dropped 18 percent, and in agricultural manufactures exports, which fell 19 percent. Airplanes and boat exports declined 75 percent, while shipments of cars fell back 21 percent.

“The dollar is becoming stronger so the prices of commodities are declining, affecting Argentina's exports. The amount of exports of industrial goods dropped because of a low exchange rate and lower demand from Brazil, while fuel and energy declined because it's not profitable to export with such low prices of oil,” Sigaut Gravina said. “The harvest saw record figures so grain exports rose in the first half of the year.”

Downward trend in imports

A similar downward trend was seen in the country's imports, which declined 13 percent in the first six months of the year.

Imports of fuels and lubricants decreased 48 percent, vehicles 24 percent, consumption goods three percent, intermediate goods two percent and capital goods accessories 13 percent. The only exception was capital goods, which rose six percent. “Unlike the first quarter in which imports moved evenly with exports, in May and June they dropped more than exports,” the Abeceb report said. “Despite the low export performance, an increase on the Central Bank's foreign-currency reserves allowed the government to authorize more import payments and not affect the domestic economy.”

June saw a better performance than the whole of the first semester, with a seven percent drop in exports (US$5.8 billion). Vehicle imports rose four percent, followed by positive figures in consumption goods (eight percent), capital goods accessories (nine percent), intermediate goods (seven percent) and capital goods (two percent).

The main markets

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) plus China, Korea, Japan and India and the Mercosur bloc were the country's main markets in the first half of the year. ASEAN accounted for 24 percent of Argentina's exports and 26 percent of the imports, while Mercosur accounted for 25 percent of the country's exports and imports.

A trade deficit of US$332 million was registered with ASEAN plus China, Korea, Japan and India in the first six months of the year. Exports rose two percent due to higher sales of primary products and industrial goods, while exports dropped four percent because of drops in all the areas, with the exception of capital goods and intermediate goods. June saw a US$353 million surplus.

Argentina registered a US$593 million trade surplus with the Mercosur bloc in the first half of the year.

The main destinations of the country's exports were Brazil, China, United States, Chile and Vietnam, while most of the country's purchases came from Brazil, China, United States, Germany and Mexico. Herald staff. Heraldo de Buenos Aires Ltd

The Trans-Pacific Partnership: Into the home stretch

25 July 2015

The Economist

For all its flaws, the biggest trade deal in years is good news for the world

FIVE years of trade negotiations, 29 chapters of dense rules and hundreds of tariff lines culminate, in one corner of Asia, in whirring spools of white fabric. Negotiators are still wrangling over the text that aims to establish a new Pacific trade zone, tying together 12 countries from America to Vietnam. But Penfabric, a textile company in Penang, north-western Malaysia, is not waiting around. In one of its mills, bright yellow flags distinguish rolls of high-end fabric from cheaper cloth. Lately, these flags have started to multiply. "We need to be in tune with what America wants," says H. S. Teh, Penfabric's managing director.

The zone, dubbed the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), is the most important free-trade agreement in years. If completed, it will be the largest regional trade deal ever, with its members accounting for nearly 40% of the world economy. The countries leading the negotiations want to set a new standard for what trade agreements cover. They are taking on the morass of regulations, such as local-content rules determining how much of a product must be made from local inputs, that have replaced tariffs as the main obstacle to the free flow of goods across borders. After repeated failures to seal big global deals--the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organisation (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO) has turned its focus to specific industries rather than comprehensive agreements (see "Trade deals: Bargaining chips")--the TPP actually has a good chance at success. A meeting of trade ministers in Maui from July 28th to 31st is expected to put the final touches on the deal.

Gauging the exact benefits of the TPP is tricky, not least because the trade talks are still confidential. Critics have bemoaned the lack of disclosure but conducting negotiations in the open would have been a sure way to undermine them. Governments will have several months to review the final deal before deciding whether to give their assent.

Even when the details are known, it will still be hard to assess the impact. The most authoritative study, published by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Peterson Institute for International Economics, reckons the TPP will enlarge the economies of the 12 member states by $285 billion by 2025. But, as with any economic model, reality is more complex. Benefits could be smaller if exemptions on tariffs blunt its impact--Japan, for one, is still trying to protect its "sacred" food, such as rice, wheat and beef, from imports. But through knock-on effects--if, say, Vietnamese industry becomes more efficient--the gains could also be larger.

Trying to pin down the exact value of the deal misses the point, though. First, the TPP is not at its final destination. It is supposed to expand, drawing in more countries. The Philippines, South Korea, Taiwan and Thailand have expressed interest in joining. The hope is that it will eventually also attract China. If the initial 12-country zone is expanded to 17, the benefits could be much bigger (see chart). Second, TPP is not mainly about cutting tariffs (these are already low after years of trade liberalisation) but rather about setting new rules for global commerce.

By leaving China out, America has, to a certain extent, rigged the talks in its favour. Much as state-owned companies in Malaysia or Vietnam want to defend their fiefdoms, they do not have the clout to push back as strongly as their peers in China might have done. But if the TPP gets under way and proves successful, China may yet be compelled to join, or at least to agree to pacts with similar standards. "If China doesn't promote its own ideas for trade, it will be influenced by those of others," says Zhou Mi, a researcher in a think-tank under HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"China's commerce ministry.

The rules that America is pushing have faced criticisms, some valid, some not. Particularly controversial has been a demand from big pharmaceutical firms for a 12-year freeze on sharing data on a group of new medicines called "biologics", which they say is necessary to spur more innovation. Groups such as HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Médecins Sans Frontières say that this would go too far and hinder the development of the cheaper alternatives needed for poorer countries. People familiar with the negotiations say the data-exclusivity term is likely to be pared back, perhaps to seven years.

Other rules are more welcome. Some economists have noted the TPP's focus on intellectual property and its mechanism allowing investors to sue states, and concluded that it is more a political agenda than a free-trade agreement. But such provisions are not unique to TPP. And its boldness in tackling the rules gumming up the gears of global trade is laudable. Firms that straddle borders know that local-content rules can be just as distortionary as tariffs. "In South-East Asia, you basically have to build cars in the country in which you want to sell them," says Matt Hobbs, vice-president of government relations at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"General Motors.

The TPP talks have dragged on since 2010 and there could be drama yet in the final weeks. Some think Canada could quit the group if its dairy farmers are not insulated. Malaysia might be pushed out because of American concerns about human trafficking. In America, Congress could scupper the deal, though goodies for beef farmers, carmakers and drug companies should tip the balance in favour. Japan will also face domestic blowback if it opens its door to agricultural trade. But as a hub of innovation, it has a strong interest in TPP. It has been a crucial ally for America in demanding more rigorous trade rules, says Matthew Goodman of the Centre for Strategic and International Studies.

The China syndrome

Ultimately, for TPP to really make a mark, it has to be bigger. Leaving out China is an expedient to get the deal done but, if kept that way, it would be a huge gap. China is the world's biggest manufacturer. Any Asian trade zone without it faces one of two sorry fates. Either, because of China's centrality to Asian supply chains, the deal is so riddled with exemptions that it becomes worthless. Or, if the zone gains traction, the effect is to divert trade away from the most efficient Chinese companies and hurt the global economy.

The TPP is likely to face both problems. In textiles, for instance, Vietnamese and Malaysian mills expect to be allowed to continue to source fabric from countries such as China or India that those inside the trade zone cannot produce. This exemption may be vast. Meanwhile, Vietnamese and Malaysian garment makers admit the exclusion of Chinese finished goods will help shelter them from their toughest competition--hardly the ideal of free trade.

In other areas, though, TPP could make waves of a good kind. Rules to protect labour rights, strengthen HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"environmental safeguards and limit subsidies to state-owned companies should go further than any previous trade deal. Officials in China, who previously viewed TPP as a gambit to isolate it, now drop hints about wanting to join the club. "It won't be the gold-standard deal they've been talking about, and they will be lucky to get a silver. Perhaps it will be a bronze," says Jayant Menon of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Asian Development Bank. With other ambitious trade talks gathering dust, however, even a bronze would glitter.

The Economist Newspaper Limited (The Economist) 

U.S. Lawmaker Expresses Serious Concerns over TPP

24 July 2015

Jiji Press English News Service

Washington, July 23 (Jiji Press)--HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"U.S. House of Representatives lawmaker Rosa Delauro (D-Connecticut) expressed Thursday "serious concerns" about Trans-Pacific Partnership free trade negotiations ahead of a closely watched ministerial meeting.

"There are serious concerns on the substance of the agreement," Delauro said in a teleconference, before the 12 countries engaged in the TPP negotiations will aim for a broad agreement at the four-day ministerial meeting in Hawaii from Tuesday.

She said market opening may not make progress for Japan's five key agricultural product categories, such as beef and pork, and Canadian dairy products.

As the dollar's strength has been pressuring U.S. exports, Delauro said: "The agreement does nothing on currency manipulation. The negotiating objective is just to encourage countries not to engage in currency manipulation."

Lloyd Doggett (D-Texas) said that Malaysian measures against forced labor, which the United States is closely watching, are inadequate

Jiji Press Limited

Pacific Rim free trade deal seen within reach in Hawaii

Kayo Mimizuka Kayo Mimizuka 

24 July 2015

Kyodo News

TOKYO, July 24 -- Twelve Pacific Rim countries are heading into what is expected to be the final round of negotiations on setting up the world's largest regional free trade zone with new standards for trade and investment in the fast-growing region.

Aiming to secure a broad agreement after years of talks, the members of the U.S.-led Trans-Pacific Partnership initiative, the most ambitious trade framework in a generation, will hold a four-day ministerial meeting from Tuesday on Maui island in Hawaii, preceded by a chief negotiators' gathering from Friday.

The latest session of negotiations is viewed as an effective deadline for the 12 countries to cut a deal on the TPP -- which would stretch from Chile and Canada to Japan and cover some 40 percent of global output -- by the end of this year. If the Hawaii meeting ends without a major breakthrough, the talks could drift into 2017 or even later given that the United States will soon enter full-fledged campaigning for the 2016 presidential election.

Koji Tsuruoka, Japan's chief TPP negotiator, said the TPP talks are "in the final phase," but problems such as tariffs and the establishment of unified rules for protecting intellectual property remain to be resolved.

"It's hard to say that all issues have been settled. All of the outstanding issues are extremely difficult" to resolve, Tsuruoka told reporters before departing for Hawaii on Wednesday.

In principle, the TPP aims for abolition of tariffs on all goods. The far-reaching initiative also eyes setting global rules in relatively new areas such as intellectual property, environmental protection as well as reform of state-owned enterprises, which are heavily protected in some member economies, to ensure fair competition.

While expectations mounted for securing a deal after U.S. President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Barack Obama -- who wants to make the TPP part of his legacy before his term expires in January 2017 -- secured fast-track negotiating authority for international trade deals late last month, differences remain among the TPP economies with each nation wanting to protect politically sensitive areas.

The most contentious issues that will likely require political decisions by the ministers include data exclusivity periods for new medicines. The United States has been in conflict with Australia and emerging Asian economies over the issue, which concerns the availability of generic medicines as well as the profits of big U.S. pharmaceutical firms.

Another sticking point is the opening up of Canada's protected dairy and poultry markets. Ottawa is expecting a general election in October and therefore reluctant to make bold concessions that might be unpopular among voters who are against the TPP, according to negotiation sources.

In addition to Canada, New Zealand, which has called for drastic liberalization of dairy products, is also falling behind in its negotiations, with some sources saying the two countries could possibly be tossed out of the initiative.

Japanese Economic and Fiscal Policy Minister Akira Amari, who is in charge of TPP negotiations, has said that "one possible option" is to reach a broad agreement without countries that are unwilling to end negotiations in Hawaii, apparently with Canada and New Zealand in mind.

Earlier this month, over 20 U.S. lawmakers sent a letter to the Canadian ambassador to the United States, saying Ottawa has been "unwilling to seriously engage in market access discussions regarding dairy."

"It will be difficult for us to support Canada's inclusion in TPP if significant new dairy access is not part of the deal," the letter said.

For the eventual success of the TPP, Japan and the United States, the two largest economies accounting for some 80 percent of gross domestic product in the framework, must resolve their differences over liberalization of agricultural products and autos.

While the negotiation sources say that Tokyo and Washington are left with only a few problems, they have yet to fully agree on how drastically Japan should expand imports of U.S. rice -- one of the most sensitive farm products for Tokyo -- amid persistent calls from Washington for the opening up of the Japanese agricultural market.

Acting Deputy U.S. Trade Representative Wendy Cutler said earlier this month the two countries "knew that rice would be one of the most difficult issues to solve in these negotiations due to the sensitivity of rice in the Japanese market" and that has "proven to be the case," adding the issue will need to be discussed by their respective ministers in Hawaii.

The Japanese side is calling for abolition of U.S. tariffs on automotive parts and expanding imports of Japanese beef under a low-tariff quota, which also remain as hurdles.

The United States, Australia, Brunei, Chile, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore and Vietnam launched negotiations over the TPP in 2010, with Malaysia, Mexico, Canada and Japan joining the dialogue later. Kyodo News

Japan, U.S. eye compromise on rice ahead of TPP talks

24 July 2015

The Japan News

Negotiations on raising the ceiling for the volume of rice imported from the United States -- the largest remaining issue in Japan-U.S. talks on tariffs in connection with the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade agreement -- are approaching a settlement. As negotiations enter the final phase, Japan and the United States are apparently showing their willingness to compromise, from the perspective of aiming to achieve a high-level TPP deal at the ministerial meeting to be held later this month.

Unprepared to leave the rice imports to transactions among private companies, the United States is asking Japan to guarantee a volume of U.S. rice imports, in an effort to ensure an increase in the amount. The two countries will speed up the process of last-minute negotiations from now on.

Based on rules set by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization, Japan uses the so-called minimum access rice system, under which the nation imports a total of 770,000 tons of foreign rice per year, including 360,000 tons from the United States, without applying a tariff. At present, the focus of negotiations is to set up a special TPP quota, separate from the minimum access rice system, and determine the amount by which the rice imports can be boosted.

For the special TPP quota, the United States is also seeking for Japan to guarantee imports of U.S. rice as an obligation of the Japanese government, in the same manner as the minimum access rice system.

Japan, however, has insisted on leaving the exact volume to be determined by private companies' transactions. Under the Japanese formula, for example, it would be possible for the actual import volume to remain at 50,000 tons despite an agreed quota of 80,000 tons. Therefore, Washington is demanding concessions from Tokyo.

Behind this is the fact that differences in rice prices between Japan and the United States have been reduced due to the yen's continuing depreciation, among other reasons. Therefore, U.S. rice is losing its price-based appeal for the food service sector and other industries in Japan.

Meanwhile, if the Japanese government agrees to guarantee rice imports, there is a possibility that the United States could make a concession to reduce the volume of U.S. rice imports. Therefore, from now on, the Japanese government is likely to explore measures that are advantageous for Japan.

Meeting in Maui

Chief negotiators from 12 countries involved in TPP negotiations will hold a meeting on the island of Maui in Hawaii from Friday to Monday. Ahead of the ministerial session starting from Tuesday, where participating countries aim to strike a broad deal at the meeting, chief negotiators are trying to narrow as much as possible any differences of opinion on intellectual property rights protections and other matters.

The Yomiuri Shimbun

Access to affordable medicines in middle incomes countries under threat: MSF

EP News Bureau-Mumbai 

Distributed by Contify.com

23 July 2015

Express Pharma

Criticises moves to base fund allocation in part on income classifications, rather than public health needs

At the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"International AIDS Society (IAS) Conference, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Doctors Without Borders/HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Medecins Sans Frontieres (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"MSF) warned that middle-income countries (MICs), which will be home to 70 per cent of people living with HIV by 2020, face increasing threats to their ability to access affordable generic medicines, which are crucial to countries' ability to reach the global UNAIDS 90/90/90 targets.

"No one can deny the pivotal role that affordable antiretrovirals have played in putting 15 million people on HIV treatment, but as we look ahead to the next 15 million, we see that middle-income countries are increasingly constrained in accessing affordable generic medicines, and this spells disaster for the global HIV response," said Dr Peter Saranchuk, TB/HIV Advisor for MSF.

Calling the term 'middle-income' an artificial classification that is not linked to public health realities, the release makes the point that more than half of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"MSF's medical programmes are in MICs, including India, Kenya, Myanmar, Republic of Congo and South Sudan. About 70 per cent of the world's poor live in MICs, and 60 per cent of people with HIV live in these countries today.

Leena Menghaney, Head of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"MSF's Access Campaign in South Asia said, "Multiple threats on MICs are converging to form an unprecedented assault on access to medicines. Amongst other threats, some of the most acute come from trading partners - like the US and Japan - who seek to impose intellectual property rules that will block access to generic medicines; and from several donor agencies, including the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Global Fund to Fight AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria, whose discriminatory policies are moving towards reducing funding for MICs at a time when global HIV targets call for increasing the pace of treatment scale-up."

The association points out that current pharmaceutical industry pricing strategies for antiretrovirals (ARVs) and other medicines, including tiered pricing, voluntary licensing and donation programmes, deliberately exclude MIC, and are almost entirely focused on excluding MICs from accessing the lowest global prices available to low-income countries. This is particularly acute for third-line, or salvage regimens, which are priced out of reach for most countries. For example, the raltegravir, etravirine, darunavir and ritonavir salvage regimen is available at the lowest global price for $1,854 per person per year (PPY), but middle-income countries often pay exponentially more: for example, Myanmar pays $2,929 PPY and Ukraine pays $16,409 PPY. Second-line treatments, and some newer first-line treatments, are also priced out of reach.

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"MSF release is targetting the negotiators for the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) agreement who will meet later this week in Hawaii to try to finalise terms for a trade pact that will encompass at least 40 per cent of the world's GDP. One third of the 12 TPP countries are developing countries classified as middle-income economies who, if the deal is signed in its current form, would be forced to implement a range of new provisions that will lengthen, strengthen and expand patent and regulatory monopolies for medicines. For example, one proposed rule limits governments' ability to restrict pharma companies' efforts to pursue abusive 'evergreening' strategies to extend the life of pharma patents well beyond 20 years. The effect is reduced ability to access affordable generic medicines.

The release criticises the 'new funding model' of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Global Fund to Fight HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria as it relies on a funding allocation formula based in part on income classifications, rather than public health needs. As a result, several MICs such as Ukraine and Vietnam have seen their funding reduced in the 2014-2016 funding period compared to previous years, limiting their ability to reach socially excluded groups.

Menghaney also refers to pressures India is facing from the US, EU and other governments to roll back the country's progressive patent laws "in order to restrict generic competition, in favour of supporting the MNC pharma industry's monopoly- and profit-driven business models. She warns that if these policies are allowed to continue, middle-income countries face nothing short of a calamity that poses a major threat to the global HIV response and other health initiatives.

The Indian Express Limited

END

 

 

cid:image001.png@01CC55E4.A4F90770

 

Josep Bosch, Information Officer

Information and External Relations Division

+41227395681

 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.
