Headlines:
Food safety, trade should improve nutrition, boost development: FAO and WTO
WTO: differences intensify over Nairobi package
Industry groups want WTO's global tariff-cutting deal for tech products to take effect sooner
Trade slows in Asia-Pacific as economies adjust to lower global growth: UN report
Country's climate actions can help secure Paris deal
BRICS Countries Signed Moscow Declaration for Supporting Multilateral Science Projects
The TPP: widening Latin America’s economic divide
Argentina's biodiesel output to drop 30% in 2015: industry group
Iran's container trade forecast to grow 25 percent annually
Kerry invites Russia, China to join TPP on condition of raising country standards
Los países del G20 siguen imponiendo restricciones al comercio, según la OMC
OMC da por hecho que próxima reunión de Nairobi no cerrará Ronda de Doha; OMC DOHA
 
Details:
Food safety, trade should improve nutrition, boost development: FAO and WTO
guzhenqiu
2 November 2015
Xinhua News Agency
UNITED NATIONS, Nov. 2 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xinhua) -- The Food and Agriculture Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" FAO) and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) agreed on Monday to promote international food trade and safety in ways that improve nutrition and allow small-scale producers to have better access to international agricultural markets.
"We look forward to ensuring fair trade of agricultural and food products through this stronger (FAO-WTO) cooperation," FAO Director-General Jose Graziano da Silva said in a press release.
"On the one hand trade is likely to play an increasing role in meeting the growing demand from food-deficit countries. On the other hand, greater trade openness may undermine the capacity of local people to produce their own food," he was quoted as saying at an event at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" FAO headquarters in Rome, Italy.
According to the press release, Graziano da Silva warned that failure to reach a balanced solution on issues relating to production and trade of agricultural products could derail the international community's recently agreed sustainable development goal to eradicate world hunger.
WTO's Director-General HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevedo stressed that "we seek to ensure that the global trading system works for all, that it is fair and balanced," in a way "which supports growth and development and allows people to access the goods and services that they need" including food.
"When I visit developing countries, especially in Africa ... business people tell me about the difficulties they face in meeting the required standards," he said.
It is essential to provide capacity building for producers in developing countries, an area of work where the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" FAO are seeking to deepen their collaboration, he added.
Azevedo referred to the 10th WTO Ministerial Conference scheduled for December in Nairobi, Kenya, where the role of agriculture -- especially in development and in improving the lives of people in least developed countries -- will be high on the agenda.
Issues for discussion include addressing trade restrictions that impact imports, such as the lowering of tariffs, the need to minimize domestic agricultural subsidies, and the "distortions these programmes produce," Azevedo said, as well as the need to eliminate export subsidies.
Meanwhile, the WTO director-general expressed hope that some agreement would be reached in Nairobi on the issue of export subsidies.
This, he said, would mark "an extremely significant breakthrough," and would be especially important for developing and least developed countries.
Both leaders underscored the increase in cooperation between HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" FAO and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO.
This includes deepening their collaboration on trade and food safety, including a joint publication in 2016 which would deal with sanitary and phyto-sanitary measures that curb the spread of plant and animal diseases during the transport for trade of agricultural products.
Other areas where they are seeking to reinforce joint efforts include the Standards and Trade Development Facility; capacity development initiatives to assist countries in the implementation of the Codex Alimentarius or "Food Code" which develops harmonized international food standards that protect consumer health and promote fair practices in food trade; and country level assistance to facilitate trade in safe and nutritious food.
Xinhua News Agency
WTO: differences intensify over Nairobi package
Amiti Sen
3 November 2015
Business Line (The Hindu)
Farm exporters want export competition to be included, while G-33 nations want special safeguards Differences between developing countries and rich nations over what needs to be included in the package of agreements, to be delivered at the Nairobi Ministerial meet of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) in December, are getting more intensified.
India, China and Indonesia were among the developing nations that recently took on farm exporting members such as the US and New Zealand for pushing for an agreement on export competition at Nairobi, while ignoring other aspects of the farm negotiations such as a special safeguard mechanism for poor farmers.
“At last week’s meeting of the Committee on Agriculture (CoA), several developing countries made it obvious that they are not willing to agree to only a pact on export competition in agriculture at Nairobi without getting anything in return,”,” an official who attended the meeting said.
Speaking independently at the meet, India’s representative stated that all three pillars of the agriculture negotiations — market access, domestic support and export competition — were balanced, and asked members not to cherry pick.
China, too, seemed to be on the same page with its representative stating that members should not push any issue off the table, the official said.
The US and some others support the conclusion of the Doha Round — which has been on since November 2001— at Nairobi, with the delivery of a small package of agreement on select issues.
Development issues
This is being opposed by many developing countries such as India as it would result in burying of all developmental issues that the Doha Round included and subsequent rounds might just focus on issues favoured by powerful nations.
The US, backed by the entire HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Cairns group of farm exporting countries, has been insisting that a pact on export competition — for time-bound elimination of all forms of export subsidies and tracking and monitoring of export measures — was the only plausible agreement that could be reached at Nairobi. The G-33 group of developing countries in agriculture, led by Indonesia, however, does not agree.
At the CoA meeting, the alliance insisted on an agreement on a ‘special safeguard mechanism’ that will allow developing countries to raise import tariffs on farm goods whenever there was a surge in imports or a fall in domestic prices.
The G-33 proposal also received support from the African Group and the African, Caribbean and Pacific countries group. It was, however, opposed by the US and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Cairns group, which argued that the mechanism would allow countries to raise tariffs instead of opening markets, a step in the wrong direction of agriculture reform.
Kasturi & Sons Ltd
Industry groups want WTO's global tariff-cutting deal for tech products to take effect sooner
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Bien Perez
2 November 2015
scmp.com, Hong Kong
More than 80 industry groups from around the world have called on negotiators to push for a faster implementation of the expanded HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" Information Technology Agreement (ITA), ahead of a new round of trade talks scheduled in Geneva on November 9.
The United States, China and other major economies HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" agreed in July to broaden the range of duty-free information and communications technology products covered by the ITA, a plurilateral trade pact, to mark the first major tariff-cutting deal under the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) in 18 years. Under the terms of the expanded deal, the majority of tariffs will be eliminated on 201 products — representing more than US$1.3 trillion in annual trade — within three years, with reductions starting from July 1 next year.
The so-called "staging" talks slated next week amount to a "show and tell" for ITA negotiators on how far their countries "are willing to go when it comes to assigning the specific timeframes for tariff elimination of the myriad tech products covered by the [expanded] agreement", HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" John Neuffer, the president and chief executive of the Semiconductor Industry Association (SIA), told the South China Morning Post on Monday.
The ITA negotiating parties met at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO headquarters in Geneva in September for an initial round of talks to determine the phase-out timeframes, or staging, for the 201 products covered by the ITA expansion.
In a joint statement, the industry associations urged ITA negotiators "to implement their tariff elimination commitments as quickly a possible, showing restraint in their requests for extended staging".
Specifically, the groups called on all negotiating parties "to show restraint in seeking staging periods longer than three years, given the short innovation cycles for high-technology products".
These groups included the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Consumer Electronics Association, the SIA, DigitalEurope, the US Information Technology Office, Japan Electrical Manufacturers Association, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Korea Electronics Association, the Hong Kong Electronic Industries Association and the Hong Kong Information Technology Federation.
Neuffer said negotiators can waive the baseline tariff phase-out period of three years and simply eliminate duties on some, or all, of the 201 products covered by the updated ITA when this deal is implemented in July next year.
"They can also indicate they want to stick with the default three-year staging period. Or they can opt for extended staging of five years or seven years to provide a bigger buffer for domestic producers to adapt to a tariff-free business environment," Neuffer said.
"The real-life problem with so much extended staging is that the innovation life cycles of tech products are often shorter than seven or even five years" he added.
"So when the tariff relief finally comes, it has largely lost its relevance."
The expanded ITA will cut tariffs on such products as video game consoles, liquid crystal display televisions, next-generation semiconductors, printer ink cartridges, global positioning system devices, loudspeakers, video cameras, solid state drives, magnetic resonance imaging machines and computed tomography scanners.
The 54 economies in the ITA talks account for 90 per cent of the annual global trade of information and communications technology products.
After all the technical details and tariff phase-out periods are hammered out, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO expects the expanded ITA to be formally concluded at its 10th Ministerial Conference in Nairobi next month.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Stephen Ezell, the vice-president for global innovation policy at US think tank the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Information Technology and Innovation Foundation, said the ITA has been one of the most commercially successful trade agreements in history.
"The original agreement helped to boost annual worldwide information and communications technology trade from US$1.2 trillion in 1996, when it took effect, to more than US$5 trillion today," Ezell said.
"The expanded ITA has the potential to deliver roughly US$50 billion in tariff savings on information and communications technology product sales each year globally, and add approximately US$190 billion to global GDP through increased trade."
South China Morning Post Publishers Limited
Trade slows in Asia-Pacific as economies adjust to lower global growth: UN report
India Blooms News Service
3 November 2015
New York, Nov 3 (IBNS): The regional trade and investment flows in Asia and the Pacific is decelerating as the economies in the region adjust to cyclical and structural changes resulting from the global economic downturn and the expected reduction in China's growth rate, says a new United Nations report launched on Monday.
However, the Asia-Pacific Trade and Investment Report 2015, compiled by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP), said that the Asia-Pacific remains the most dynamic region of the global economy and will continue to hold its position as the largest trading region in the world. According to the reports analysis of the latest regional trade and investment outlook in the region, total exports and imports from the region grew by only 1.6 per cent in 2014. When China is excluded from the regional total, exports from the Asia-Pacific region registered a decline of 0.4 per cent. The report further states that any possibilities of a merchandise trade recovery could suffer if the sluggish pace of trade and investment growth in the region continues. Despite the slow pace, the report says the Asia-Pacific region stands out for its significant and sustained achievements in leveraging trade and investment flows for development. The report, launched in Bangkok by ESCAP Executive Secretary Shamshad Akhtar, underscores the importance of reviving trade and investment to implement and meet the recently adopted Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The data and analysis in the 2015 Asia-Pacific Trade and Investment Report will help to mainstream trade considerations, as we work towards achieving the new Sustainable Development Goals, said Akhtar. She added that the production fragmentation across the world as part of Global Value Chains (GVCs) has opened new opportunities for developing countries to integrate in global trade. In order to prosper in this globalized environment, countries will need to boost competitiveness and productivity to attract inward investment and technology, and find areas where they can successfully integrate in these value chains, said Akhtar. According to the report, Asia and the Pacific accounted for nearly 40 per cent of global exports and imports in 2014, while intra-regional imports remained at a little over 50 per cent of the total in 2014, with intra-regional exports at 54 per cent. Further, the report indicated that the outlook for regional services trade was better than for merchandise trade as exports of services in the region increased at 5.1 per cent in 2014, compared to 4 per cent in 2013. The report evaluated that exports of travel and other commercial services were especially strong, supported by growing demand for travel by China. Additionally, the report shows that trade facilitation measures, including implementation of the WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement, can help reduce trade costs as many countries in the Asia-Pacific region are getting on with implementing trade facilitation measures ahead of the Agreements ratification. The report assesses that such changes when incorporated will help reduce regional trade costs but stressed that much more still needs to be done, especially in landlocked countries and it suggests that a regional agreement on paperless trade would mark a substantial breakthrough in this regard. Further, the report reinforces the importance of countries maintaining open trade regimes, and avoiding implementation of trade-restrictive measures. It highlights that increasing use of trade-restrictive measures such as non-tariff measures have detrimental consequences for the regions least developed countries, presenting particular obstacles to small- and medium-sized exporters. The report also contained analysis on the challenges and opportunities posed by the rise of GVCs as a major trading factor as recent years have seen increased fragmentation of production across national boundaries with all its attendant benefit, supported by improving logistics, communication technologies and lower barriers to trade. However, the report finds that despite the region being central to the development of GVCs, which is now at the heart of many global and regional supply chains, most countries in the region have not fully benefitted from the expanded flows of trade and investments associated with them. These countries remain excluded from their potential benefits, particularly low-income countries, as 90 per cent of GVC-related trade is found to occur in just ten regional economies, the report stated. 
India Blooms News Service
Country's climate actions can help secure Paris deal
Fu Jing
3 November 2015
China Daily-Hong Kong Edition
Six years ago, I was covering the unsuccessful United Nations climate summit held in Copenhagen, and I saw first-hand how China's image was tarnished, even though it had been making continual efforts to help achieve a global deal.
As countries have been drumming up their efforts to reach a deal on reducing greenhouse gas emissions in Paris in a few weeks, it is meaningful to take stock of how much better China has prepared itself in the years between the two sets of talks.
In my view, the past six years have seen China develop growing green awareness, improved institutional arrangements, better low-carbon commitments and active participation in cooperation with other countries. With such dramatic changes, China will be in a better position to help promote an agreement in Paris.
Since the late 1970s, when China launched its reform and opening-up policy, until recently, the country's overarching strategy has been "development is the unyielding principle", which resulted in decades-long fast economic growth, but at the cost of severe environmental pollution and wasteful energy consumption.
Since the change in leadership in 2012, the move away from this strategy has been accelerated.
The leadership has been promoting the understanding that ecological civilization and building a beautiful China are an important part of realizing the Chinese dream of the rejuvenation of the Chinese nation. This has started to guide China's economic activities, and been embodied in the concept of the economic new normal.
To turn concepts into actions, China has been beefing up its efforts to build a legal framework to strengthen its environmental protection. For example, leading officials at various levels are required to accept environment and natural resources auditing when they leave their positions.
And after laws related to fighting air and water pollution and realizing a circular economy, China's law-making body is also busy drafting a law on climate change prevention, which should be another milestone in the country's environmental protection. But what is most encouraging is China has pledged to realize a peak in its carbon emissions by 2030 by improving energy efficiency and increasing the ratio of renewable energy in its total energy mix, which is targeted at 15 percent by 2020 and 20 percent by 2030.
It has also made a pledge to lower carbon emissions per unit of GDP by 60 to 65 percent from the 2005 level by 2030.
In its bid to turn greener, China has also quickened the pace of trying to usher in a nationwide cap-and-trade emission system by 2017, and a carbon emission trade system is being piloted in some regions at present.
And surprisingly, China, which has mainly been powered by coal for years, saw its consumption of coal decline last year for the first time mainly as a result of better energy efficiency and economic restructuring.
Along with these domestic actions, China has spared no effort on the bilateral and international levels as well. Since last year, President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xi Jinping and his US counterpart Barack Obama have twice made presidential announcements about injecting inputs aimed at making Paris a success. China and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union announced joint commitments and actions in June as well.
Meanwhile, China has been pledging and taking increased actions in South-South cooperation by embedding more sustainability content, and it has been busy coordinating with the BRICS countries (Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa), who share similar stances on climate change.
All in all, China has taken climate actions as a trigger to institutional and legal framework improvement, development pattern transformation, lifestyle changes and also a chance to showcase its rising desire to be a responsible global stakeholder.
Being so well prepared, China, together with other players, should be able to make it the bottom line that Paris proves more fruitful than Copenhagen.
China Daily Information Company
BRICS Countries Signed Moscow Declaration for Supporting Multilateral Science Projects
3 November 2015
RIA Oreanda-News
Moscow. OREANDA-NEWS. November 03, 2015. BRICS countries - Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa agreed for co-investment of resources for supporting multilateral R&D Projects in mutually agreed areas. The Indian delegation led by the Union Minister for Science & Technology and Earth Sciences, Dr. Harsh Vardhan, signed a joint Declaration called Moscow Declaration to this effect, at the 3 rd Meeting of BRICS Ministers for Science, Technology and Innovation held at Moscow.
This declaration reflects BRICS partnership in addressing common global and regional socio-economic challenges, utilizing such drivers as science, technology and innovation (STI). BRICS STI Minister agreed on the collaboration for: (i) cooperation within large research infrastructures, including mega-science projects; coordination of the existing large-scale national programme of the BRICS countries; (ii) development and implementation of a BRICS Framework Programme for funding multilateral joint research projects, technology commercialization and innovation; (iii) establishment of BRICS Research and Innovation Networking Platform.
BRICS STI Ministers also endorsed a BRICS Action Plan 2015-18 on BRICS Science, Technology and Innovation cooperation. The Work Plan outline detailed modalities of BRICS collaboration in previously agreed thematic areas such as Prevention and Mitigation of Natural Disasters led by Brazil; Water resources and pollution treatment led by Russia; Geospatial technology and its application for development led by India; New and renewable energy, and energy efficiency with focus on Solid-state lightning led by China. This Work Plan also included few new areas for BRICS STI collaboration such as Material science including Nanotechnology and Photonics jointly led by India and Russia; Biotechnology and Biomedicine including Human Health &Neuroscience led by Russia or Brazil; Information Technologies and High Performance Computing led jointly by China and South Africa; Ocean and Polar Science and Technology led jointly by Brazil and Russia.
The 3 rd BRICS S&T Ministers Meeting endoresed India's proposal to host the BRICS Young Scientist Forum Secretariat in India with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Indian Department of Science and Technology as coordinating point. The idea of creation of BRICS Young Scientist Forum for youth engagement was mooted by the Indian Prime Minister in VI th BRICS Summit in Brazil in July 2014. India's proactive role in creation of this Forum has been noted with interest by the BRICS Leaders at the VII th BRICS Summit held in Ufa, Russia in July 2015. It was also agreed to develop a dedicated Website for BRICS Young Scientist Forum with an interactive online component to broadcast opportunities and initiative for young STI community in the BRICS Region. To take this initiative forward, India will be hosting the 5-day BRICS Young Scientist Conclave at National Institute of Advanced Studies (NIAS) Bangalore during March 2016 with intent to create BRICS Young Scientists Corps. This event is seeking 50 to 75 young STI delegates from BRICS countries. The event will allow BRICS Youth connectivity & networking to harness their knowledge for resolving common societal challenges through research and innovation and strengthen advancement of skill & research competencies of youth primarily in the age group of 22-35 years drawn from Science, Engineering other allied disciplines.
As outlined in the BRICS Action Plan 2015- 16, a series of of scientific events will be organised in 2015-16:
· Holdingof BRICS Working Group on Geospatial Technology Application for Development (March 2016, India);
· Holding the 2nd Meeting of the BRICS SSL Working Group (November 2015, China);
· Holding the first Meeting of the BRICS Astronomy Working Group (December 2015);
· Holding annual conference Innovative materials for energy and water saving and environmental protection, new trends in the technological development (Russia)
Information Agency Oreanda News, LLC
The TPP: widening Latin America’s economic divide
Adolfo Acebras and Alejo Czerwonko, UBS Wealth Management
2 November 2015
Financial Times (FT.Com)
The proposed Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) has united 12 nations in the Asia Pacific region and the Americas around a long-awaited trade and investment framework. But it has also accentuated a number of divides – not only within Asia, as the deal excludes China, but also within Latin America. The major Latin American economies that already face the greatest headwinds – Brazil, Argentina and Venezuela – were also the only ones not to sign up to the draft agreement. The others have either joined or, in the case of Colombia, may join soon. In addition to benefiting the latter economies, the TPP is widening Latin America’s divergences.
Even in China’s absence, the TPP members form a significant club, accounting for 40 per cent of world GDP and one third of global trade. The main objectives of the treaty are to eliminate import tariffs and to implement common rules on intellectual property, environmental standards and the labour market. Recent studies suggest that the deal should boost trade and long-term investment among member nations. According to the Peterson Institute, the agreement could increase world income by close to $290bn a year by 2025, although these benefits would accrue only gradually and could vary considerably.
The biggest upside for TPP countries will come from the “accumulation of origin” concept. This means that goods produced in one TPP nation and exported to another will be treated as if they were made in the importing country.
Chile, Mexico and Peru, which have joined the TPP, are relatively open economies. They have already signed free-trade agreements with many of the TPP members in the past, which limits room for further improvement. That said, the agreement should further boost their trade with those countries, which already represents 30 per cent, 85 per cent and 34 per cent of Chile’s, Mexico’s and Peru’s total trade, respectively.
In Mexico, the agreement will increase the country’s integration with the US and Canada, and open up attractive markets in the Asia Pacific region. The government expects the TPP deal to increase Mexican exports by $150bn in five years (40 per cent from current levels), while also boosting foreign direct investment. In a similar vein, the Peterson Institute estimates annual export gains of $31.5bn by 2025. Importantly, the attractiveness of Mexico relative to China as a manufacturing destination for the TPP countries, which has already been rising lately due to diverging labour costs, will likely increase further given China’s absence from the deal.
The deal should also help Chile and Peru by diversifying their exports. According to Peterson estimates, by 2025 annual exports should increase by $2.6bn for Chile and by $4.5bn for Peru. Of course, all three countries will gain from having seats at the table where the details of the deal will be negotiated. The terms that come out of these discussions could become the new template for global trade rules used in future trade deals or in an expanded TPP.
The main risk to Latin American countries comes from Asian nations being able to access the US on better terms. Mexico is particularly exposed as for the past 20 years it has enjoyed preferential access to the US market. However, we think the benefits should outweigh risks for the nations involved. As mentioned, the TPP improves Mexico’s attractiveness relative to China in particular. Also, in terms of their major exports, Chile and Peru do not compete intensively with Asia Pacific nations.
By contrast, Brazil, Argentina and Venezuela, which have not signed the deal, risk becoming further disengaged from world trade, especially as they have showed no prospects of joining in the near future. First, political antipathy towards free trade in all three is considerable. Second, none of them has joined successful precursor partnerships such as the Pacific Alliance, which might have better prepared them for TPP membership. Third, even if the political will was present, membership would require arduous reforms in areas such as tariffs and state-owned enterprise governance.
As a result, Brazil, Argentina, and Venezuela may need weaker currencies in the medium term to compensate for the resulting loss of competitiveness. Their attractiveness as foreign direct investment destinations would also be hampered. We therefore think these three nations are the region’s biggest losers. Colombia has not signed the deal, but it is already a member of the Pacific Alliance and has shown greater political willingness to join in future. In our view, it would be wrong to assign Colombia to the same problematic category.
As such, the TPP is on track to exacerbate the gulf in Latin America between Chile, Mexico, Peru and Colombia on the one hand and Brazil, Argentina and Venezuela on the other. Although the slowdown in the developing world and in global commodities trade has caused problems for all these countries to varying degrees, the latter three have suffered the most damaging combination of institutional as well as economic volatility. Politically, Chile, Mexico, Peru and Colombia have scarcely emerged unscathed from the emerging markets turmoil of the past two years. But they have not suffered internal crises on the level of Brazil, Argentina and Venezuela. Without a political volte-face, this trio of troubled economies is likely to become even more isolated from its peers.
Adolfo Acebras is head of the Mexican investment office, and Alejo Czerwonko is emerging markets strategist, at UBS Wealth Management.
The Financial Times Limited (AAIW/EIW)
Argentina's biodiesel output to drop 30% in 2015: industry group
2 November 2015
Platts Commodity News
Buenos Aires (Platts)--2Nov2015. Argentina's biodiesel production is on track to decline 30% this year, as rising domestic consumption fails to compensate for dwindling exports, the head of an industry group said Monday.
Claudio Molina, the executive director of the Argentine Biofuels and Hydrogen Association, said output of the fuel additive likely will end the year at no more than 1.8 million mt, or 30% less than the 2.58 million in 2014.
Exports are poised to contract 55%, while domestic consumption is due to rise 11%, he said.
This means that the industry will be working at about 40% of the 4.6 million mt of installed capacity, he added.
Molina, however, said he is optimistic of a gradual turnaround following a runoff presidential election later this month. Both of the candidates in the November 22 election, Buenos Aires Mayor Mauricio Macri and Buenos Aires Governor Daniel Scioli, are moderates who are expected to take steps to improve business conditions, Molina said.
One help would be to increase the biodiesel blend in diesel to 12% from a current 10%, and later take it to 15%.
"This would be more than welcome," he said.
Another step would be to mix biodiesel into diesel as power plant fuel and to require agriculture transport and passenger buses to use a 20% blend, he added.
However, Molina said it is a recovery in international shipments that would allow producers to recover capacity use.
Exports started declining in 2012 after the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Commission launched investigations into alleged dumping of the product by Argentina, prompting the EC to raise taxes on the imports. Argentina has since filed a complaint in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization against the EU for the anti-dumping duties.
The lawsuit should reopen the EU for Argentine biodiesel supplies by as soon as 2017, which would give a huge boost to exports. Europe is a world leader in biodiesel consumption.
Biodiesel production fell 23% to 780,283 mt in the first half of 2015 compared with 1.02 million mt in the year-earlier period, according to the latest data of the Argentine statistics agency Indec. Over the same period, exports fell 55% to 236,550 mt, compared with 524,216 mt, while domestic consumption rose 30% to 525,883 mt from 404,632 mt, Indec said.
Platts, a division of The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc. 
Iran's container trade forecast to grow 25 percent annually
Turloch Mooney, Senior Editor, Global Ports
2 November 2015
Journal of Commerce Online
Container throughput at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" Iran’s ports should grow by up to 25 percent annually over the next half decade as a confluence of benefits are realized from the expected relaxation of sanctions, a senior Iran-based industry researcher and commentator told JOC.com.
“Within the coming five years, Iran can expect to expand its throughput to around 8 million 20-foot-equivalent units per annum, equating to 25 percent growth on an annual basis,” said Mehdi Rastegary, head of research and development with Sina Ports & Marine Services, Iran’s largest HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" terminal operator, based in Bandar Abbas.
Iran has been subject to varying levels of U.N., HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU and U.S. sanctions due to its nuclear program, but a significant portion of those sanctions are set to be relaxed following the agreement reached in July between Iran, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU and the ‘P5+1’ countries (U.K., France, Germany, U.S., China and Russia).
The agreement was formalized in the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action under which sanctions are to be withdrawn in a phased manner beginning in the first half of 2016 and conditional on certain actions by the Iranian government and verification by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" International Atomic Energy Agency.
Iran was an important driver of growth in global container trades in the period from 2006 to 2010, but a tightening of sanctions at that time quickly eroded its growth and impact on global volumes. Throughput at its main port, Shahid Rajaee on the Persian Gulf, which is responsible for more than 80 percent of the country’s total container trade, fell from a peak of 2.8 million TEUs in 2011 to 1.82 million TEUs in 2014. The port fell more than 40 places in the ranking of top global container ports, from 44 to 87, from 2010 to 2014.
Total container throughput in fiscal 2014-15 expanded 10.6 percent year-over-year to 2.45 million TEUs. However, throughput in the first half of the current fiscal year is down by around 10 percent, said Rastegary.  
Current demand is mainly around gateway business but the termination of sanctions is expected to spur growth in transhipment volumes to westbound ports in the Persian Gulf, he added.
The re-establishment and development of trade ties with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU, China, Russia, India and the U.S. will clearly be the key driver of growth together with demand from a large and growing market of over 80 million people. Iran sees itself as a potential shipping gateway for several underdeveloped neighbouring countries, including Afghanistan, Iraq and several HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Commonwealth of Independent States countries.
“Iran is moving towards becoming a global trade power. It is already an influential member of several important supranational economic organizations, including the GECF (Gas Exporting Countries Forum), the ECO (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Economic Cooperation Organization) and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OPEC (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries). The expectation is it will eventually join others, including the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization),” said Rastegary. 
Government policies and moves to attract more foreign direct investment are expected to grease the wheels for growth in container shipping. These plans include developing a value-added export sector to diversify the economy away from its reliance on oil and gas production, and creating special economic zones and free trade zones at port areas. 
SEZs are being developed at Shahid Rajaee, Imam Khomeini Port, Bushehr, Mashahr and Astara, while FTZs are being developed at Chabahar, Anzali, Khorramshahr and Abadan.
“Development of the Iranian fleet in the post-sanction years will be a main driver of throughput at Iranian Ports,” said Rastegary. According to the chairman and managing director of theHYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Lines, Mohammad Saeidi, Iran will add 570,000 TEUs of containership capacity, 2 million deadweight tonnage of dry bulk vessels and 1.6 million deadweight tonnage of tankers by the year 2020.
A series of new build contracts is to be signed with yards in China and possibly South Korea as the country invests funds built up in overseas banks through trading during the sanctions era.
On a tonnage basis, containerized cargoes currently account for around 16 percent of the total throughput of Iranian ports and 25 percent of non-oil throughput.
Iranian ports currently have the capacity needed to handle 5.34 million TEUs per year, double current throughput levels. There are a number of capacity expansion projects in the pipeline, including second and third phase projects at Shahid Rajaee and construction of new terminals at Chabahar and at Negin Island in Bushehr.
Overseas interest in the post-sanction potential of the country’s shipping sector is rising. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" CMA CGM, Hanjin Shipping and Yang Ming have resumed calls at Bandar Abbas after most carriers dropped Iran from their networks in 2013-2014 when sanctions were tightened.
Contship Italia, Italy's largest container terminal operator, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" in August signed a strategic memorandum of understanding with Sina Port and Marine, Iran's biggest port company.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" Diego Aponte, the CEO of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" Mediterranean Shipping Co., and Sultan bin Sulayem, chairman of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" DP World, the Dubai-based global container terminal operator, have also visited Iran recently, while HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" Maersk Group has had people on the ground investigating investment opportunities in the country for some time.
A delegation from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" Port of Antwerp visited in HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" late October to look for opportunities to exploit relaxed sanctions.
Led by port alderman and port authority chairman Marc Van Peel, the group of petrochemical and shipping experts met with various ministries in Tehran, petrochemical organizations, and private companies. The exploratory mission was aimed at making contact with official bodies, the Belgian port said in a statement. 
United Business Media Global Trade
Kerry invites Russia, China to join TPP on condition of raising country standards
2 November 2015
Interfax: Russia & CIS General Newswire
MOSCOW. Nov 2 (Interfax) - Washington is not against Russia joining the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), the U.S. Secretary of State has said.
Speaking in an interview with the Mir television channel, John Kerry said that the U.S. is inviting people to join various initiatives such as the TPP.
He said that the U.S. invites China, Russia and other countries that would like to join, provided they agree to raise their standards and live according to high standards, by protecting people and cooperating openly, transparently and responsibly.
Interfax Information Services, B.V.
Los países del G20 siguen imponiendo restricciones al comercio, según la OMC
2 November 2015
Agencia EFE - Servicio Efeagro
Ginebra, 2 nov (EFEAGRO).- Los países que conforman el G20 siguen imponiendo medidas proteccionistas y restricciones al comercio, a pesar de que abogan por lo contrario, según un nuevo estudio publicado hoy por la HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Organización Mundial del Comercio (OMC).
La investigación cubre el periodo entre el 16 de mayo y el 15 de octubre de este año, y revela que desde el último informe -este es el decimocuarto desde 2008- las medidas proteccionistas han crecido un 5 por ciento.
"A pesar de que los países han mostrado relativo control al introducir medidas restrictivas del comercio, el número acumulado sigue aumentado", reza el texto.
Dado que las perspectivas económicas mundiales siguen siendo bastante pesimistas y tendrán un efecto pernicioso en los intercambios internacionales, la OMC insta una vez a más a los países del G20 a que no creen más medidas proteccionistas y eliminen las que han impuesto en los últimos años.
"El sistema de normas de la OMC ha ayudado a evitar una respuesta proteccionista al inicio de la crisis financiera, pero el número de medidas restrictivas del comercio que se han introducido sigue siendo preocupante", indicó, citado en un comunicado, Roberto Azevêdo, director general de la OMC.
"El G20 debería mostrar liderazgo al eliminar las restricciones al comercio", agregó Azevêdo.
En los cinco meses transcurridos desde mayo, los miembros del G20 han introducido 86 nuevas medidas restrictivas, lo que implica una media de 17 medidas por mes, una media estable con respecto a lo observado en el informe anterior.
No obstante, el número de medidas proteccionistas sigue creciendo dado que de las 1.441 medidas introducidas desde 2008 sólo se han eliminado 354.
En total, existen 1.087 medidas restrictivas, lo que indica que a pesar de que el propio G20 aboga por evitar el proteccionismo, en la práctica sigue manteniendo más del 75 por ciento de las restricciones implementadas en los últimos 7 años.
De hecho, el periodo de estudio sólo se habilitaron 62 medidas para facilitar el comercio, una media de 12 por mes.
Cabe recordar que la OMC rebajó el pasado 30 de septiembre la estimación del crecimiento del comercio mundial para 2015 del 3,3 % al 2,8 %.
Asimismo, redujo sus estimaciones de crecimiento de los intercambios comerciales en 2016 del 4 % al 3,9 %. EFEAGRO
Agencia EFE S.A. 
OMC da por hecho que próxima reunión de Nairobi no cerrará Ronda de Doha; OMC DOHA
2 November 2015
Agencia EFE - Servicio Internacional
Roma, 2 nov (EFE).- El director de la HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Organización Mundial del Comercio (OMC), Roberto Azevêdo, dijo hoy a Efe que la próxima reunión ministerial en el seno del organismo, el próximo diciembre en Nairobi (Kenia), no será suficiente para cerrar la Ronda de Doha.
El responsable brasileño señaló que "las conversaciones de Nairobi son muy importantes porque cualquier cosa que se haga allí no va a ser suficiente para concluir las negociaciones de la ronda de Doha", un programa de liberalización comercial que sigue discutiéndose desde 2001.
Uno de los asuntos centrales de las negociaciones es el comercio agrícola, tal y como destacó Azevêdo en una intervención en la sede de la HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Organización de la ONU para la Alimentación y la Agricultura (FAO), con sede en la capital italiana.
En medio del debate sobre la necesidad o no de reformar el modelo de la OMC con vistas a continuar ese diálogo, hasta ahora infructuoso, su director consideró que "lo más importante es que las negociaciones no paren".
Durante su discurso, llamó a los países miembros de la organización a actuar con "flexibilidad" y "pragmatismo" ante la "oportunidad histórica" de acabar con las distorsiones del mercado internacional.
Sin embargo, reconoció, existen aún muchas divergencias entre los miembros, como las relativas a los subsidios para la exportación, que preocupan especialmente a las naciones menos desarrolladas, en peores condiciones para competir en ese sentido a nivel mundial.
La agenda de Nairobi abordará del 15 al 18 de diciembre próximos el acceso a los mercados, incluyendo la cuestión de prohibir las restricciones a las importaciones, el apoyo doméstico a la agricultura mediante subsidios y la necesidad de minimizar esas distorsiones, y la competición en relación con las exportaciones, que abarca también los créditos y las ayudas alimentarias.
"No queda mucho tiempo para diciembre, por lo que se necesita mucho más pragmatismo", apuntó el brasileño, que recordó que si no hay un acuerdo en Nairobi habrá otras ocasiones más adelante.
Particularmente difícil se presenta la negociación respecto a los programas de seguridad alimentaria, después de que en noviembre de 2014 India y Estados Unidos alcanzaran un acuerdo por el que los miembros de la OMC se comprometían a no denunciar en ese organismo tales programas hasta que no se llegase a una solución permanente.
Previamente, el país asiático se había negado a firmar un acuerdo en la OMC como forma de presión para defender su programa de subsidios, con el que compra a pequeños agricultores productos por encima del precio del mercado y después los revende a precios ajustados al poder adquisitivo de los ciudadanos más pobres.
Algo que para otros países supone una distorsión del mercado.
Sin el veto indio, la OMC adoptó a finales del año pasado el protocolo que permitirá implementar el Acuerdo de Facilitación del Comercio, el primer pacto alcanzado en el seno del organismo con sede en Ginebra en 20 años, si bien este acuerdo apenas ha servido para avanzar en la Ronda de Doha. 
Agencia EFE S.A.
END
 
Josep Bosch, Information Officer
Information and External Relations Division
+41227395681
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.