Headlines:
All Eyes On Kenya Again As Nairobi Hosts WTO Talks Next Week
No justification for defaulting on WTO Doha Round commitments: experts
CHINA MAKES THINLY VEILED SWIPE AT U.S. IN URGING CONTINUATION OF DOHA
China has not budged an inch Beijing urged to make changes to global tariff-cut deal on ITA 
Deng to join WTO meet on ITA tariff elimination
Ukraine preparing to contest Russia's food restrictions in WTO
U.S. Congress leader says no TPP vote before 2016 election
Oil price tanks again as IEA warns of unrelenting oversupply and falling demand
House Passes Trade Component, but Trans-Pacific Partnership Still in Doubt
China's coal addiction lingers
South African troubles mount as rand collapses
Developing countries at Paris climate talks should stop fighting old battles, says OECD head
Brazil signs automotive free trade deal with Uruguay
 
Details:
All Eyes On Kenya Again As Nairobi Hosts WTO Talks Next Week
by Kennedy Kangethe
11 December 2015
All Africa
Nairobi, Dec 11, 2015 (Capital FM/All Africa Global Media via COMTEX) -- All eyes will be on Kenya again next week as Nairobi hosts The 10th HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation (WTO) Ministerial Conference (MC10) that will be held between December 15 and 18.
This is the first time the conference is taking place in Africa.
In the upcoming discussions, Africa's hope will lie in the successful conclusion of the Doha Development Agenda (DDA).
The Doha Declaration focused on the concerns of developing countries by promising major reforms in agriculture, particularly reductions in subsidies and tariffs provided by developed countries, Non-Agricultural Market Access, Special and Differential Treatment for developing countries, among others.
According to Standard Investment Bank Research, The DDA was to systematically correct the multilateral trading system, to make it more relevant to these economies and their people placing the needs and interests of developing countries at the heart of Doha Work Programme.
"There are however fears that the Doha Round will be "closed" and not "concluded" without an exhaustive agreement. This could give rise to another agenda dubbed "Nairobi Round" which has far reaching ramifications," the research bank noted.
The research bank indicates that for a successful outcome for Africa, the MC 10 should conclusively address issues of market access by Least Developed Countries, eliminate trade-distorting domestic support, elimination of export subsidies and application of export competition disciplines to cotton, duty-free quota-free access for cotton exports and affirmation of the development objectives of the DDA.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO is the sole global international organization with 161 members that deals with the rules of trade between nations. Its main objective is to help producers of goods and services, exporters, and importers conduct their business of trade in global markets fairly.
The ministerial conference is the highest decision making body of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO and where the business of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO is conducted.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO meeting comes a few months after Kenya hosted the Global Entrepreneur Summit led by US President Barrack Obama and this will be a big win for tourism which has recently suffered due insecurity challenges.
The conference is expected to attract over 7,000 delegates.
All Africa Global Media
No justification for defaulting on WTO Doha Round commitments: experts
lingxin
11 December 2015
Xinhua News Agency
GENEVA, Dec. 11 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xinhua) -- Ahead of the World Trade Organization's 10th Ministerial Conference, a group of United Nations human rights experts on Friday called on governments across the world to deliver on the Doha Round Development Agenda and not weasel out of prior commitments to address the needs of developing economies.
"If trade is to work for human rights and development it should contribute to the realization of the rights to adequate food, to the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health, and to live in a clean environment," the United Nations experts said in a public statement addressed to negotiators due to gather in the Kenyan capital from Dec. 15 to 18.
"There is no justification for defaulting on the Doha Round commitments, as such action would have a detrimental impact on human rights in many countries," the experts observed. They deplored indications that certain developed countries will move for the premature ending of the Doha Round at the upcoming HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO conference.
The independent experts emphasized that human rights obligations must be reaffirmed in the context of global trade rules to ensure that "HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO negotiations and rules support development efforts to eliminate the root causes of hunger, ill-health, and poverty, strengthen human rights protection and promotion and ultimately ensure that the newly adopted Sustainable Development Goals are achieved."
Xinhua News Agency
CHINA MAKES THINLY VEILED SWIPE AT U.S. IN URGING CONTINUATION OF DOHA
11 December 2015
Inside U.S. Trade
China at a high-level HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization meeting late last month blamed the deadlock in the Doha round negotiations on "major members" of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO who have been unwilling to seriously participate, and made a thinly veiled jab at the United States for not even mentioning the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO on its trade office's homepage.
"The challenge we are facing is not about mandate or framework," China said in a Nov. 20 statement at a heads of delegations meeting, which was posted publicly on Dec. 4. "The real challenge is some major members are unwilling to participate in the [Doha Development Agenda] negotiations," it added, reiterating its argument that the Nairobi ministerial must not mark the end of the Doha round -- as members like the U.S., HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union and Japan have called for.
China also seemed to put the U.S. trade agenda in the crosshairs of its criticism, saying that it is "discouragingly surprised to see that, one major founder of this Organization has quietly deleted the information related to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO and Multilateral Trading System on its Government website."
"What is flaring in the homepage is the eye-catching Mega-Regionals and plurilateral agreements," the Chinese statement added.
When accessed on Dec. 10, the homepage of the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative did not contain a direct link to information on the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO or the Nairobi Ministerial, but heavily featured regional trade agreements such as the Trans-Pacific Partnership and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, as well as the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO plurilateral Environmental Goods Agreement.
To access HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO information on the USTR website, one must select the "Issue Areas" drop-down from the homepage banner, then select "Trade Organizations." On that page the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO is listed alongside links to pages with information on the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Association of Southeast Asian Nations, and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
The Obama administration has presented TPP as the alternative to China "writing the rules" for trade in Asia, while at the same time holding open the possibility that China could accede to the deal in the future. It has also argued that regional trade deals can reinvigorate the multilateral trading system, although some critics argue that mega-regionals have sapped energy and urgency from the Doha round. Other experts have seen TPP as an effort to contain China's economic influence in the region.
China, in its statement, argued that an "an overwhelming majority" of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members support continuing the Doha agenda in its present framework. It listed the African Group; the African, Caribbean, and Pacific Group; Recently Acceded Members; Least-Developed Countries and "other developing members" as supporting the continuation of Doha. It also said giving up on Doha "will deal a severe blow to Africa."
"One billion African people have earnest expectation for [the Nairobi ministerial] which should deliver on development, and deliver for Africa," it said. "If DDA is ending in failure at MC10, how can we tell our African brothers and sisters that ending DDA is a success for MC10?"
Its reference to developing members may be an allusion to a Dec. 2 joint proposal forwarded by China, Ecuador, India, Indonesia, South Africa and Venezuela, which includes language aimed to ensure the Doha round continues after Nairobi in its current form. The African Group proposed similar language on the same day.
Members are divided over whether language on continuing the Doha round under its current framework should be featured in the Nairobi Ministerial declaration (see related story).
China argues that the leaders of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO member-countries have "clearly instructed" that the Doha agenda be concluded by adopting the United Nation's 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development which includes food security and global partnership and sustainable development as two of its goals which seemingly overlap with certain aspects of the Doha agenda.
Because of this, giving up on the Doha agenda would be in defiance of instructions laid out by the highest government officials in HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO member-countries which China alleges would amount to an "abuse of power" on the part of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO ministers.
China concluded their statement by invoking an "ancient Chinese saying" to stress the importance of including in the Nairobi declaration language to continue work on the Doha agenda: "When a bird's nest is overturned, no egg can remain intact. This is a matter of to be or not to be."
Inside Washington Publishers
China has not budged an inch Beijing urged to make changes to global tariff-cut deal on ITA 
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Bien Perez
11 December 2015
scmp.com
China is under pressure to put the finishing touches on a new global pact to expand tariff cuts on information and communications technology products, with last-minute negotiations expected next week at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation (WTO) Ministerial Conference in Nairobi, Kenya.
Nearly five months after 54 HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO member economies agreed to expand the scope of duty-free products under the Information Technology Agreement (ITA), China has not pared down the number of products that it wants to keep tariffs on for an extended period of five to seven years.
“China has positioned itself as the only significant obstacle standing in the way of getting ITA expansion wrapped up next week,” HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" John Neuffer, the president and chief executive of the Semiconductor Industry Association, told the South China Morning Post on Friday.
The United States, China and other major economies agreed in July to broaden the range of duty-free information and communications technology products covered by the ITA, a plurilateral trade pact, to mark the first major tariff-cutting deal under the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO in 18 years.
Under the terms of the expanded deal, the majority of tariffs will be eliminated on 201 products - worth more than US$1.3 trillion in annual trade - within three years, with reductions starting July 1 next year.
Once this enlarged scheme takes effect, it will scrap import tariffs on such products as video game consoles, liquid crystal display televisions, next-generation semiconductors, printer ink cartridges, global positioning system devices, loudspeakers, video cameras, solid state drives, magnetic resonance imaging machines and computed tomography scanners.
Neuffer, however, pointed out that China “has not budged an inch” in terms of revising its national tariff schedule of the products covered by the agreement.
More than 80 industry groups from around the world have called on negotiators to push for a faster implementation of the expanded ITA.
They want to see a revised schedule from Beijing that includes more ambitious tariff phase-out periods, known as “staging”, for the covered products.
“China's staging requests are remarkably super-sized,” Neuffer said.
“China wants a whopping 81 of its tariff lines, out of the 201 lines covered in the agreement, to receive extended phase-out periods of five or seven years.”
For most of the past two months, ITA negotiators have been pushing forward with assigning specific time frames for tariff elimination of the myriad products covered by the expanded ITA.
Thailand this week reduced to 16, down from 104, the number of tariff lines that it is requesting for a seven-year phase-out period.
Taiwan had also improved its offer by moving 35 lines from three-year staging to zero once the expanded ITA pact is in force.
Japan, Norway and Singapore are among the economies that have already committed to move all 201 lines in the expanded agreement to zero tariff on July 1 next year.
The 54 economies in the ITA talks account for 90 per cent of the annual global trade of information and communications technology products.
Despite the lingering issues with China, Neuffer said proponents in the industry “remain hopeful ITA expansion will get done early next week”.
For the global economy, ITA expansion is estimated to add an additional US$190 billion annually to the global gross domestic product through wider trade in information and communications technology products.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Stephen Ezell, the vice-president for global innovation policy at US think tank the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Information Technology and Innovation Foundation, said the ITA has been one of the most commercially successful trade deals in history.
“The original agreement helped to boost annual worldwide information and communications technology trade from US$1.2 trillion in 1996, when it took effect, to more than US$5 trillion today,” Ezell said.
South China Morning Post Publishers Limited
Deng to join WTO meet on ITA tariff elimination
By Lauly Li
Staff reporter
12 December 2015
Taipei Times
The Ministry of Economic Affairs yesterday said it would work with other HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members involved in the expanded tariff-elimination program of the Information Technology Agreement (ITA) to persuade China to shorten its tariff-removal period.
Each member is to decide how long it will take to eliminate duties on 201 technology products, and we hope some countries could shorten the tariff-elimination period, Minister of Economic Affairs John Deng told a media briefing.
Deng is to join the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO ministerial meeting on Sunday in Nairobi, Kenya, where they are scheduled to discuss each members proposed tariff-elimination timetable.
In July, most of the 25 HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members involved in the ITA, including the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU, agreed to remove duties on 201 technology products, including video game consoles, printer cartridges and GPS devices.
Members of the expanded ITA program agreed to remove duties on most of the products within three years after the agreement takes effect. For certain products, members could propose eliminating duties in five or seven years, the ministrys Bureau of Foreign Trade said.
The bureau said the agreement is expected to be completed in the upcoming ministerial meeting and to take effect on July 1 next year at the earliest.
Citing the ministrys estimates, the bureau said the net benefits for Taiwan is expected to reach US$820 million per year after the agreement takes effect.
However, a source in the ministry said China had opposed including flat-panel products in the expanded program as it is developing its own panel industry, which is the main reason Taiwan failed to include panels in the expanded tariff scheme.
The source, who declined to be named because she was not allowed to make media statements, said China is seeking to subject a wide range of its products to the longest phase-out periods, with 19 products slated for tariff removal in seven years, 62 products in five years and 71 items in three years. Liberty Times Ltd. 
Ukraine preparing to contest Russia's food restrictions in WTO
11 December 2015
Interfax: Ukrainian General Newswire
KYIV. Dec 11 (Interfax-Ukraine) - Ukraine will be forced to initiate a new dispute under the rules and procedures of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) if Russia continues discriminatory measures in relation to Ukrainian food.
"If discriminatory measures are not terminated, Ukraine will have to initiate a new dispute under the rules and procedures of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO. The country is already working on a draft request to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO dispute settlement body regarding Ukrainian goods forbidden for imports to the Russian Federation," reads a posting on the website of the Economic Ministry.
The agency is constantly monitoring and analyzing the trade restrictions of Ukrainian exports by Russia. According to monitoring results it makes decisions on whether it is appropriate to use HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO instruments to protect the interests of domestic producers in foreign markets.
The Economic Ministry noted that there are restrictions imposed by Russia on the supply of Ukrainian salt, confectionery, beer, juice, and dairy products.
Interfax Information Services, B.V.
U.S. Congress leader says no TPP vote before 2016 election
12 December 2015
Kyodo News
WASHINGTON, Dec. 11 -- A U.S. congressional leader has said the Trans-Pacific Partnership free trade pact should not be sent to the legislature for approval until after the November 2016 presidential election, The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Washington Post reported Friday.
Mitch McConnell, the Republican leader in the Senate, expressed his view on the TPP in an exclusive interview with the daily, which characterized it as a "significant blow" to President Barack Obama's policy of focusing on the Asia-Pacific region.
"It certainly shouldn't come before the election," McConnell, an influential figure in the Republican-controlled Congress, was quoted as saying.
Senate Majority Leader McConnell said Obama "would be making a big mistake to try to have that voted on during the election."
When the sweeping U.S.-led trade pact will take effect is a big topic within the United States itself as well as among its 11 partners in the initiative, such as Japan, Canada and Australia.
In reaction to the report, White House spokesman Josh Earnest expressed hope that Congress will pass the TPP deal before the presidential election, saying, "There's no reason that we need to wait that long" given the initiative's benefits for the U.S. economy.
It is possible for Congress to carefully consider the details of the TPP and to review all of the benefits "without kicking the vote all the way to the lame duck period," Earnest said.
Passage by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" U.S. Congress is indispensible to implementation of the TPP, which would cover 40 percent of the global economy.
But the focus among American politicians and voters has shifted to battles for the presidential nomination rather than trade-related topics that may have an impact on domestic jobs.
The first state-level election for the presidential nominee of both the Republican and Democratic parties will take place on Feb. 1 in Iowa.
Kyodo News
Oil price tanks again as IEA warns of unrelenting oversupply and falling demand
By finance reporter Stephen Letts
12 December 2015
Australian Broadcasting Corporation (ABC) News
Things look like getting much worse before they get better for oil producers, with the first signs of rapidly declining demand for oil emerging at a time of "unrelenting oversupply".
With prices in both the key US and European markets tumbling to seven-year lows — below $US40 a barrel — the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" International Energy Agency (IEA) said the first signs of slowdown in demand growth are starting to appear.
The analysis dragged both Brent Crude and West Texas Intermediate prices down by as much as 5 per cent overnight.
Both commodities have fallen by more than 10 per cent over the week since unity among HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OPEC members finally collapsed, leading to fears that gulf producers would continue to raise production, no matter the price.
Brent futures slipped below $US38 a barrel for the first time since December 2008 while WTI fell below $US35 a barrel and is rapidly approaching its GFC low of $US32.40.
In its monthly Oil Market Report, the Paris-based IEA, the key energy advisor to the OECD, found a nine-month long rally of strong demand growth for oil in the US came to an abrupt halt in September.
"Preliminary indicators for October and November [are] pointing to further outright declines," the IEA said.
"Rapid gains in HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD oil demand growth may be on the verge of a sharp deceleration if the latest preliminary indicators of US, German, French and Japanese deliveries can be used as a 'canary in the mine'."
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OPEC 'pumping at will'
While demand shows signs of crumbling, the same can't be said of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OPEC producers' determination to keep their taps open.
In what the IEA described as an "unrelenting oversupply", supplies are gushing out at 1.8 million barrels a day (mb/d) more than a year ago.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OPEC has effectively been "pumping at will" since Saudi Arabia convinced fellow cartel members a year ago to refrain from supply cuts and defend market share against the rapidly growing production in US shale oil fields and Russia.
Saudi Arabia's decision earlier this month to abandon HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OPEC's 30mb/d supply ceiling — a cap that had been roundly ignored anyway — signalled a renewed determination to pump non-OPEC producers out of business.
Saudi strategy is starting to work
The IEA said there is evidence the Saudi-led strategy is starting to work.
"Lower prices are clearly taking a toll on non-OPEC supply, with annual growth shrinking below 0.3 mb/d in November from 2.2 mb/d at the start of the year," the IEA said.
The report found US light tight oil — or shale oil — production could fall by 600,000 barrels a day next year.
"As companies make further spending cuts in reaction to sub-$50 a barrel oil, the impact on supplies — both from non-OPEC and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OPEC — will be even more pronounced in the longer term," it said.
And it is not just the US shale producers under duress at $US40 a barrel.
Recent analysis from investment banks HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UBS and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Morgan Stanley found the big Australian oil and gas producers would most likely be losing money if the price stayed at this level for a prolonged period.
Oversupply likely to swell by 300 million barrels in 2016
This is not likely to have much of an impact in the short-to-medium term as inventories are expected to swell by 300 million barrels into 2016 as sanction-free Iranian oil floods onto the market.
Additional spare capacity being developed — particularly in the US — means oil tank tops should not come under undue immediate pressure.
However, the extra 230 million barrel capacity in the US is more likely to extend the overhang of supply as demand wanes.
While the IEA said global demand should edge down to its long-term average of 98.5 mb/d, the forecast was delivered with a significant caveat.
"An exceptionally precarious macroeconomic backdrop is also likely to restrain the 2016 forecast," the IEA noted.
"The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" US Federal Reserve is likely to start tightening monetary policy and raise interest rates, which could dampen many already weak emerging market currencies and create more problems for their already ailing economies."
The Fed is expected to make its first move to raise rates after its two-day meeting, which wraps up next Wednesday.
Australian Broadcasting Corporation
Politics
House Passes Trade Component, but Trans-Pacific Partnership Still in Doubt
By William Mauldin
11 December 2015
The Wall Street Journal Online
The House passed a key component of President Barack Obama's trade policy Friday, but tepid support among Republicans and business groups for his big Pacific trade agreement could keep that deal from coming to a vote until the final weeks of his presidency, if then.
A customs bill that cleared the House on Friday gives American steel companies greater ability to challenge subsidized and dumped steel from China and other countries, one of several provisions demanded by the small group of Democratic lawmakers that supports the White House on trade.
That measure appears unlikely, though, to provide much added momentum in Congress for approving the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which was completed in October but now faces resistance in unexpected corners.
Vital Republican backing for the deal is waning. The party is divided on trade, and establishment Republicans are having a harder time defending the administration's Pacific deal against outspoken criticism from a number of Republican presidential candidates, including front-runner HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Donald Trump.
Republicans and powerful pro-trade business groups say they need more time to evaluate the agreement, a 12-nation compromise that includes North American partners along with Japan, Australia, Vietnam and others around the Pacific.
Meanwhile, a number of lawmakers and prominent staffers have expressed skepticism the deal will be put to a vote in Congress until after next year's election, and could even wait until the next president.
Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, who has his own misgivings over the deal, gave greater weight to those doubts this week in an interview with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Washington Post, saying he would resist a vote until at least the period immediately following the November election. His comments virtually eliminate the possibility that the Pacific deal could get a vote in the spring or summer, as the administration hoped.
A White House spokeswoman said Friday that the administration “will continue working with congressional leaders to pass the Trans-Pacific Partnership as soon as possible next year."
House Speaker HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Paul Ryan, from cheese powerhouse Wisconsin, is scrutinizing the dairy provisions, which allow greater U.S. exports to Canada but also some additional imports from New Zealand.
Finally, Sen. Orrin Hatch, chairman of the Senate committee that reviews trade agreements, has complained that the TPP doesn't do enough to defend the intellectual property of advanced drugs.
“I am concerned about erosion on the Republican side of the aisle," said Rep. Gerry Connolly, a Virginia Democrat who supports Mr. Obama's trade policy. “You've got some peeling off here on dairy and tobacco and pharmaceuticals, and if that isn't contained, our margin is very limited."
At the same time, business groups including the Chamber of Commerce and Business Roundtable can't formally begin the job of building congressional support until they iron out deep differences among their own ranks.
Farm groups, meat packers, multinational manufacturers, tech firms, big retailers and Hollywood studios have praised the TPP. But many lawmakers have heard complaints from tobacco companies, drug makers and Detroit auto makers, which are concerned the TPP could give a bigger boost to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Toyota Motor Corp. and other rivals in Japan.
“We continue to hold robust, thoughtful discussions with our member companies and association partners," the Chamber of Commerce said this week in a statement.
Officials from the U.S. and the other 11 countries are likely to sign the TPP formally in early February.
The customs bill House lawmakers approved Friday—which also is expected to clear the Senate—includes the “Enforce Act," a measure designed to help U.S. firms, including steel companies, more easily win special tariffs against competitors overseas for dumping or receiving government subsidies.
It also contains a provision to permanently ban state and local governments from taxing Internet access, locking in a prohibition that started in 1998. The losers are seven states—Hawaii, New Mexico, North Dakota, Ohio, South Dakota, Texas and Wisconsin—that will have until June 2020 to replace a revenue stream that brought them more than $500 million a year, according to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Congressional Research Service.
The final bill contains measures to streamline trade via HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" U.S. Customs and Border Protection, to enhance enforcement procedures against unfair trade and to prevent attempts to boycott Israel over West Bank settlements. 
Dow Jones & Company, Inc.
China's coal addiction lingers
11 December 2015
Deutsche Welle
China's central government wants to transition away from coal, but local officials are resisting. That's one reason why heavy smog frequently blankets major cities despite talk of building an "eco-civilization."
This week, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Asian Development Bank (ADB) announced a $300 million (274 million euro) loan to China to help develop environmental and clean energy policies for Beijing, the neighboring port of Tianjin and surrounding Hebei province. The area is home to 109 million people.
"Poor air quality has reached such a serious level that it is jeopardizing the capital region's health and sustainable growth," Satoshi Ishii, an ADB urban development expert, said in a statement.
As if on cue, the level of smog in Beijing grew so intense this week that the city issued its first-ever red-alert air pollution warning, ordering schools and factories closed for two days and restricting motorized vehicle traffic. Most of the smog is composed of fine particulates emitted by diesel motors, coal-fired power stations, factory chimneys and coal-burning home heating systems.
China, as the world's largest carbon polluter, is also playing a central role in climate policy negotiations - and its leaders want to be seen as responsible global leaders.
China has very good reasons to make a concerted effort to move away from coal and toward cleaner ways of powering its economy and heating its homes, and the central government has committed to doing that. But domestic politics make progress difficult.
"The central government has substantially decentralized decisions about power-plant permitting to regional and municipal governments," Per Ove Eikeland, a researcher at Norway's Fritjof Nansen Institute, told DW. "Strong connections between coal industry businesses and local politicians make it difficult for China to move away from coal more quickly."
Heavy pollution costs
Life expectancy in northern China was about five and a half years shorter than in southern China in the 1990s, according to a 2013 research study by Beijing University researcher Yuyu Chen and others. The study attributed the difference primarily to heart and lung disease related to air pollution from coal-burning.
The reason for the North-South difference: Between 1950 and 1980, the Chinese government provided coal free of charge for home and office winter heating systems for everyone living north of the Huai River and Qinling Mountain range - but not to people south of the line.
The free-coal policy greatly increased total suspended particulates (TSPs) air pollution in northern Chinese cities, and "is causing the 500 million residents of Northern China to lose more than 2.5 billion life-years of life expectancy," the study concluded.
An HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD study published in 2014, "The Cost of Air Pollution," estimated that about 1.3 million people died prematurely in China in 2010 from the consequences of ambient air pollution.
Various estimates have been made of the direct economic costs of air pollution. These costs range from sick days and lost leisure-time or work-time to loss of life-years. Valuing lost lives is a rather arbitrary business, but one such estimate, published in a 2014 joint report by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Bank and the Development Research Centre of China's State Council, assessed the losses from illnesses and premature deaths as being in the range of $100 billion to $300 billion a year.
Heavy air pollution also makes expatriates with technical expertise reluctant to relocate to China - another difficult-to-estimate category of economic costs.
Whatever the specific numbers, it's clear that the costs of burning vast quantities of coal are very high - not just the costs to the global climate, but also to Chinese residents' health and quality of life, and to the country's economy.
Moving away from coal - slowly
Home-heating coal isn't free anymore in northern China, but it's still subsidized, and many coal-fired heating stoves remain in place. The government wants to see their use banned from two central Beijing districts by the end of the year, the Beijing Municipal Environmental Protection Bureau announced in November.
On December 2, the government announced a promise to reduce air pollution emissions from coal-fired power stations by 60 percent by 2020, according to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xinhua, a government news agency. Inefficient power stations that don't meet new government efficiency standards put in place in 2012 are to be closed by the end of the decade.
Mindful of the need to shift away from coal, China has been investing heavily in building solar, wind, and nuclear power infrastructure. China invested a record $83.3 billion in renewable energy in 2014, up 39 percent from 2013. That was 31 percent of the global total invested in renewables - more than any other single country.
However, at least 70 percent of China's electricity still comes from coal-fired generators. And even though it's investing heavily in renewables, China also continues to invest heavily in coal: The country built a stunning 39 Gigawatts of coal-fired power plants in 2014.
And in the first nine months of 2015 alone, China's central and provincial governments issued permits to build another 155 new coal-fired power plants, at an estimated capital cost of about $74 billion, according to aHYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Greenpeace analysis published in November. The total capacity of those 155 plants, once they're built, will be as big as that of 40 percent of operational coal power plants in the US.
It's no wonder the country is home to seven of the world's ten most polluted cities, according to a study by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Asian Development Bank and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Tsinghua University.
All this flies in the face of the Chinese government rhetoric in recent years about turning China into an "eco-civilization" - a line of speech-making that sounds so green, it might have been written by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Greenpeace.
Eco-civilization
Chinese President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xi Jinping announced an ambitious push to reduce pollution and improve environmental sustainability when he took office November 2013. Xi used the occasion of the 18th National Congress to set out his broad vision for China's future as an "eco-civilization," a term Xi first introduced in 2007, years before he became the country's senior leader.
The Chinese Communist leadership has adopted a number of rhetorical themes for its modernizing drives since the reconstruction of the country began at the end of the 1970s under Deng Hsiaoping: "spiritual civilization," "material civilization," "political civilization," and now "ecological civilization."
Such themes are meant to provide broad guidance, and they don't necessarily translate easily into specific policies. Yet it would be wrong to conclude Chinese leaders aren't sincere about implementing an eco-civilization. In August and September of this year, a policy package was announced that aimed to put flesh on the bones of the idea. Twelve departments of the Central Committee and the State Council - China's Cabinet - contributed to the initative, which was coordinated by the Central Leading Group on Financial and Economic Affairs.
The reforms address many of the country's environmental problems. There are proposals to establish a national parks system, to improve protection of arable lands and water resources, to formally protect natural resource rights, establish a green financing system, improve environmental compensation mechanisms - and, of course, build a cleaner energy system.
For China watchers, the heavyweight players involved indicate that Beijing is serious about "eco-civilization." But given the enormous inertia of an economy the size of China's, the special interests involved, the power of local officials, and the enormous sunk costs buried in the country's coal economy, it's clear the shift won't be easy, cheap or fast.
Have something to say? Add your comments below. The thread to this editorial closes in 24 hours.
Deutsche Welle
South African troubles mount as rand collapses
11 December 2015
Agence France Presse
South Africa's rand slumped to record lows for a second day on Friday as the country's economic prospects darkened over President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Jacob Zuma's firing of the respected finance minister.
The rand breached 16 to the US dollar for the first time, government bond yields rose and bank stocks dived further in reaction to Nhlanhla Nene being dismissed late Wednesday.
Nene was replaced by David van Rooyen, a little-known figure from the ruling HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" African National Congress (ANC) party, in a move greeted with dismay by many investors and financial analysts.
But late Friday Zuma explained the shock ouster for the first time. He said Nene had been nominated as South Africa's candidate to head the African Regional Centre of the newly formed HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" BRICS bank.
"We are fully backing his candidature, knowing full well that he will excel and make the nation proud in his next assignment," said a statement.
Zuma said Nene's departure "does not signal a change in the government's fiscal stance."
"Government will not abandon the fiscal path that we have chosen in the last few years. Maintaining a prudent fiscal position remains one of government's top priorities," it said.
But economists were not so convinced.
"Nene was not prepared to be used as Mr Zuma's own petty cashbox," Ian Cruickshanks, chief economist with the South African Institute of Race Relations, told AFP.
"Foreigners are getting assets out. There are lots of uncertainty, the only solution to protect the exchange rate of the rand is an intervention by the Reserve Bank (raising interest rates)," he said.
South Africa, the continent's second largest economy, is struggling with unemployment stubbornly high at over 25 percent, low growth and the threat of a credit rating downgrade to "junk" status.
The rand has lost about 30 percent of its value against the dollar this year -- falling 8.0 percent alone since Nene was removed.
His fate and the market reaction unleashed a bout of deep pessimism in South Africa over ANC rule which has dominated politics since HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Nelson Mandela won the first post-apartheid elections in 1994.
Van Rooyen is seen as likely to back huge outlays on a nuclear station building programme and the troubled state airline as well as public spending ahead of local elections next year.
Nene's "ouster will now go down in history as one of the costliest blunders ever made by the current administration," said Ellis Mnyandu, editor of Business Report newspaper.
"The shock announcement... was devoid of any logic and justification, especially when (Zuma's) government is meant to be doing everything possible to restore confidence and growth.
"His successor, David Douglas Des van Rooyen, is a big unknown."
Van Rooyen, 47, was a member of the ANC's armed wing in the last years of its struggle against apartheid, and has recently been a low-key member of parliament's finance committee.
His time as a small-town mayor of Merafong is primarily remembered for when his house was burnt down by a mob over provincial boundary changes that local people thought would disadvantage them
He resigned the post in 2009, according to local media.
Zuma, who led the ANC to an easy general election victory last year, holds the presidency until 2019.
Agence France-Presse
Developing countries at Paris climate talks should stop fighting old battles, says OECD head
Fiona Harvey in Paris
11 December 2015
The Guardian
Angel Gurria says HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD study on money mobilised for climate aid is robust and rejects claims of ‘dubious accounting’
Some developing countries risk destabilising the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN climate negotiations in Paris by trying to rerun old battles over climate aid that have already been resolved, the head of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation has said.
Angel Gurria, the OECD’s secretary general robustly defended the organisation’s assessment of global climate finance and said that developing countries should accept that most funding due to them under international agreements was already flowing.
Climate finance – to help poor countries cut emissions and cope with the effects of extreme weather – is a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" key sticking point at the Paris climate change talks. Poor countries were promised in 2009 that at least $100bn (£66bn) would flow to them by 2020, and proof that this will be fulfilled is a pre-requisite for them to sign any agreement.
Related: HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" More countries reject OECD study on climate aid
But in a veiled swipe at the Indian delegation Gurria said it was never the intention of previous agreements that the finance would come exclusively from public funding. Previous agreements had always allowed the funds to come from a variety of sources, including the private sector.
“You can make speeches about this, but it’s not serious and it’s not professional,” Gurria said. “You can’t make these statements [criticising the inclusion of private investment] without a very big risk [to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN process] at this stage.”
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" OECD’s analysis found that financial flows for climate assistance were already strong, at about $62bn a year, and set to increase.
“This is progress,” he told HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" the Guardian in an interview. “We are not in a bad place. Does this mean we might overshoot the target [for providing assistance]? Hopefully.”
The organisation was asked by the French hosts of the Paris climate conference to assess how much financial help was becoming available, but its findings have been disputed by some developing countries, which say the accounting methods used are unclear, and called for more money to come from public sector sources instead of businesses.
Related: HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" The six key road blocks at the UN climate talks in Paris
Countries including HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" India and Brazil have strongly criticised the OECD analysis, arguing that the accounting methods were “murky”.
Gurria mounted a tough defence of the methods used by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD. The organisation’s analysts had examined all the sources of finance, including overseas development assistance from rich to poor governments, loans from development banks, and export credits, and taken care to avoid double counting of any that could be overlapping. He pointed to the nearly 60 pages of the report devoted to an explanation of the methodology.
“This is severe, this is rigorous, this is transparent,” he said. “No one can say that our method was wrong.”
He suggested that some developing countries were seeking to reopen old disagreements. Commitments made at the Copenhagen climate summit in 2009, where the promise of $100bn a year was first made, and annual HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN climate meetings since then, have specifically included private sector finance, as well as funding from development banks such as the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Bank, governments, and other institutions.
But since then some NGOs and some developing country governments have argued that $100bn should be supplied only from the public sector of the industrialised world. In a letter, quoted by the Indian government in a recently published discussion paper on climate finance, 120 civil society groups said: “Private finance should should not be substituted for public funding or counted towards the $100bn.”
This was never the intention of the Copenhagen pledge, or subsequent reaffirmations of it, Gurria said.
He also pointed out that the government of Peru, which hosted last year’s climate talks in Lima and is a leading developing country voice at the Paris talks, had co-signed the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD report, a reflection of their confidence in it.
If private sector money cannot be included, Gurria said, then developed countries would be called upon to pay $100bn a year from their taxpayers towards climate goals in the poor world. “Taxpayers would have to put their hands in their pockets, year after year,” he said.
Just because a private sector company might make a profit, that did not negate the value of its investment in a developing country, he said.
Gurria also rejected the idea that donor countries could hide behind general commitments to overseas aid, in order to inflate their climate finance figures. “We sniff very closely to see if it is real or not,” he said. “We don’t want substitutions from [existing] overseas aid. We have evidence and we know.”
Gurria said that the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD’s report had been instrumental in encouraging donor countries to have a “can-do” attitude and up their contributions, pointing to the US’s doubling of its commitments to poor countries to adapt to the effects of climate change.
Gurria also said that the conference should abandon the idea that no parts of the deal can be resolved until the final moments. “Nothing is agreed until everything is agreed” is a mantra that has been cited by participants. The phrase comes from the Doha round of international trade talks, but according to Gurria it is “not conducive or constructive” at the current negotiations.
He called for countries to resolve some of the outstanding issues – such as on the level of emissions cuts needed – separately, in order to make progress in time for the deadline.
Guardian Newspapers Limited
Brazil signs automotive free trade deal with Uruguay
11 December 2015
BBC Monitoring Americas
Text of report by leading, centre-left Brazilian newspaper Folha de Sao Paulo website on 9 December
[Report by Isabel Versiani: "Brazil And Uruguay Close Free Trade Deal On the Automotive Sector"]
Note: the translation below is machine based with limited editorial intervention.
Brazil and Uruguay on Wednesday (9) in Brasilia signed the first free trade agreement in the automotive sector among Mercosur member countries.
It is also the first sectoral agreement of the kind that Brazil will have with another country - agreements currently in force with much larger markets such as Argentina, Colombia, and Mexico provide for the trade of vehicles and spare parts with a zero tariff, but limited to different types of quotas.
For the government, although it is a modest market -- the Uruguayans bought a total of 57,000 vehicles last year, 25 percent of them from Brazil --, the agreement is significant because it sets a precedent which can help Brazil in negotiations with other partners.
The automotive sector is not covered by the Mercosur free trade regulations. Because it is a sensitive market, trade is governed by specific agreements.
The sectorial agreement with Argentina, the largest importer of vehicles from Brazil, expires in June 2016 and the government hopes to negotiate the extension of the trade rules.
"By establishing a free-trade agreement with Uruguay, we create the grounds for a 'Mercosur-bound' automotive industry," said Minister Armando Monteiro Neto (Development, Industry, and Foreign Trade).
For him, the prospects for the negotiations with Argentina are favorable following the election of the President Mauricio Macri. "The first signs we received are strongly in favor of revitalizing trade with Brazil."
SLOWDOWN
In view of the slowdown in the domestic demand for vehicles as of 2013, speeding up negotiations for automotive agreements with neighboring countries has been a demand of the automobile industry.
Sales of vehicles in Brazil plummeted by 25 percent this year compared to 2014 until November, reaching 2.3 million units. In Argentina, the demand dropped even more, but Brazilian exports have not declined in number of vehicles.
In Uruguay, the expectation is that Brazilian exports may gain ground with the liberalization, in particular in relation to Mexican vehicles, the main competitor in the country. To be entitled to zero tariffs, the products must have a minimum of regionally produced content: 55 percent for cars sold in Brazil and 50 percent for the Uruguayans.
The agreement will be signed by Ministers Monteiro Neto, Mauro Vieira (Foreign Affairs) and their Uruguayan counterparts.
This year, the country also renegotiated an agreement with Colombia, which involved increasing the export quota with a zero tariffs.
Now then, with Mexico, Brazil's effort in the agreement signed in March was to stop the quota from increasing.
The two countries had an automotive free trade agreement between 2002 and 2012, but Dilma's administration pushed for limiting trade after the trade balance showed a strong deficit for Brazil.
This year, Brazil's vehicle exports to Mexico are increasing, favored by the devaluation of the real.
Source: Folha de Sao Paulo website (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" www.folha.com.br) in Portuguese 9 Dec 15
The British Broadcasting Corporation
END
 
Josep Bosch, Information Officer
Information and External Relations Division
+41227395681
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.