Multilateral Trade Agenda to Gain Steam During January Meetings in Switzerland
Germany and US report new cases of H5N8 bird flu
Commerce Official to Travel to China To Discuss Rule of Law Issues
Panamá espera diálogo con Colombia
Chile to pursue FTA with PHL
ICCI welcomes Pak-China agreement to open bilateral bank branches
China liberalises last agricultural commodity
USTR Touts Increased Transparency On Negotiations for Trade Agreements
After 8 years of membership, what has the WTO brought to Vietnam?
How to Stop Currency Manipulation
India turns to new industries for economic revival



Multilateral Trade Agenda to Gain Steam During January Meetings in Switzerland

By Bryce Baschuk, Bloomberg BNA

Jan. 9 — International trade officials are preparing for a busy January, as the World Trade Organization seeks to accomplish its July 1 goal of producing a “clearly defined work program” to address the remaining issues of the Doha Development Agenda (DDA).

Their efforts will begin in earnest on Jan. 21, when trade delegates from around the world convene in Davos, Switzerland, for the World Economic Forum's annual meeting.

On the sidelines of Davos, trade ministers from the U.S., the European Union, India and other nations are slated to discuss their expectations for the WTO's 2015 agenda.

Also that week, WTO Director-General Roberto Azevedo will hold informal Trade Negotiation Committee meetings with the heads of delegations in Room W of the WTO building aimed at advancing a post-Bali Ministerial work program.

WTO officials hope to maintain the momentum created by the recent passage of the Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA), the organization's first multilateral agreement in 20 years.

February General Council Meeting

The WTO's trade negotiation groups will discuss the status of their various issues in separate meetings during January and February and will report their findings at the WTO's General Council meeting scheduled for Feb. 20.

The Special Session Agriculture Committee will meet in January to devise a permanent solution to the public stockholding issue that upset the approval of the TFA last July. Some WTO members, like India, have sought to revise the WTO's 1986-1988 pricing benchmark used to calculate trade-distortion measures so that their agricultural subsidies for food security programs don't breach trading norms.

The Special Session of the Committee for Trade and Development will meet informally during the last week of January to discuss several proposals and provisions aimed at advancing the work program of the special session.

Also this month the WTO will hold dispute settlement body (DSB) meetings on Jan. 16 and 26. The Jan. 16 DSB meeting will adopt a recent appellate body ruling related to U.S. countervailing duty investigations into a range of Chinese products (244 WTO, 12/19/14).

The agenda of the Jan. 26 DSB meeting has not yet been announced.

The WTO will hold its trade policy review of Barbados Jan. 27 and Jan. 29.



Germany and US report new cases of H5N8 bird flu

By Max Green, Agra Europe  Published: 09 January 2015 12:48 PM

New cases of H5N8 avian flu were this week reported in Germany and also in the US, where concerns are rising over potential impacts on trade.

German authorities detected the virus in a stork kept at Rostock Zoo in the northeastern state of Mecklenburg–Western Pomerania. Local press reports also quote officials as confirming H5N8 in two hunter-killed mallard ducks in Saxony-Anhalt – another northeastern state.

The cases add to earlier German cases in November and December, when the same strain was also detected in the Netherlands, UK and Italy.

Meanwhile, US authorities have confirmed further cases of both H5N8 and H5N2 avian flu – the former in a hunter killed duck in the Pacific flyway – reportedly in north-central California. The USDA said tests pointed to an identical strain to that found in Washington state in mid-December.

In a separate report to the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE, the department said H5N2 avian flu had been found in a backyard poultry flock in Benton Country in southeastern Washington. Meanwhile, the state of Oregon continues to implement its multi-agency response plan following last month’s discovery of H5N8 bird flu in a backyard bird flock in Douglas County.
Trade bans in force

So far, some 30 countries have imposed restrictions on imports of US poultry due to concerns over recent H5 bird flu outbreaks.

In most cases, these measures are limited to affected states or regions. But in recent days, South Korea has banned imports of all unprocessed US poultry – closing the door on trade worth more than $90 million in the first eleven months of 2014.

Similar blanket bans have been imposed by Sri Lanka and Thailand although neither of these countries are major importers of US poultry. Meanwhile, the EU has banned the import of US poultrymeat from December 19 – although impacts on trade are again minimal as EU sanitary requirements mean almost no US poultry is currently imported by the bloc.

New rules also mean poultry products from Oregon and Washington state are no longer allowed to enter the EU even for onward shipment to third countries.
USDA response

In a recent statement, the USDA urged trading partners not to overreact to recent bird flu outbreaks, calling for any restrictions to be based on sound science and to be limited to affected regions.

“Unfortunately, some countries have decided to place far more restrictive measures than necessary on US poultry, including, in a few instances, bans on imports of all US poultry and poultry products,” the department notes.

“We disagree with these actions and are taking a number of steps to address them and help support the US poultry industry.”

The statement notes that highly pathogenic avian flu has not been detected in commercial US poultry and vows to press trading partners to bring their import restrictions into line with OIE guidelines.



Commerce Official to Travel to China To Discuss Rule of Law Issues 
By Rosella Brevetti, Bloomberg BNA

Jan. 9 — Commerce Department General Counsel Kelly Welsh will discuss promoting a transparent and predictable commercial legal environment with Chinese officials and stakeholders in China the week of Jan. 12.

“Promoting a strong commercial rule of law wherever U.S. companies do business is a high priority for Secretary [Penny] Pritzker and the Department of Commerce. That's why I am travelling to Beijing and Wuhan, China during the week of January 12 to speak to the public, academics, legal professionals, the media, Chinese government officials, and U.S. businesses about how the United States and China can work together to promote commercial rule of law, ” Welsh said in a Commerce blog post.

China's Fourth Plenum of the 18th Central Committee meeting took place in October 2014 and focused on rule of law issues. China announced plans for far-reaching legal reform during the Fourth Plenum meeting, Welsh wrote. “Those plans embraced themes that the U.S. government has been discussing with Chinese leaders for many years in the U.S.-China Joint Commission on Commerce and Trade and the Strategic and Economic Dialogue, including the Transparency Dialogue,” Welsh said. He added that the U.S. viewed these recent developments as “an opportunity to move the conversation forward in promoting sound commercial legal principles.”

Welsh said that he would meet with Chinese officials and U.S. industry leaders on commercial rule of law issues that impact both economies. During the trip, Welsh will lead a U.S. delegation to the 19th U.S.-China Legal Exchange and will deliver remarks on ways the U.S. and China can work together to advance the type of legal system that promotes economic growth and innovation, according to the blog post.

China agreed to broad legal reforms in areas such as transparency, uniform application of laws and judicial review during its World Trader Organization accession process. A recent Office of the U.S. Trade Representative report on China's compliance with WTO commitments stated that various areas of China's legal framework can adversely affect the ability of U.S. exporters and investors to get the full benefits to which they are entitled under WTO agreements.



Panamá espera diálogo con Colombia
11 January 2015 La Estrella (Panamá)

El Gobierno de Panamá espera llegar a un acuerdo con Colombia antes que la Organización Mundial del Comercio (OMC) emita un fallo sobre el proceso que se le sigue al país sudamericano por imponerle un alto arancel a los textiles y calzados que reexporta la Zona Libre de Colón (ZLC).

La expectativa es que el proceso termine mediante un diálogo entre las partes y que esta solución permita a 'la zona franca panameña tener el desempeño económico que ha tenido a lo largo de su historia', señaló Melitón Arrocha, ministro de Comercio e Industrias de Panamá. 'Que se pueda abastecer al mercado colombiano de productos de buena calidad, a buen precio, en este caso de textiles y calzados', agregó Arrocha.

CERO CONCESIONES

Sin embargo, Panamá no está dispuesta a realizar ningún tipo de concesión arancelaria para lograr un acuerdo. El titular del MICI explicó que lo único que su país exige es un fiel apego a los compromisos internacionales que asumió Colombia cuando se incorporó a la OMC.

En junio de 2013, Panamá le impuso una queja a Colombia ante la OMC por el exgerado arancel a los productos que reexporta la ZLC a ese país sudamericano. En febrero se dará una audiencia por este proceso y en agosto la OMC debe emitir un fallo.

Panamá ha suspendido la ratificación del Tratado de Libre Comercio (TLC) con Colombia como una medida de presión para que el país sudamericano elimine los aranceles a los productos de la zona franca panameña.



Chile to pursue FTA with PHL
By Kris M. Crismundo PNA (Philippines News Agency)
11 January 2015

MANILA, Jan. 11 -- Chile will be pursuing for a free trade agreement (FTA) with the Philippines to boost bilateral trade between the two countries.

Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) Secretary Gregory L. Domingo said there will be Chilean mission visiting the country by February or March this year.

'They want to pursue FTA with us,' Domingo added. 'We're still confirming if it's business or official mission.'

He said that for the past years Chile want to have bilateral trade pact with the Philippines and they are now pushing through to start FTA talks.

'They have lots of bilateral agreements. They are one with the most prolific in terms of bilateral agreements, FTAs,' he mentioned.

He said the two countries will start informal discussion on FTA during the Chilean mission here this first quarter of the year. This will include identifying sectors that will benefit with the trade pact.

The Philippines, the trade chief added, will also conduct a return mission to Chile as the country aims to have business mission to South America during the middle of 2015.

'During my term, we never had business mission to South America. It's about time to have one,' Domingo said, adding that they might visit Peru, and/or Brazil and Mexico aside from Chile.

Meanwhile, prior to the Chilean mission, there will be a delegation from the United States coming to Manila this January 29 led by Philippine Ambassador to the U.S. Jose L. Cuisia.

Then, this will be followed by a business mission from Japan in February. At least 40 Japanese delegates will be visiting in the Philippines, the largest business mission of Japan in the past three years.

Early this month, Domingo met Japanese Ambassador to the Philippines Kazuhide Ishikawa to discuss measures on strengthening economic ties of Japan and the Philippines.

According to Domingo, they also talk to fast-track the general review of Philippines-Japan Economic Partnership Agreement (PJEPA) and to continue moving for a stronger bilateral economic relation.

'Our relation with Japan is a strategic relationship. We want to make it stronger then reflect it to future agreements,' the DTI chief said.



ICCI welcomes Pak-China agreement to open bilateral bank branches
10 January 2015 Plus News Pakistan

ISLAMABAD: Islamabad Chamber of Commerce and Industry on Saturday welcomed the understanding reached between Pakistan and China during the third meeting of second phase negotiations on Pak-China FTA.

The meeting discussed to soften the requirements for establishing bank branches in each other's country and termed it highly positive development that would help in boosting bilateral trade and yield fruitful results for both countries, according to press release issued by ICCI.

President, Islamabad Chamber of Commerce and Industry (ICCI) Muzammil Hussain Sabri said that Pakistan and China possessed immense potential to improve bilateral trade, however,lack of banking facilities was a big stumbling block for Pakistani businessmen to promote trade with China as presently the LCs were routed through foreign banks.

He said the opening of Pakistani banks in China would greatly facilitate trade promotion with China as the financial transactions would be routed through Pakistani banks.

He added that this arrangement would not only benefit our banking reserves, it would also help in expansion of our economy and GDP growth.

He stressed that both countries should remove all impediments on urgent basis to establish bank branches on reciprocal basis.

Senior Vice President, ICCI, Muhammad Shakeel Munir also appreciated the Pak-China move to re-negotiate tariff reduction on tradable goods under the Free Trade Agreement (FTA).

He said both countries had signed the FTA in 2006, but its concessions could not be better utilized as yet.

He urged that Government of Pakistan should provide helping hand to its businessmen in taking full advantage of FTA for improving trade with China.

He said though Pak-China bilateral trade has improved from $4.10 billion in 2006-07 to over $ 10 billion in 2014, however, the volume of trade was highly tilted in favor of China, which needed to be made balanced for both countries.

Muhammad Ashfaq Chatha, Vice President ICCI stressed that both countries should take measures to address issued related to technical barriers to trade (TBT).

He said that Chinese Government should also look into the strict conditions of its inspections and quarantine processes to remove the concerns of Pakistani exporters in order to facilitate them in promoting exports to China.



China liberalises last agricultural commodity

By Timothy Maler, Agra Europe
Published: 09 January 2015

China has liberalised prices on 24 commodities and services – including on tobacco leaves, previously the last remaining agricultural product subject to the government’s price controls.

All price controls on agricultural products have now been removed, according to an announcement from the country’s National Development and Reform Commission (NRDC) early this week (January 4).

The Chinese government began to liberalise its agricultural produce market in 1978.

It now runs certain state storage programmes and maintains minimum prices while granting subsidies to certain produce.
Foreign investment

Beijing also published draft rules that would allow foreign investors to trade in some of its commodities futures, as Beijing looks to increase its sphere of influence over the global commodities market.

The China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC) issued the draft guidelines on December 31, increasing the number of futures contracts that would be open to foreign investors.

Currently, state restrictions on foreign participation and currency flows have prevented the Chinese commodities market from becoming a global leader.

Foreign companies are only allowed to trade via brokers after setting up a locally registered “non-financial unit” – which requires considerable resources.

The Shanghai Futures Exchange’s crude oil futures will be the first contract opened up to foreign players – able to trade by way of approved overseas or local brokerages. They may also apply for direct trading licenses.

The CSRC did not outline which other domestic futures contracts would open up to foreign investors.



USTR Touts Increased Transparency On Negotiations for Trade Agreements 
By Len Bracken, Bloomberg BNA

Jan. 9 — The administration outlined what it called “unprecedented steps” to increase the transparency of its negotiations on market-opening trade agreements such as the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) with 11 other Pacific Rim countries and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) with the European Union.

In a fact sheet issued by the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, the administration Jan. 9 said it has provided detailed summaries of negotiation priorities on the TPP and the TTIP and information on key negotiation topics and press conferences following negotiating rounds.

The USTR also outlined the extent of its consultations with Congress, citing more than 1,600 congressional briefings on the TPP and the granting of access for all members to current negotiating texts in a secure reading room on Capitol Hill.

The agency fact sheet follows a Jan. 8 press conference by opponents of the administration's trade policy where some members of Congress, along with public interest groups, charged the administration with conducting secret trade negotiations and called for increased transparency (6 DER A-40, 1/9/15).

Trade officials contend that negotiations are necessarily conducted on a confidential basis, so offers and counteroffers can be made discretely until negotiators arrive at final offers. U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman has said he is committed to providing as much transparency as possible consistent with simultaneously obtaining the best deal for the U.S.
Transparency Provisions in TPA Bill

The USTR fact sheet comes as trade has emerged as an issue of potential cooperation between the administration and the newly seated 114th Congress, notably around trade promotion authority (TPA) legislation that would provide for up-or-down votes on trade agreements.

Bolstering the transparency provisions in the previous TPA was a stated goal of Senate Finance Committee ranking member Ron Wyden (D-Ore.). In a Jan. 9 briefing with reporters, National Foreign Trade Council President William Reinsch said any changes to the transparency provisions of the TPA bill introduced in the 113th Congress concerning the degree of information provided by the administration to Congress, to the public and to trade advisory committees and other stakeholders would likely be dealt with piecemeal.

The advisory committee system was created by Congress in 1974 to ensure that U.S. trade policy and trade negotiating objectives reflect U.S. public and private sector interests.

In 2014, the USTR added a new Public Interest Trade Advisory Committee with the intention that it join with other committees, such as the Labor Advisory Committee and the Trade and Environment Policy Advisory Committees, to allow labor unions, environmental groups, faith organizations, public health advocates, consumer organizations, local and state officials, farmers, ranchers and small businesses to have more input in negotiations.

Additional Measures

In outlining additional transparency measures, the fact sheet said the USTR has:
•?solicited public comments on negotiation aims, priorities and concerns, including through the Federal Register; •?held public hearings inviting input on the negotiations; •?organized first-of-their-kind stakeholder events where the negotiations are suspended so that a diverse group of stakeholders can meet with negotiators; and •?shared information on the current status of negotiations through blog posts, trade policy updates, press releases, statements, conference calls with stakeholders and the press and tweets.



After 8 years of membership, what has the WTO brought to Vietnam?
Vietnam News Summary 10 January 2015

The expected gains from Vietnam’s membership in the WTO (World Trade Organization) remain unclear, while the losses are more noticeable.

Under WTO commitments, Vietnam opened its distribution market fully to foreign investors in January 1, 2009. But in fact, some foreign investors made their presence in Vietnam before that time.

Big C, for example, joined the Vietnamese market in 1998 when setting up a joint venture with a Vietnamese partner, while Metro Cash & Carry got a license to set up a 100 percent foreign owned enterprise in 2002.

The limitations on the kinds of good foreigners can distribute in Vietnam have been applied since January 1, 2007. This means that the foreign distributors who came to Vietnam before that time did not have any limitations.

Vietnam did not set any limitations regarding the sources of the products to be distributed in Vietnam. This means that foreign invested distribution chains can determine what products to be displayed in their chains, even if they are made in Vietnam or sourced from other countries.

The Vietnamese logistics market has also become a playing field for foreign firms. A report from the Vietnam Shipowners’ Association showed there are only 25 operational foreign invested logistics firms in Vietnam, but they control 80 percent of the logistics market.

“Vietnam has joined the WTO, but the economy remains weak,” said Dr. Le Dang Doanh, a renowned independent economist. “This is attributed to the weak inner strength of the national economy.”

“Vietnam has been too slow in carrying out economic reforms,” he noted.

What will happen?

According to Truong Dinh Tuyen, former Minister of Trade, under the ASEAN Free Trade Agreement (FTA), Vietnam bears pressure on goods trade because it had to cut import tariffs. Meanwhile, under the WTO, the major pressure is on the opening of the service market.

Vietnam has committed to open a production-relating service market from January 11, 2015, which analysts say will start a “foreign outsourcing vs domestic outsourcing battle”.

Pham Chi Lan, a renowned economist, commented: “Vietnam, before joining WTO, had advantages in doing footwear and garment outsourcing. After joining WTO, its advantages are still in footwear, garment outsourcing and making some electronic parts.”

However, outsourcing will be no longer be the “privilege” of Vietnamese industrial enterprises, once foreign-invested enterprises can also join the playing field. The enterprises will have advantages in obtaining outsourcing contracts as nominated by multinational conglomerates.

Also from January 11, 2015, foreign investors will have full rights just like Vietnamese in hotel development and food & beverage catering. Analysts warn that if Vietnamese cannot well prepare for this eventuality, they will only get small pieces of the lucrative business field. (Viet Nam Net – January 5)



How to Stop Currency Manipulation
The Opinion Pages | Op-Ed Contributor
By JARED BERNSTEIN JAN. 9, 2015 New York Times

WASHINGTON — IF the new Congress can agree on anything this year, it may well be the Trans-Pacific Partnership, a trade deal between the United States and 11 other countries throughout the Asia-Pacific region. Passions run high when it comes to trade deals these days, and the Obama administration is working hard to sell it to labor unions, which roundly oppose it.

So far the pitch has been about what the deal, as written, will do to help the American economy — a pitch that hasn’t won over many, on either side of the partisan divide. But there’s one thing the administration can do that will both win over some opponents and address one of the biggest issues in global trade: add a chapter on currency manipulation.

It is not unusual for countries to manage their exchange rate — the value of their currency relative to others — to make their exports cheap while making others’ exports to them more expensive. This method has been used extensively by, among others, China, Japan, Malaysia and Singapore — aside from China, all signatories to the partnership.

The American dollar is a prime target for these currency managers. First, the dollar is the global trading system’s premier reserve currency, meaning dollars are freely traded and confidently accepted by international investors. And Americans are a highly acquisitive people — a nice way of saying we buy a lot of stuff. Consumer spending as a share of gross domestic product is about 70 percent here, 55 percent in Europe and 35 percent in China. We’re steady customers for export-led economies.

There’s nothing wrong with that, until these exporters start buying dollars to raise the value of the dollar relative to their own currencies, thus subsidizing their exports and taxing their imports. In the United States, the result is persistent trade deficits that have been a drag on growth and jobs — better-than-average manufacturing jobs — for decades.

In a compelling argument for including a chapter in the Trans-Pacific Partnership to restrict currency manipulation, C. Fred Bergsten of the Peterson Institute for International Economics estimated that America’s trade deficit “has averaged $200 billion to $500 billion per year higher as a result of the manipulation” by the rest of the world, resulting in the loss of one million to five million jobs.

The challenge is in the details. Countries buy foreign currencies for various reasons, not just to gain a trade advantage, and they shouldn’t necessarily be held to account for doing so. Moreover, opponents of such a chapter argue that it would cover the actions of our own central bank, the Federal Reserve, and open it to charges that it also manipulates exchange rates. (When the Fed lowers the short-term interest rate, or engages in “quantitative easing” to lower longer-term rates, one clear consequence is to lower the value of the dollar.)

But that argument doesn’t quite hold. It’s a matter of intent, and there is a clear test: whether the central bank is engaging in domestic demand management or currency management, and the simplest way to tell is to observe whether the bank is buying foreign currencies. The People’s Bank of China does a great deal of that. Our Fed does almost none.

It’s important to recognize that deals like the Trans-Pacific Partnership are not necessarily about “free trade.” They are instead a set of rules; some, like lowering tariffs, lead to freer trade, while others, like expanding patent protections, are more protectionist. Rules governing currency tactics certainly fit the framework.

Some purchasing of foreign currency should be fine under the Trans-Pacific Partnership. Some developing economies collect dollars to cover their external debts in case of financial crises and large outflows of private capital. With this in mind, Mr. Bergsten suggests that holding enough foreign currency to cover a year’s worth of external liabilities might be a sound benchmark; anything more would be questionable.

Once we’ve agreed on what currency management looks like, what actions would a chapter on it take? These could include a tax on the imports of offending countries, fines, the temporary canceling of certain trade privileges and my favorite, reciprocal currency intervention: If countries can go into currency markets and buy dollars, then we must be able to do the same with their currency. That’s not currently possible with China and other countries, which use capital controls to block such large purchases.

Speaking of China, even though it’s not part of the partnership talks, rules like these, especially reciprocity, should be applied to it as well. Not to do so would put the signatory countries at a distinct disadvantage to a trade behemoth with a history of undervaluing its currency to maintain trade surpluses.

As a White House economist in the first few years of the Obama administration, I learned that many of my colleagues shared my concerns about currency management. But all administrations believe the only way to do something about it is through quiet diplomacy. They believe that writing down rules in a trade agreement is too risky, with the potential to scuttle the whole deal.

Diplomacy hasn’t worked. A more direct approach is needed. If the trade deal’s supporters want an agreement worthy of broad support, this is a chance they can’t afford to miss.
Correction: January 10, 2015

Jared Bernstein, a senior fellow at the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, was the chief economist and economic adviser to Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. from 2009 to 2011.



India turns to new industries for economic revival

Victor Mallet, James Crabtree and Amy Kazmin in New Delhi  Financial Times

India will focus on “entirely new industries” – including solar technology, LED lighting, small cars, medical appliances and weapons – rather than trying to follow China into consumer electronics in its drive to become a global manufacturing power, according to one of its senior policy makers.

“What we’re trying to do is massively build out India’s productive capacity,” Jayant Sinha, minister of state for finance and a former McKinsey partner, said in an interview in New Delhi.

“That is, in fact a veritable supply side revolution because what we are really trying to do is to position India for a decade or more of sustainable, non-inflationary 7 to 8 per cent GDP growth. It’s only if we can achieve those kinds of growth rates that we will be able to create the millions and millions of jobs we have to create every year.”

Mr Sinha, a Harvard Business School alumnus, is one of the technocratic politicians charged by Narendra Modi, the prime minister, with helping to implement his “Make in India” vision after a collapse in economic growth to less than 5 per cent in the final two years of the previous Congress government.

India is the world’s third-largest economy after the US and China, measured on a purchasing power parity basis, but manufacturing makes up only 15 per cent of gross domestic product, an unusually small share for an Asian developing economy.

Mr Modi wants to boost that to 25 or even 30 per cent of GDP to help create the 1m jobs a month needed by new entrants to the workforce from the growing population of 1.3bn. But he will be hampered by clogged transport infrastructure, a shortage of skills, onerous labour laws that discourage investors, and the reluctance of indebted Indian companies to take on new risks.

“Make in India at this stage is still a slogan,” admits one of Mr Sinha’s government colleagues as business leaders and statesmen - including US Secretary of State John Kerry, World Bank chief Jim Yong Kim and billionaire Mukesh Ambani of Reliance Industries - converged on Mr Modi’s home state for the biennial “Vibrant Gujarat” summit.. “We’re not going to do manufacturing like the east Asians did. We’re going to have to have a new model.”

Mr Sinha sees two broad aims in the Modi government’s industrial policy: first, to meet India’s vast domestic demand for everything from steel and aluminium to refrigerators and motorcycles; second, to develop internationally competitive industries in new sectors.

“When China became a tremendous electronics manufacturing hub, it did that for smartphones, for instance, which did not exist as a product category,” Mr Sinha said. “It did that in laptops, which did not exist as a product category. They didn’t necessarily replicate what Japan was doing in automotive manufacturing.

“Similarly, I think there will be industries where India will become a global leader, but those are entirely new industries, for instance solar appliances, solar lanterns, solar home systems?.?.?.?India is already the world hub for small car design and manufacturing.”

Mr Sinha added: “The Indian economic model is not the same as the Chinese economic model. Ours is a much more innovation-driven, bottom-up approach towards economic growth?.?.?.?We will rely on our innovative and world class firms to be able to unlock these new manufacturing industries of the future.”

Some analysts dismiss this vision as over-optimistic, given the heavy debt burden weighing on many Indian conglomerates and the wariness of foreign industrial investors faced with unexpected tax demands and an array of regulatory and political obstacles that make it hard for them to turn a profit.

Arvind Subramanian, Mr Modi’s newly appointed chief economic adviser, has noted the weakness of private investment and called for a loosening of medium-term fiscal policy to make room for a surge of public investment in infrastructure.

The first stage of India’s planned industrial revolution, therefore, is likely to put more emphasis on public spending for infrastructure than on private investment in new factories.

Mr Sinha said the government was considering unlocking an additional $25-50bn of public investment in the 2015-16 fiscal year to compensate for sluggish private spending, while the Indian railway network has plans for $100bn of investments in the next five years. Piyush Goyal, minister for power, coal and renewable energy, has launched a $250bn plan for power generation and transmission to double electricity output and achieve Mr Modi’s promise of 24-hour electricity for all by 2019.

“The economic reforms that we’ve pursued have been unprecedented in terms of scope and magnitude,” said Mr Sinha, adding that Mr Modi’s Bharatiya Janata party government had done more than the Congress government that launched a series of liberalising reforms in 1991 to extract itself from a financial crisis.

Now the government has to prove that its reforms and its industrial policy will actually work. “We’re at the bridge between the promise and the hubris,” said Ashoka Mody, a sceptical US-based economist, “and if there’s disappointment [because after 1991] it would be the second time. India would lose credibility, and not just this government.”
