HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO Director-General Touts Changing Tides in Doha Talks Despite Agricultural Discord
·         HYPERLINK \l "OMC: les négociations accélèrent, selon son directeur général
·         HYPERLINK \l "NZ ambassador hauled before Brazilian foreign minister
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S. questions China at WTO on banking technology restrictions
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO Decision in U.S.-India Solar Dispute Expected in Late August
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S. groups don't want trade war with Canada; Ottawa could impose tariffs on American oranges, wines, candy
·         HYPERLINK \l "Japan Again Asks S. Korea to Lift Import Ban on Fishery Products
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S. Sees 'Pervasive' Circumvention Of AD Duties, Seeks WTO Discussion
·         HYPERLINK \l "EU to end milk quota on March 31
·         HYPERLINK \l "USDA says a quarter of farmers yet to select subsidies
·         HYPERLINK \l "Imported rice volume in FY 2014 to fall to lowest in nearly 20 years
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S. hopes to wrap up Pacific trade deal, fast-track soon
·         HYPERLINK \l "SNB warns of ‘difficult times’ as currency move hits home
 
WTO Director-General Touts Changing Tides in Doha Talks Despite Agricultural Discord
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, March 27, 2015
 
March 26 — The director-general of the World Trade Organization said members have entered a new phase of their latest Doha Round talks whereby specific proposals and solutions are actively debated among members.
 
“At this point in time the negotiations are changing gears very visibly, very clearly,” Roberto Azevedo told reporters at a March 26 news conference in Geneva.
 
The shift marks a notable departure from past Doha Round conversations where members had generally rehashed old positions from 2008.
 
“That has clearly changed,” Azevedo said. “Right now you will see a number of delegations exploring new approaches, suggesting new approaches. There have been new proposals put on the table. “
 
“We are moving more from a situation of identification of problems and difficulties and gaps to one where we are trying to find solutions,” Azevedo said.
 
New Proposals
 
This year, members have endeavored to address the lingering Bali Ministerial goals of liberalizing multilateral rules regarding agriculture, non-agricultural market access and services.
 
Through an intensive consultation process members have begun negotiating terms to improve market access, eliminate export subsidies and reduce trade-distorting domestic support in line with the goals of the group's Doha Development Agenda.
 
The members' near-term goal is to present, by July 31, a detailed work program that ideally leads to the conclusion of the Doha Round.
 
Though the process has been slow, members like Paraguay and Argentina have introduced new proposals that seek to replace some of the negotiating texts from 2008 regarding market access terms.
 
Paraguay, suggested members adopt a series of average tariff cuts for developed and developing nations, with special protections for small and lesser-developed countries. Argentina's proposal would consider offers and requests by individual members instead of a tiered tariff-reduction formula.
 
No Convergence
 
Azevedo acknowledged that the new proposals have not yet produced an accord among members and agriculture continues to be the key area for discussions.
 
“In the three pillars of agriculture the bigger challengers are in domestic support and in market access,” Azevedo said.
 
In a recent document, the G-33's 46 members—which include China, India and Indonesia—rejected Paraguay and Argentina's proposals because they deviate from the text of the December 2008 draft modalities (Rev. 4), which are formulas for reducing trade-distorting measures.
 
G-33 nations said there is potential to improve the Rev. 4 text but reaffirmed their steadfast support for the document as a central component in their effort to improve policies regarding domestic support and market access for agricultural products.
 
Some developed nations—like the U.S.—argue that market realities have dramatically changed since 2008 and the negotiations must take account for the increased impact that developing countries have upon the multilateral trading system.
 
Export Competition
 
One agricultural area where there is greater convergence among members is in the discussions to eliminate export subsidies, Azevedo said. “Members, I think, are less distant from each other on that pillar,” he said.
 
Last month, 16 members of the Cairns Group endorsed a proposal to eliminate export subsidies in line with the 2008 revised draft modalities for agriculture(27 WTO, 2/10/15).
 
The Feb. 6 proposal urged members to adopt the relevant elements of Rev. 4—namely Section III, paragraphs 160-169 and related annexes J, K and L—at the December 2015 Ministerial Conference in Nairobi, Kenya.
 
“The rest will have to follow,” Azevedo said. “It's not an agriculture only round. Goods, services and all the other areas of the Doha negotiations are on the table.”
 
 
OMC: les négociations accélèrent, selon son directeur général 
26 March 2015
 
Genève (awp/ats) - Les négociations à l'OMC dans le cadre du cycle de Doha ont repris de la vitesse, avec plusieurs propositions mises sur la table, a affirmé jeudi son directeur général Roberto Azevedo. Les 160 pays membres doivent s'entendre d'ici le 31 juillet sur un programme de travail.

Le Brésilien a affirmé que l'année 2015 est une année "d'une grande importance" pour le système commercial multilatéral. Les pays membres doivent finaliser le cycle de Doha, lancé en 2001, à l'occasion de la conférence ministérielle prévue mi-décembre à Nairobi (Kenya), a-t-il indiqué.

"Nous avons une grande année devant nous, mais les résultats qui pourront être obtenus restent encore incertains", a-t-il dit à la presse en faisant un tour d'horizon des travaux de l'OMC.

"En ce moment, les négociations sont en train de changer de vitesse de façon très claire. Un certain nombre de délégations explorent de nouvelles approches, et l'on est passé de la phase d'identification des problèmes à celle de la recherche de solutions", a déclaré le patron de l'Organisation mondiale du commerce (OMC).

Il a précisé qu'il n'y a pas encore de convergence. Sur le dossier agricole, le plus important, les questions des subventions et de l'accès au marché restent les plus difficiles, alors que moins de divergences existent sur le dossier de la concurrence aux exportations.

ACCORD À RATIFIER

Les membres doivent aussi ratifier cette année l'accord sur la facilitation des échanges, adopté à la conférence de Bali en décembre 2013. Les procédures législatives prennent du temps, a expliqué M. Azevedo.

Jusqu'ici seulement quatre pays ont ratifié l'accord, mais il pourrait entrer en vigueur à la faveur de la conférence de Nairobi. La ratification par les deux tiers des pays est nécessaire.

M. Azevedo a rappelé aussi que les membres doivent négocier d'ici le mois de décembre une solution permanente sur la sécurité alimentaire, selon le compromis convenu l'an dernier entre l'Inde et les Etats-Unis. En outre, ils doivent conclure les négociations séparées sur l'extension de l'accord sur les technologies de l'information.

TENDANCE À LA BAISSE

Interrogé sur l'évolution du commerce mondial, Roberto Azevedo a affirmé qu'il dépend de la croissance économique mondiale et que celle-ci reste "léthargique". L'OMC avait révisé ses prévisions à la baisse l'an dernier, et "la tendance reste la même", a affirmé M. Azevedo.

La croissance en Europe reste très faible, alors que ce continent représente le tiers du commerce mondial. Celle de la Chine est la plus faible en 25 ans et cette tendance pourrait durer, a indiqué M. Azevedo. L'OMC doit publier le 14 avril sa nouvelle estimation.

Le directeur général a aussi relevé le "succès" du système de règlement des différends, depuis la création de l'OMC il y a 20 ans. Près de 500 différends ont été portés devant les arbitres de l'OMC.

"En raison même de ce succès, le système est engorgé et les dossiers sont traités avec retard", a reconnu M. Azevedo. Non seulement le nombre de différends, mais aussi leur complexité nuisent à l'efficacité du système. L'OMC a engagé huit juristes supplémentaires.

FRANC FORT: IMPACT NEUTRE

M. Azevedo a précisé que l'organisation n'est pas directement touchée par le franc fort, car son budget est en francs suisses. "L'impact est neutre pour nous", a-t-il dit. Par contre, la contribution des gouvernements en monnaies étrangères doit augmenter pour compenser la différence de cours.

Enfin, M. Azevedo a annoncé qu'un événement spécial aura lieu le 14 juin à l'occasion du 20e anniversaire de l'organisation pour dire "Merci à Genève". Une journée portes ouvertes sera organisée, avec des débats et des expositions.

 
NZ ambassador hauled before Brazilian foreign minister 
STACEY KIRK
Stuff
Last updated 17:41, March 27 2015
 
The Brazil Government has called for an explanation, over revelations New Zealand's GCSB snooped on its diplomat who was competing with Trade Minister Tim Groser for the top job at the World Trade Organisation in 2013.
 
New Zealand's ambassador to Brazil, Caroline Bilkey, has been called upon to explain leaked documents showing New Zealand's Government Communications Security Bureau (GCSB) spied on rival candidates for the top job at the World Trade Organisation (WTO). 
 
United States-based website The Intercept released explosive documents on March 24, alleging the GCSB used its specialist spyware to snoop on Trade Minister Tim Groser's rivals for a job as the WTO director-general.
 
Documents obtained by The Intercept show that, leading up to the May 2013 appointment, the GCSB set up a programme to snoop on emails about the other candidates from Brazil, Costa Rica, Ghana, Indonesia, Jordan, Kenya, Mexico and South Korea.
In what it labelled the "WTO project", the GCSB looked for emails referring to Groser, the WTO, and the surnames of other candidates. It targeted the Indonesian candidate in particular.
 
The claims are the latest in a series based on documents obtained by former National Security Agency (NSA) contractor Edward Snowden. 
 
Brazilian diplomat Roberto Azevedo was the successful candidate for the role and still sits at the head of the WTO, while Groser's bid was seen as a long shot.
 
He failed to make the final cut but the Government poured its resources behind him in an effort to secure international backing for his candidacy.
 
On Thursday, the Brazilian Department for External Relation confirmed New Zealand Ambassador Caroline Bilkey was hauled in by their Secretary-General of Foreign Affairs for a "please explain". 
 
"The Brazilian Government has learned with surprise of media reports indicating that electronic mail on the candidacy of Ambassador Roberto Carvalho de Azevedo for the post of Director General of the World Trade Organization (WTO) have been the subject of a violation by the Government New Zealand.
 
"The Brazilian government expressed its determination to see the issue more fully worked out within the framework of the friendship that has always existed in relations between the two countries," the department said in a translated statement. 
 
"Ambassador of New Zealand yesterday called the Foreign Ministry by the Secretary General of Foreign Affairs, with the expectation that the New Zealand Government to provide the necessary explanations on the subject."
 
Foreign Affairs Minister Murray McCully confirmed the meeting had taken place. In a statement, he said: "We can confirm that MFAT officials in Brazil have discussed the matters raised in media reporting with their counterparts.
 
"If foreign governments want to raise issues about the assumptions being made by journalists we will respond. We will do this in private rather than through the news media."
 
Meanwhile, Fiji has also taken action in relation to separate revelations New Zealand had spied on it and other countries in the Pacific.
 
The Fiji Times reported defence minister Timoci Natuva said the government would invest in extensive security measures to make its communication networks more secure.
 
Those allegations, also made in documents released by The Intercept, are now the subject of an inquiry by the spying watchdog, Inspector-General for Intelligence and Security Cheryl Gwyn. Natuva reportedly said the government would not write to New Zealand over the allegations.  Stuff
 
 
U.S. questions China at WTO on banking technology restrictions 
By Tom Miles

GENEVA, March 26 (Reuters) - The United States is concerned about China's restrictions on the use of foreign information technology equipment by the banking sector, according to a filing published by the World Trade Organization on Thursday.

U.S. business groups have already complained about the new rules, which China announced in December, and senior officials including Secretary of State John Kerry have written to their Chinese counterparts about them.

Japan and the European Union have echoed U.S. concerns about the regulations, which China says aim to promote cybersecurity.

By bringing up the issue at the WTO, where member countries can legally challenge foreign laws that affect trade, the United States has put pressure on China to explain how the regulations - which aim to promote "secure and controllable" banking technology - comply with global trade rules.

"Could China explain what 'controllable' means?," the U.S. filing asked. "Do the guidelines apply to foreign-owned banks operating in China?"

Although it did not question China's right to improve cybersecurity, it said the definition of "secure and controllable" would severely limit access to the commercial banking sector for many foreign products and services and dictate the business decisions of financial institutions.

That raised the question of compliance with WTO rules, which bar countries from favouring domestic producers over competitors abroad, the United States said.

The regulations specify that all new computer servers, desktop computers and laptop computers and 50 percent of new tablets and smartphones bought by the banking industry must meet "security and controllability" requirements, it said.

The new regulations represent one of China's most significant steps toward banishing foreign technology, 18 months after former National Security Agency contractor Edward Snowden disclosed that U.S. spy agencies planted code in American tech exports to snoop on overseas targets.

The rules also aim to encourage "indigenous innovation", but "the requirement for a product to be 'indigenous' would allow for little involvement by foreign companies," the filing said.

Among the U.S. questions for China was a request to explain the meaning of "indigenous" software - whether the code had to be mainly written by Chinese nationals or on Chinese territory or copyrighted in China - and why indigenous software was favoured over non-indigenous.

"Does China exclude the possibility that foreign-developed technology may provide a better security solution than a technology developed indigenously?," it asked. (Reporting by Tom Miles; Editing by Alison Williams/Ruth Pitchford) 
 
 
WTO Decision in U.S.-India Solar Dispute Expected in Late August
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, March 27, 2015
 
March 26 — A World Trade Organization panel said it will determine, by “late August,” whether India's solar energy program violated international trade rules.
 
Participants had expected the WTO to reach a conclusion in the case, which centers on U.S. claims that India's domestic sourcing requirements are discriminatory, before the end of March.
 
On March 26, the Dispute Settlement Body (DSB) said it would not issue its final report within the six-month timeframe required by the WTO Understanding on Rules and Procedures Governing the Settlement of Disputes.
 
The delay is due, in part, to a backlog created by the increased frequency of complex disputes being considered by the DSB. Though the DSB hired eight new dispute attorneys this week, WTO Director-General Roberto Azevedo told reporters that the “resources of the secretariat are being stretched to the limit.”
 
Systemic Delays
 
The panel was established on May 23, 2014, after the U.S. claimed India's Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission unfairly discriminated against imported solar cells and modules in favor of domestic products (102 WTO, 5/28/14). The WTO named three mediators in the case on Sept. 29, 2014.
 
The U.S. claimed that India's domestic sourcing rules were inconsistent with India's obligations under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the Agreement on Trade-Related Investment Measures, and the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures.
 
The U.S. solar industry has urged the U.S. to dispute India's requirements, although some environmental groups—like the Sierra Club and Greenpeace—say a prolonged disagreement could hinder solar deployment.
 
 
U.S. groups don't want trade war with Canada; Ottawa could impose tariffs on American oranges, wines, candy
ALEXANDER PANETTA 
The Canadian Press
26 March 2015
Montreal Gazette
 
Business interests are pleading with the U.S. Congress to avert a trade war with Canada that could squeeze Florida orangegrowers, put a cork in California wine exports and sour the sales of American chocolate.

Several groups Wednesday asked lawmakers to undo legislation that's caused trade tensions with U.S. neighbours, prompting Canada and Mexico to threaten widespread retaliation.

They urged a House of Representatives Committee to change the country-of-origin meat-labelling rules before it causes blowback for all sorts of American industries.

"This is a dark cloud that is forming over U.S. exporters," said Christopher Wenk of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.

"This is a very urgent topic." Canada has already listed a series of products that could be slapped with tariffs, should it and Mexico follow up their recent successes at the World Trade Organization with a win in the final round.

But proponents of U.S. countryof-origin rules say consumers deserve to know where their meat comes from. Those mandatory U.S. labels explain where livestock was born, raised and slaughtered.

Opponents say those labels do nothing to affect safety standards, cause headaches for businesses during processing, and amount to a protectionist measure that has slashed Canadian meat exports to the U.S. by half.

The Canadian government has expressed optimism that there might be more sympathy for its position in the new, Republican-dominated Congress - even though the issue doesn't fall neatly along partisan lines.

It certainly sounded Canadaand-Mexico-friendly on Wednesday. The politicians who spoke at the House agriculture committee hearing, as well as the people invited to testify, almost all supported repealing the law.

"Clearly there's no upside to this (rule)," said Republican Vicky Hartzler of Missouri.

"It's not good for America, it's not good for the producers, the processors, and it's not good for the mom that goes to the grocery store that has to pay more for products. So we really do need repealing."

Linda Dempsey of the National Manufacturers Association warned: "Time is running out. It is imperative that Congress act quickly."

The vice-president of California's Wine Institute, Tom LaFaille, warned that producers lost 50 per cent of their exports to Mexico a decade ago because of retaliatory measures and it took years to rebuild. LaFaille said he doesn't want a repeat. Wine is on Canada's lengthy hit list for possible tariffs.

Congressman Ted Yoho of Florida expressed fear for his state: "Canada is Florida's largest trading partner also - it would be tough for us. We ship a lot of citrus up there."

American candy-makers aren't too sweet on a trade war, either. Alison Bodor, the vice-president of their lobby group, the National Confectioners Association, noted that Canada's published list of potential tariffs includes different types of chocolate and sugar-free sweeteners.

"Many American-made chocolates will disappear from Canadian shelves," she said. "That loss of business will impact U.S. confectionary companies, their workers, and importantly also their communities." A rare voice in support of national meat-labelling Wednesday was the National Farmers Union. While several big livestock associations oppose the existing law, the NFU isn't one of them.

The group's president, Roger Johnson, urged lawmakers to be patient. He said they should wait to see the final WTO ruling, expected soon, before taking any drastic measures.

He said about 70 other countries have meat-labelling requirements. Also, in the latest rounds at the WTO, he said the body's decisions against the U.S. have become increasingly narrow in scope.

He said the trade body has never ruled against the principle of country-of-origin labelling - only the way the law has been applied - and he suggested the U.S. still had a chance of winning the final round.

 
Japan Again Asks S. Korea to Lift Import Ban on Fishery Products 
 
London, March 26 (Jiji Press)--Japan on Thursday reiterated its call for an early removal of South Korea's import ban on fishery products from Fukushima and seven other prefectures that was introduced following Japan's worst nuclear accident.

Tokyo made the request at a meeting of a World Trade Organization panel on food safety, held at the WTO's headquarters in Geneva.

South Korea introduced the ban in September 2013 following massive leaks of radiation-tainted water from Tokyo Electric Power Co.'s <9501> Fukushima No. 1 nuclear power plant in northeastern Japan, which was knocked out by the March 2011 earthquake and tsunami.

The seven other Japanese prefectures are Aomori, Iwate, Miyagi, Ibaraki, Tochigi, Gunma and Chiba.

At the panel meeting, Japanese officials argued that the South Korean ban is not based on scientific grounds.

This time, the Japanese side sought an early lifting of the ban especially because farmed sea squirts are set to be shipped from areas hit by the disaster this summer for the first time since the quake and tsunami. Sea squirts are a popular food item in South Korea.

In response to Japan's repeated requests, the South Korean government started last September a study on whether to remove the ban. But it is unclear how the country is conducting the review and when it will draw a conclusion.

Japan has urged South Korea to clarify the review process and make an objective decision.

 
U.S. Sees 'Pervasive' Circumvention Of AD Duties, Seeks WTO Discussion
Inside U.S. Trade - 03/27/2015
Five years after Sen. Ron Wyden (D-OR) flagged the problem, the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative (USTR) is seeking a discussion in the World Trade Organization on the increased proliferation of services offering importers and exporters help in evading antidumping (AD) duties.
 
"Such evasions of the applications of antidumping duties undermine the effectiveness of the [Antidumping Agreement] and erode confidence in the rules-based multilateral trading system," the U.S. said in a two-page paper dated March 17 that outlined the problem in general terms.
 
According to the paper, the U.S. is seeking to notify members of the Informal Group on Anti-Circumvention of the growing problem of AD evasion, particularly through such evasion services. It notes that it also wants to obtain information on how the other members counter or eliminate such efforts.
 
The paper does not identify which countries engage in such evasion of orders, but does refer to the 2010 staff report prepared for Wyden, which cites numerous examples of evasion offers related to products from China.
 
The staff report said a Wyden aide set up a fictitious company profile on China's largest business-to-business e-commerce website, Alibaba.com, in order to find companies willing to evade AD/CVD orders. Over a two-week period, the aide -- purporting to be a purchasing manager -- contacted roughly 120 companies, and got 47 responses, 10 of them written offers to evade duties on five different Chinese products subject to AD/CVD orders.
 
A trade lawyer involved in anti-circumvention issues for petitioners also said this week that the problem is largely a Chinese one.
 
The Informal Group on Anti-Circumvention is solely a discussion forum, which is limited in its power to making recommendations to the Committee on Antidumping Practices, according to the WTO. It generally meets the same day as the formal committee, whose next meeting is scheduled for April 29.
 
So few participants raise issues in the group that Brazil in October last year proposed that the group not reconvene until members do so. Brazil's idea, however, was dismissed.
 
The last paper the U.S. submitted on circumvention to the group was on Oct. 17, 2003, and was more lengthy and detailed than the March 17 paper.
 
Specifically, the older paper drove home the need to carefully examine circumvention claims to ensure they really involve "minor" alterations in a product under AD order to avoid such duties. It provided a case study involving identical modifications by Japanese and Canadian producers to carbon steel, which was subject to a trade remedy order. But upon closer examination, Commerce found that Canada was engaging in circumvention in this case, while Japan was not because it made the alterations to affect the product's characteristics.
 
The only other papers submitted in recent years were two from New Zealand in 2004 and 2007 respectively, according to the WTO.
 
One labor source placed the new anti-circumvention paper firmly in the context of an administration campaign to show enforcement efforts in the run-up to a potential vote on a bill to renew Trade Promotion Authority (TPA), also known as fast track.
 
"This is all about fast track," the labor source said, who was critical of proponent claims that TPA will pave the way for job-creating trade deals. "The only way that fast track creates jobs is in getting the administration to initiate enforcement actions."
 
The source noted that the WTO paper seems to be aimed at industrial products, while last week's USTR request for a WTO panel on Argentina's import licensing scheme is focused on U.S. agriculture exports. He anticipated that USTR would make several more enforcement efforts involving industrial sectors in the near future.
 
According to the U.S. paper, the problem of circumvention has "become more pervasive and the parties have become more brazen in their activities," but it fails to provide any numbers or any details specifying how this is the case.
 
"Accordingly, the United States believes it warrants a more detailed discussion in this Group," according to the paper.
 
The paper only offers one example for such an evasion scheme, which it says involves shipping goods under AD orders from one country to another, reloading them and providing papers claiming that intermediary country as the export nation.
 
The services provided include manipulating and creating new invoicing, packaging lists, and other related documentation to disguise the actual country of origin, the U.S. said.
 
Typically, there are no other services provided that would constitute substantial transformation of the good in question, adding significant value or any other activities that would confer origin to a new country, the U.S. paper says.
 
 
EU to end milk quota on March 31 
 
BRUSSELS, March 26 (Xinhua) -- The European Union (EU) said on Thursday its milk quota regime will come to an end on March 31, a move aiming to increase the market-orientation of the dairy sector and boost exports of dairy products.

The EU milk quota regime was first introduced in 1984 at a time when EU production far outstripped demand. The quota regime was one of the tools introduced for overcoming these structural surpluses.

"The situation today is completely different to that in 1984 with this more market oriented sector. You will recall that those were the days of butter mountains and milk lakes," said Phil Hogan, the EU commissioner for Agriculture and Rural Development.

The decision to end the quota regime was made in order to provide EU producers with more flexibility to respond to growing demand, especially on the world market. Even with quotas, EU dairy exports have increased by 45 percent in volume and 95 percent in value in the last 5 years.

"We are now more competitive in world market prices. Intervention prices are set at a level that does not encourage surplus milk production and we are able to export 11 percent of our milk production without any kind of subsidies at all," Hogan said.

Market projections indicate that the prospects for further growth remain strong - in particular for added-value products, such as cheese, but also for ingredients used in nutritional, sports and dietary products.

Hogan added that the EU will introduce new market mechanisms to prevent any disorder in the dairy sector after abolishing the quotas. For example, the European Investment Bank will assist member states to restructure the dairy industry with a new financial instrument.

 
USDA says a quarter of farmers yet to select subsidies 
By Christine Stebbins 
 
CHICAGO, March 26 (Reuters) - About 25 percent of U.S. farmers have yet to make their final selections for the government's new crop subsidies with the deadline to enroll less than a week away, the U.S. Department of Agriculture said on Thursday.

Grain farmers have until next Tuesday to choose between the federal government's new subsidy programs created under the 2014 Farm Bill - agricultural risk coverage (ARC), which is a price-average option, and price lose coverage (PLC), which is a fixed-price program.

By Tuesday farmers also must update their crop acreage and yield history, data that will be used to determine farmers' subsidies over the life of the five-year federal law.

Responding to a Reuters inquiry, the USDA said in a statement that 94 percent of grain farmers had updated their crop history as of March 19, but only 77 percent had elected either ARC or PLC to complete their five-year eligibility for payments.

"We do not yet have a breakdown of how many have chosen ARC and how many PLC," USDA spokesman Cullen Schwarz added.

University economists who have been teaching farmers about the complicated new programs say ARC is a big favorite among corn and soybean farmers while PLC will likely be more popular with crops like wheat, sorghum, barley, rice and peanuts.

Covered commodities include barley, canola, chickpeas, corn, crambe, flaxseed, sorghum, lentils, mustard seed, oats, peanuts, dry peas, rapeseed, rice, safflower seed, sesame, soybeans, sunflower seed and wheat. Upland cotton is no longer a covered commodity.

Late last month the USDA extended the deadline for farmers to update their farm history from Feb. 27 to March 31, matching the time to enroll in a specific subsidy program.

"No announcement yet on whether there will be an extension," Schwarz said. (Reporting by Christine Stebbins; Editing by Alan Crosby) 
 
 
Imported rice volume in FY 2014 to fall to lowest in nearly 20 years 
Kyodo News
 
TOKYO, March 26 -- The amount of rice imported into Japan in the current business year under exceptional tariff-free quotas is set to drop to the lowest in nearly 20 years, farm ministry officials said Thursday.

The volume in fiscal 2014 that ends Tuesday will be the lowest since fiscal 1995 when so-called "minimum access" quotas were introduced due to falling prices of domestically produced rice.

The average price of domestically produced rice in January stood at 12,078 yen per 60 kilograms, down 17 percent from a year earlier.

Under the ongoing Trans-Pacific Partnership free trade talks, the Japanese government has proposed a plan to further increase annual rice imports from the United States by some 50,000 tons without tariffs, in exchange for retaining its current 778 percent tariffs on rice.

Japan wants to retain tariffs on rice -- a staple food in Japan and one of the country's main farm products -- under the TPP deal to protect domestic farmers.

But the drop in rice imports suggests demand for overseas rice may not increase even if tariffs are abolished.

"The farm ministry is trying to increase imports as it is obsessed with keeping tariffs, which will result in lowering Japan's food self-sufficiency," said Kazuhito Yamashita, a senior fellow at the Canon Institute for Global Studies.

Under the minimum access quotas, Japan needs to import as much as 770,000 tons of rice annually, a deal which the country agreed on in the Uruguay Round of global trade talks in exchange for rice tariffication.

While most rice imported under the quotas is used for processed products such as rice crackers as well as livestock feed, 100,000 tons are imported for the staple. But bids were made only for 11,600 tons in fiscal 2014. In such a case, the rest is imported for processed products.
 
 
U.S. hopes to wrap up Pacific trade deal, fast-track soon 
 
WASHINGTON, March 26 (Reuters) - U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman said on Thursday a Pacific trade agreement can be wrapped up in months and urged lawmakers to quickly move ahead with key trade legislation.

Froman said although there was no firm deadline to conclude the 12-nation Trans-Pacific Partnership, "we do feel that we can close this out in a very small number of months."

Some countries are demanding Congress approve legislation to streamline the passage of trade deals before closing the TPP, sources close to the negotiations told Reuters.

But Republicans and Democrats are still negotiating the final form of the bill, which would allow lawmakers to set negotiating objectives in exchange for a yes-or-no vote, with no deal expected until next month.

"We are encouraging Democrats and Republicans to work together to reach agreement on a bill that can get bipartisan support and to move that ahead in parallel as soon as possible," Froman said at the National Council of Textile Organizations' annual conference.

The timing of the two is tricky. Many Republicans want fast-track legislation done before TPP and some warn they will not support the TPP if so-called trade promotion authority is not in place before a deal is reached.

But some Democrats - including the party's senior member on the House of Representatives' committee responsible for trade, Sander Levin - want to focus on the content of the TPP and insist getting the deal right must take priority.
 
 
SNB warns of ‘difficult times’ as currency move hits home
Laura Noonan in Zurich 
Financial Times
March 26, 2015 8:04 pm
 
Switzerland is facing “difficult times” and a short period of deflation following January’s abrupt unwinding of a currency peg, one of the Swiss National Bank’s most senior policy makers said on Thursday night. 
 
The comments from Fritz Zurbrugg, one of three permanent members of the SNB’s governing board, show the impact of the January 15 currency move on an economy often regarded as a safe harbour during the eurozone crisis. 
The Swiss franc has shot up in value since the removal of the peg that capped it at SFr1.20 per euro, making Swiss exports and Swiss holidays more expensive. A euro is now worth SFr1.05. 
 
“This year, the stronger Swiss franc will have a noticeable damping effect on economic activity in Switzerland,” Mr Zurbrugg said in Zurich. “CPI [consumer price index] inflation will decline well into negative territory.”

Switzerland’s stock market — home to global groups such as UBS, Credit Suisse, Novartis and Zurich Insurance — fell sharply in the days after the SNB’s announcement but has largely rebounded. 
 
In an effort to ward off the danger of deflation in the 18-country eurozone, the European Central Bank has launched a €1.1tn quantitative easing programme in which it will, in effect, print money. 
 
Mr Zurbrugg said that the fall in prices that Switzerland faces is “temporary” and would not threaten price stability in the medium term. “A damaging deflationary spiral is not expected.”

Swiss inflation is already in negative territory, with prices falling 0.8 per cent in February — worse than the 0.3 per cent fall in prices across the eurozone in the month. 
 
The SNB complemented January’s currency move by reducing deposit interest to -0.75 per cent in an effort to prevent a wave of cash flowing into Switzerland in anticipation of the Swiss franc’s rise in value. 
 
“The introduction of negative interest is already having the desired effect,” said Mr Zurbrugg, pointing to falling interest rates across the board.

“It is important that the negative interest rate be allowed to take effect and help to bring about a weakening of the Swiss franc,” he said. “Efforts to circumvent negative interest rates by obtaining exemptions or shifting to cash are not in the interests of Switzerland as a whole in the current climate.” 
 
Speaking at the same event, Dewet Moser, an alternate member of the SNB’s governing council, said the central bank had more tools it could use to make sure it achieved its policy objectives. 
 
“If required, the SNB will continue to deploy unconventional methods for monetary policy implementation,” he said. “Equally, it will continue to take account of the exchange rate situation and, if necessary, will intervene in the foreign exchange market.” END