Headlines: 
S. Korea's exports to Europe may fall 5.8 pct on 'Grexit'
US urged to sweeten deal on sugar access
Vietnam to gain from regional FTAs
Fashion as a sustainable trade will help people out of poverty - ITC
Unions wary of TISA secrecy
In My View; Consumers want better food labeling
Obama free trade isn't so free for US; Commentary
The price of stability; Canada's supply-managed dairy industry protected, but at a cost
 
S. Korea's exports to Europe may fall 5.8 pct on 'Grexit'
12 July 2015
Yonhap English News
SEOUL, July 12 (Yonhap) -- South Korea is expected to suffer a 5.8 percent drop in its exports to Europe from the economic impact of Greece's possible exit from the eurozone, or the "Grexit," a trade agency said Sunday, although the consequences will not be as serious as the eurozone crisis in 2010.
"If the Grexit happens, the eurozone's economy growth will fall 1 percentage point and the South Korean won will add 13.6 percent against the euro. This will lead to a 5.8 percent drop in exports," said Korea International Trade Association (KITA).
KITA said by segment, ships, automobiles, displays and mobile devices, will be major losers if the Grexit happens.
"South Korean exporters must utilize the free trade agreement with the European Union and diversify its exports by tapping into new markets," KITA added. "The government should continue monitoring the foreign exchange markets at home and abroad."
The EU took up 9 percent of South Korea's exports in 2014, although Greece accounted for 0.2 percent.
The KITA, however, said the consequences of the Grexit will not be as serious as previous eurozone crisis, as the European Central Bank's market stimulus efforts that began in March are expected to limit the damage spreading across the eurozone.
 
US urged to sweeten deal on sugar access
SID MAHER NATIONAL AFFAIRS EDITOR 
11 July 2015
The Australian
Negotiations on additional access for Australian sugar exporters to US markets under the Trans-­Pacific Partnership trade agreement look set to go down to the wire, with Australia pushing the Obama administration for a “commercially meaningful’’ deal.
US Trade Representative ­Michael Froman last week signalled that the Obama administration was willing to give countries participating in the TPP additional access to the US sugar market as long as that access did not undermine local producers.
A significant opening of the American sugar market would represent a breakthrough in TPP negotiations as trade ministers from the 12 nations involved get set for what could be a final round of talks, from July 28 to 31.
The meeting follows last month’s granting of fast-track authority to US President Barack Obama by the US congress.
The TPP negotiations take in advanced countries, including Japan, the US, Canada, Singapore and New Zealand, as well as emerging countries, including Malaysia, Vietnam, Mexico and Peru.
Trade Minister Andrew Robb told The Weekend Australian “we shouldn’t be reading too much into Mr Froman’s comments’’.
Mr Robb said he had yet to see any genuine offer on sugar from the US. Sugar is set to be a major sticking point for Australia across the TPP, with Mr Robb also understood to be pushing for gains in several other markets.
Queensland Nationals MPs have said they will not support a TPP that does not include significant additional access to inter­national sugar markets. Nationals senator Matthew Canavan said he wanted to see a world sugar trade “on a platform that is fairer for sugar producers and sugar consumers’’.
Mr Robb said: “Right from day one, I have indicated that as far as the US is concerned, sugar is one of our principle asks. That message has been repeated for nearly two years now, but no genuine offer has yet been received. It’s positive to see Mr Froman’s comments, but they could still be consistent with a small offer. We are looking for a significant and commercially meaningful offer, not a token offer.” Insidetrade.com quoted Mr Froman as signalling the US was willing to grant additional access to US sugar markets. “We’re talking to all the parties and sugar is obviously an area of great sensitivity to our market here,” he said when asked whether the US was willing to provide Australia with improved access under the TPP.The Obama administration is facing internal pressure from a coalition of sugar users, including national organisations representing bakers and snack-food ­makers to allow “commercially meaningful” access to the US sugar market. The groups argue this would reduce prices for US consumers.
 
Vietnam to gain from regional FTAs
12 July 2015
PNA (Philippines News Agency)
HO CHI MINH CITY, July 12 -- Vietnam would gain substantially from the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP), which is still under negotiation, according to a workshop held held in Ho Chi Minh City yesterday.
Pham Binh An, director of the HCM City WTO Affairs Consultation Center, said that 10 ASEAN countries and six countries with which ASEAN has existing free trade agreements (Japan, Korea, Australia, New Zealand, India and China) are negotiating the content of the RCEP, which may be finalized by the end of this year.
RCEP would create the world's largest trading bloc, he said.
It would be a comprehensive, high-quality economic cooperation model and would remove barriers to establish a favorable environment for investment and trade activities in the region, he said.
Unlike the Trans Pacific Partnership (TPP), RCEP focuses primarily on trade, including trade in goods, and trade in services and investment. TPP also includes provisions on public purchases and intellectual property, for example.
The RCEP targets creating a broad and deep engagement with significant improvements over the existing ASEAN+1 FTAs. It also seeks to achieve a modern and comprehensive trade agreement among members.
An said that more trade barriers would fall, helping Vietnam, which has a rather large trade deficit with this region.
Dinh Thu Hang from the Central Institute for Economic Management (CIEM) said, like other FTAs, RCEP would open new opportunities for Vietnam to expand export markets via tariff reductions, import input materials, and machinery and equipment at cheaper costs.
Vietnamese firms would be able to participate in the region's value and production chains and exchange technical expertise with other countries.
However, competitive pressure from countries that have similar export structures to Vietnam will pose challenges to companies, as Vietnam still mainly exports raw products at a low processing rate.
An increase in non-trade barriers with partner countries had caused difficulties for local exporters, she said.
Vo Tri Thanh, deputy director of the CIEM, said overall, the country would enjoy more benefits than losses, noting that the level of benefits also depend on commitments under the free trade agreement.
As the FTA is still under negotiation, there is still no information about how the 16 parties of RCEP would open their markets.
He suggested that businesses kept up to date about FTAs so they could capitalize on new opportunities and prepare to cope with challenges.
They should also understand the mechanisms for solving trade disputes to protect their legitimate interests.
Firms must focus on improving competitiveness of their products and be more active in taking part in the region's value chain.
The workshop was organized by the HCM City WTO Affairs Consultation Center, in collaboration with the EU-MUTRAP project and the Central Institute for Economic Management. (PNA/VNS)
 
Fashion as a sustainable trade will help people out of poverty - ITC
12 July 2015
Sunday Tribune (South Africa)
Former cabinet minister Geraldine Fraser-Moleketi should urge aspirant South African couture entrepreneurs to make a beeline for Arancha González when she attends a fashion event at an Addis Ababa international development forum.
The Third International Conference on Financing for Development from July 13 to 16 will pull in heads of state, finance, foreign affairs, development ministers, institutional stakeholders, NGOs and business sector entities.
As the executive director of the International Trade Centre (ITC), González is a crucial global player in channelling development expertise and funding that stimulates global trade. She is an experienced trade negotiator who has worked at the highest level in the World Trade Organisation (WTO) and has a passion about poverty reduction through trade.
The Geneva-based ITC "is a joint agency of the World Trade Organisation and the UN. It has a double affiliation, so it is pretty unique in the world", she said.
The July 13 event will shine the spotlight on fashion as a vehicle for lifting people out of poverty through sustainable trade, an area of small and medium business in which South Africa has recently been showing great potential.
"We are a development partner for small business export success and ITC's goal is to help developing countries and those in transition countries achieve sustainable development through exports," said González.
The event is hosted by the ITC, the African Development Bank (AfDB) and Germany during the International Conference on Financing for Development.
Fraser-Moleketi held different South African cabinet portfolios until 2008 and is now Special Envoy on Gender for AfDB.
She will take the stage with African leaders including foreign and trade ministers from Kenya.
Auret van Heerden, president and founder of Swiss-based Equiception, which works on employment relations and sustainability using mediation and training, will also attend.
González was part of the recent aid for trade conference hosted by the WTO noting that its focus was on making trade happen. She said that the organisation made trade possible. It opened trade opportunities by reducing trade barriers through trade agreements that were important in creating chances for countries to get over those hurdles and take part.
"The ITC is about helping translate trade opportunities into trade realities. It is building a bridge for trade," explained González.
"Our job is to translate trade opportunities created by WTO into poverty reduction and development which is the mandate of the UN, so we are a builder of a bridge using trade as development."
Sometimes the centre would be helping small and medium companies set up strategy plans, aiding them with market intelligence, helping to improve quality of products, branding and marketing and supporting companies get access to credit.
A big area of its mandate was in sub-Saharan Africa and post-conflict economies with donors that were mainly governments, but also companies and it liked to work with the private sector.
"The ITC is an inter-governmental organisation and it is an inter-governmental development agency. We don't |do rules, we don't negotiate treaties."
The ITC helped textile producers and women, and it always started from the market, looking not at what people could do, but who wanted what they could do.
In the fashion industry, said González, "We are helping bring up young African talent. So we not only want to have |the big fashion houses give their designs to women to produce.
"We want to grow local African designs, and designers to be the engine for the fashion industry in Africa."
In the past few years the ITC had run a competition across Africa and taken its top fashion designers to Milan and other centres to give them opportunities.
"You can see your fashion designers are taking off in Africa.
"We want to use the market and use the force of trade to generate trade as a long term sustainable response to reducing poverty," said the ITC head, noting that South Africa could play a vital, national, regional and continental role there.
Independent Online
 
Unions wary of TISA secrecy
Jayne Atherton 
12 July 2015
Sunday Star-Times (New Zealand)
TRADE IN services is an important part of the New Zealand economy, making up around two thirds of economic activity and 70 per cent of employment.
Service sector exports from New Zealand added up to $18 billion last year.
It is a significant and growing sector, which will be affected by the long-running and secretive negotiations currently taking place to thrash out a Trade in Services Agreement (TiSA).
Advocates of the new agreement believe changes to how trade takes place internationally will help service providers, by removing some of the barriers to supply chains from New Zealand to international markets through the Internet. It also aims to remove restrictions on the number of branches or locations firms can have, and make it easier for business people to travel to deliver their service. Professional services can indeed be helped by reducing licensing requirements and clunky registration procedures. Businesses will benefit if qualification and registration processes are streamlined and quotas on numbers of foreign staff softened in those countries where protectionism is rife. Currently, representatives from more than 23 countries of the World Trade Organisation, including the European Union, are locked in talks over TiSA. But curiously, given if there are so many supposed benefits to be had, these conversations are taking place behind closed doors, without very much information about how they are progressing and what conclusions and frameworks for the future are being mapped out.
As a result, unions in New Zealand are understandably worried about how this is going to play out in terms of its effects on employees. The suspicion that the focus of the agreement will be to liberalise rules and regulations purely to benefit global corporations at the expense of workers is understandable.
If the global financial crisis has taught us anything, it is that transparency of regulation is essential to engender trust in all business relationships. Without that, TiSA will be problematic to impose.
 
In My View; Consumers want better food labeling
11 July 2015
The State Journal-Register
Your winter coat, your favorite T-shirt, your kitchen appliances and the replacement parts for your car have something in common. Look carefully and you'll find they all sport labels identifying the countries from which they came.
Until 2008, everything was labeled with its country of origin except what many would consider the most important item: food.
Finally, on the heels of several scares related to imported foodstuffs, Congress passed a law known as Country of Origin Labeling, which some refer to as COOL.
This law mandates that muscle cuts of meat, nuts, fruits and vegetables sold at retail must be labeled with the name of the country where they were produced. It's a common-sense law because people like to know where their food originates.
But despite strong consumer support, the U.S. House of Representatives voted to repeal the law. Its fate now rests with the Senate.
COOL had many adversaries, including our chief trade competitors, Canada and Mexico, as well as the deep-pocketed multinational meat industry.
According to a 2013 public opinion poll, the COOL labeling law enjoys over 90-percent support among consumers. I can tell you firsthand as an Illinois farmer that COOL enjoys very strong support in farm country.
Consumers increasingly want to know that the meat they put on their table and feed their children was raised in a humane environment and that the meat went through the strict U.S. inspection process. Also, many consumers like the idea of buying American, which not only supports our own farmers and rural America, but also keeps the money in the United States.
Illinois producers happily embraced COOL because we are among the most productive farmers and ranchers in the world, raising the most affordable and safest products on the market. We're extremely proud to walk into a supermarket and see a meat case full of “Product of the U.S." labels.
If Americans buy American made, then the entire nation benefits. But COOL is not at all a protectionist law or a trade barrier. If a consumer prefers to buy chicken from China or meatballs from Thailand, it's their right to do so. Likewise, if they want to buy vegetables from DeKalb or beef from Peoria, that's also their right. But nobody can make those informed decisions unless the product is labeled with its country of origin.
U.S farmers and ranchers have a world-renowned reputation and a domestic market that holds the future of our family farms, as Americans are overwhelmingly our largest market. And when beef coming in from overseas is found to be tainted in any way, the entire market suffers. But if the product is labeled with its country of origin, consumers can simply avoid purchasing meat from that country.
Unfortunately, COOL was challenged by our chief trade rivals, Canada and Mexico, which have argued that meat labeling places their goods at a competitive disadvantage. Thus, the fate of the law is somewhat unclear.
Thankfully, a bill was introduced in the U.S. Senate that, if enacted, should resolve the dispute at the World Trade Organization. It would make COOL voluntary for beef and pork and should appease the WTO. While Illinois Farmers Union has fought for mandatory labeling for years, this bill would advance the current stalemate and ensure food labeling remains on the books.
For those who want to buy American, or Argentinian, they'll be able to do so. I know the best steaks I've ever eaten come right out of Illinois, and I think American consumers deserve a chance to buy that higher quality product.
Let's stand strong behind the Senate compromise and preserve food labeling for America's consumers.
— Norbert Brauer is president of Illinois Farmers Union. He lives in Altamont in Effingham 
 
Obama free trade isn't so free for US; Commentary
11 July 2015
The Patriot Ledger
The fight for fast track legislation to allow President Obama to negotiate the secretive Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal is over. After pulling out all the stops to push the deal through Congress, the President signed legislation giving him the authority to negotiate the trade agreement and put it before Congress for a straight up-or-down vote with no amendments allowed.
Americans are told that free trade is the best strategy for advancing global economic development, reducing poverty and achieving world peace. There is a lot to be said on behalf of the utopian dreams of free traders if you ladle enough frosting on the cake to compensate for its shortcomings.
But if we want to help the American middle class - the stated goal of virtually every politician - we would pursue different policy priorities.
To say that everyone benefits from free trade is misleading.
Trade creates winners and losers and every American deserves to know the details buried in these deals. The benefits of the North American Free Trade Agreement and other trade deals have not been shared as broadly as promised.
Economists, businessmen and politicians, the most devoted acolytes, say technological advances lead to increased productivity, which means fewer workers are needed to get the job done. Yes, we have substituted capital for labor. But we have also substituted cheap offshore labor for American workers and the result is that Americans are losing jobs, their wages are stagnating and the middle class is coming apart at the seams.
How countries trade and whether they benefit from it are important questions. Starting with Adam Smith, economists have emphasized specialization and exchange as essential to increasing productivity and raising living standards.
The economic argument for free trade relies on the principle of comparative advantage developed by David Riccardo in 1817. His quaint theory, which built on Smith's work, remains the cornerstone of free trade economics. So what in simple terms is comparative advantage? Let's assume that Lady Gaga, the world-famous entertainer, also happens to be a world-class typist. Rather than both entertaining and typing, she should specialize in entertaining, where her comparative advantage is greatest and she could maximize her income. This key insight is still endorsed today by the overwhelming majority of economists.
Americans who lose their jobs are becoming less rich so people in foreign countries can be less poor. In the aggregate, people are better off, but domestic workers bear the cost. It should be clear by now that on the home front, free trade contributes to rising inequality, wage stagnation, and lost jobs.
The gains from trade are often widely dispersed, while the losses are concentrated. The extent to which offshore outsourcing is responsible for some of our current labor market woes has become highly contentious in recent years.
Perhaps it is time to adopt a national strategy that can make the American economy grow fast enough to produce decent jobs for every member of the American family who wants to work. How about if we start by investing in our broken infrastructure so it can generate economic growth instead of hamstringing it, and educating our children so they become world leaders in something besides sports? Then we just might become internationally competitive again, and restore our economy to full employment while we're at it. Joseph M. Giglio is a professor of strategic management at Northeastern University's D'Amore-McKim School of Business.
 
The price of stability; Canada's supply-managed dairy industry protected, but at a cost
Randy Shore 
Vancouver Sun
11 July 2015
David Janssens and his family produce 400,000 litres of organic milk every month at Nicomekl Farm, nestled in the heart of B.C.'s fertile Fraser Valley.
Janssens, his son Nicholas, and five employees care for 450 milking cows, roughly three times the average size of a B.C. dairy herd. The workers are paid between $50,000 and $100,000 a year.
"These are good jobs, if you like being outdoors and you like the animals," he said. "It's a good living and we are proud of that." Janssens took over the farm from his father, converted it to organic production in 2008, and hopes to pass the business on to Nicholas, an agriculture grad from the University of Guelph.
Nicomekl Farm is the very picture of stability, and there is a good reason for that.
Milk is a supply managed commodity in Canada, along with eggs, chicken and turkey. Every month the BC Milk Marketing Board tells farmers like Janssens exactly how much milk to produce, while the board and the Canadian Dairy Commission decide how much he will be paid for his product, based on a survey of production costs, consumer prices and demand projections. Even the costs of shipping milk to processors are pooled among all the farmers, so that milk from Smithers costs exactly the same amount to move to market as milk from a farm across the street from a processing plant.
"It is a bit of a Communist system," laughed Janssens, who is also on the board of directors of the B.C. Dairy Association, which represents producers. Farmers are required to buy or hold quota for "production units," each of which essentially gives them permission to own and milk one cow. It's more complicated than that but when all the math is done, that's how it works out. That system makes dairy farming a very difficult business to enter, and that goes a long way toward explaining why nearly every dairy farm in B.C. is family owned.
Adding a single production unit costs roughly $35,000 at today's market price, so buying quota for even a modest herd quickly runs into millions of dollars. Basically, if you aren't already in the business or inheriting a farm with quota, you aren't getting in without very deep pockets.
That said, dairy is a pretty comfortable business to be in.
With their profit margin assured, farmers can confidently reinvest in infrastructure and arguably produce some of the best milk in the world, according to BCDA spokesman Trevor Hargreaves.
The cost of stability
Canadian milk production has inched upward at less than one per cent annually for the past 20 years, insulated from imports by stiff import tariffs of 200 to 300 per cent on most dairy products. But that stability comes with a cost: Canadian farmers are essentially locked out of the global milk market by our artificially high prices, critics say. By contrast, milk prices in the United States are artificially low because of multi-billion-dollar Farm Bill subsidies that can form up to 40 per cent of farmer income, said Hargreaves. American dairy farmers receive about $4 billion a year in federal assistance, according to the Dairy Farmers of Canada.
Simply dismantling supply management would not have the effect of levelling the playing field, he said.
The pressure to dismantle Canada's supply management systems tends to ebb and flow whenever a new trade agreement is negotiated.
It was a bone of contention during negotiations for the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement (CETA) with the European Union and while supply management survived those talks, the EU did gain greater tariff-free access to Canadian cheese markets. We now allow roughly $1 billion in tariff-free dairy imports, according to government figures.
Pressure for new concessions - and potentially the end of supply management for dairy, eggs and poultry - has intensified in recent months during talks on the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) with the United States, Australia, New Zealand and other Pacific Rim nations.
While Hargreaves insists that the stability of Canada's $16-billion dairy industry is the "envy" of other nations, we are virtually alone in the world in our devotion to Soviet-style market controls.
New Zealand eliminated price supports for dairy in 1984 and now exports more than $10 billion in dairy each year. Australia and the EU have also opted to end milk quotas.
Meanwhile, U.S. President Barack Obama has been granted authority to press the TPP talks to a conclusion and break Canada's resolve once and for all.
Prime Minister Stephen Harper said last week that negotiators are "working to protect our system of supply management" in TPP talks.
Suffice it to say, there is some serious horse-trading going on.
Canada's failure to join TPP would be disastrous for other sectors such as automobile manufacturing, resources and the larger agriculture sector, according to Keith Head, a professor at the University of B.C. Sauder School of Business.
"If we hold out for 'carve-outs' for dairy, we risk losing opportunities abroad for our more competitive agro-forestry-fishing sectors," Head said in an email interview.
The cost of deregulation So, what happens if we dismantle the system and let farmers sell their products at prices set by a global marketplace?
Farmer Janssens fears that many B.C. dairies would fail under the weight of increased freight costs in remote parts of the province.
"We would see a migration of the dairy business to low-cost environments," he said. "I think you'd see a lot of production move to Saskatchewan and the processing would end up there too."
Dairy produces $2.7 billion in economic output in B.C. and supports about 15,500 jobs, about one in five agriculture jobs.
Critics of supply management concede that less-efficient producers will suffer and that a period of "consolidation" will see those farms absorbed by larger operations, leading to greater economies of scale at surviving dairies. The most likely scenario is that weak producers simply shut down and a smaller number of efficient producers expand to pick up the slack. B.C. jobs will be lost - at least in the short term - and slimmer profit margins may affect farmer income and the wages they pay to workers.
That is not to say that supply management has done much to preserve the pastoral family farm: The number of dairies in Canada has declined by more than 90 per cent since the late '60s.
The reward for disruption is access to foreign markets, particularly in China, where demand is expected to continue climbing.
In fact, virtually all the opportunity for growth in the dairy industry is outside Canada,
according to a report co-authored by Richard Barichello, a professor in UBC's faculty of land and food systems.
Global exports of dairy grew seven per cent in each of the three years leading up to the 2014 report for the right-leaning Conference Board of Canada. If Canada is able to capture even a fraction of that market, thousands of jobs could be created. Consumers can expect to pay less for milk, yogurt and cheese in a post-supply management world.
According to figures collected by Barichello and his colleagues, the average Canadian family overpays for dairy to the tune of $276 a year as a result of supply management price fixing.
"A harmonization of Canadian prices with world prices necessary for export trade would result in current excess profits of approximately $2.39 billion transferring from producers to consumers," the authors write. "Low-income Canadians, in particular, would benefit disproportionately from lower prices because a higher portion of their income is allocated to dairy products."
However, Barichello is skeptical that TPP talks will result in significant changes to supply management, nor does he think Canadian producers will be taking the world price for their product any time soon.
"We don't know what the bottom line demand will be from our trading partners," said Barichello. "We don't know what Canada's offer will be, but it could easily be something like (CETA), where they just increased the quota of cheese that can be imported without tariff."
As foreign cheese imports are increased, Canadian cheese production could well be curtailed to ensure that excess supply doesn't push prices down.
"In that case, consumers won't benefit at all," he said.
rshore@vancouversun.coma
Missed opportunity?
Canadian milk production has been growing in small increments since the mid-1970s, under a strict supply management system. Other jurisdictions have dropped price protection for dairy, grown their industry and exploited growing global demand for dairy.
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.