U.S. Launches New Trade Challenge Against China
Q&A: US challenges China export subsidies
China Stands Firm on Latest GPA Offer Amid Calls for Broader Inclusion of SOEs
U.S. Urges Brunei to Pursue Economic Diversification in WTO Trade Policy Review
“ Medium Term Growth and Development Strategy lauded by WTO ”
Vilsack: Congress needs to be ready if U.S. loses COOL appeal
U.S. launches trade probes against China, among others
India mulls export incentives for 1.4 mln T raw sugar - minister
Malaysian biodiesel makers seek to level playing field with Indonesia
Russia has no intention of being isolated, won't allow anyone to do so - Naryshkin
Hurt by Russian embargo, Polish farmers hit roads in protest
Australia Implements TRIPS Agreement, Streamlines IP Arrangements with New Zealand
After G20, U.S. says race to devalue a big mistake
Greece fails to reach bailout deal with Europe
Swiss outline plans to curb immigration from EU
Maid abuse case highlights plight of migrant workers
 
U.S. Launches New Trade Challenge Against China 
11 February 2015
Dow Jones Institutional News
 
WASHINGTON--The U.S. opened a new front in the long-running trade conflict with China, challenging a broad program Beijing uses to subsidize export businesses.

The new challenge at the World Trade Organization is part of the Obama administration's efforts to step up enforcement of existing trade rules as it seeks to win support a new trade agreement that would include Pacific countries.

President Barack Obama last month warned that the new bloc under negotiation, which includes Japan but not China, is important to prevent Beijing from writing the rules of trade in the Pacific area.

Despite the trade challenges, the White House has emphasized that relations with China are complex, and on Tuesday Mr. Obama spoke by telephone with Chinese President Xi Jinping on a range of issues, including climate change and nuclear talks with Iran.

The latest WTO case is similar to a previous challenge of China's subsidies for autos and auto parts. This time, the subsidies come through a system called "demonstration bases," U.S. officials said. California's agricultural trade with China, valued at $1.4 billion, is one of the industries affected by subsidies of Beijing's fruit, vegetable and poultry production, said Rep. Jim Costa in a statement.

"China appears to be giving prohibited export subsidies to companies spanning a diverse group of industries, including textiles, apparel and footwear, advanced materials and metals," Mike Froman, the U.S. trade representative, said Wednesday.

"All of these services, provided free or at a discount, undermine fair competition."

The Chinese embassy in Washington didn't immediately respond to a request to comment.

The demonstration bases are government programs through which local officials offer subsidies to small exporters, according to Chinese government documents. The programs focus on industries including auto parts, technology and agriculture.

China's Ministry of Commerce began fostering the vehicles in 2010 as a way to bolster the country's small exporters, the documents said.

One Beijing city government document said China has 179 such programs that have been recognized by the commerce ministry. The amount of support varies, depending on where the programs are based and the industries they focus on, according to the documents.

In China's eastern Anhui province, for example, the local demonstration base offers subsidies of up to 10% of the cost of an applicant's project, according to a document on the commerce ministry's website. The amount of the subsidy is capped at 1 million yuan (about $160,000,) it said. Beneficiaries included companies that export items including processed meat, fish, tea and honey. Local officials evaluated the companies based on their potential as exporters, certification in their target markets and other criteria.

In eastern Jiangsu province, a demonstration base there was seeking applicants among agricultural companies for a 1 million yuan to 2 million yuan subsidy, according to documents. Recipients included two local seed-exporting companies that received a total of 2.4 million yuan between 2011 and 2013.

The current case is unlikely to gain as much attention as previous high-profile disputes involving specific Chinese industries, but trade experts say the case is representative of the web of difficulties that U.S. companies blame for complicating their operations there.

"This administration has been filing cases for years, particularly against China, in order to demonstrate its enforcement credentials," said Bill Reinsch, president of the National Foreign Trade Council, which represents businesses. "It's a target-rich environment, the main constraints being likelihood of victory and ability to assemble hard evidence from a government that is often less than transparent."

 
Q&A: US challenges China export subsidies 
Aaron Stanley in Washington 
12 February 2015
Financial Times (FT.Com)
 
The latest trade spat between the US and China is over what Washington says are illegal Chinese export subsidies for agriculture, medical goods and other sectors. On Wednesday, the US said it had called for formal talks at the World Trade Organisation over China's use of "demonstration bases" - the first step towards bringing a possible WTO case.

What are "demonstration bases" and why is the US challenging them?

Demonstration bases are clusters of industry in China that, upon meeting certain performance targets, receive discounted goods and services from the government to facilitate exports. US investigators identified 179 such bases across seven different sectors - and probably others - as allegedly receiving the subsidies.

The US asserts that these bases, which received $1bn in government assistance from 2010-2012, are selling their products on the international market to the detriment of US industry. Just 16 out of 40 identified bases that produce textiles combined to export $33.3bn of goods in 2012 alone. That same year, six bases that produce seafood exported $3.6bn - 20 per cent of China's total seafood exports.

How did the US discover this programme?

The US uncovered the network of subsidies during a previous case raised at the WTO regarding unfair auto parts subsidies. The dispute was resolved in the consultations stage, as China removed the programme in question. But in its investigation, the US unearthed what a USTR official claims was a broad "systemic programme of illegal export subsidies" supporting numerous other sectors.

Chinese government opacity made the probe inherently difficult, but after some detective work and poring over more than 5,000 pages of Mandarin-translated documents, US investigators were able to piece together the details.

What are the political effects in the US?

As negotiations for the Trans-Pacific Partnership deal near the home stretch, a serious question mark remains over whether President Obama will be able to round up the votes in Congress. Showing aggression in enforcing existing trade rules and promulgating the argument that trade benefits America as long as all actors play by the rules is a key strategy to winning the votes needed to pass Trade Promotion Authority, which would give Mr Obama the negotiating leverage he needs.

US politicians from both parties have often painted China as a bogeyman to defend domestic industries in key political areas such as the rust belt states of Ohio and Michigan. In 2012, Mr Obama campaigned on a "tough on China" platform, and his administration has raised and won WTO disputes against China on raw materials, rare earth mineral exports, wind power and improperly imposed anti-dumping duties.

Because this case covers a wide swath of industries - including advanced materials, medical products, chemicals and agriculture - it has the potential to win over members of Congress who represent hubs for several sectors. The action also seeks to rally liberal Democrats who oppose Mr Obama's trade agenda as being harmful to American workers. Representative David Price, a North Carolina Democrat who has previously held a neutral posture toward the TPP, said on Wednesday he was inclined to support the deal, believing that its high standards can be enforced.

What happens next?

Under WTO rules, if the dispute is not resolved during a 60 day consultation period, the US can request the establishment of a dispute settlement panel on the grounds that China's actions are inconsistent with its accession protocol to the WTO and the WTO's subsidies agreement. These accords deem certain types of export subsidies to be distorting and illegal.

The panel must issue its recommendation no later than nine months after it is established. The parties must then opt either to accept the decision or seek an appeal. If a country is found to be in violation of WTO rules, it is given a window of time to modify the illegal programme or face potential retaliation.
 
 
China Stands Firm on Latest GPA Offer Amid Calls for Broader Inclusion of SOEs
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, February 12, 2015
 
Feb. 11 — China will not consider the inclusion of any new state-owned enterprises (SOEs) following its latest bid to join the Government Procurement Agreement (GPA), according to discussions held Feb. 11 in Geneva.
 
In December, China offered several improvements in its fifth revised GPA offer, including lowered procurement thresholds and increased entity coverage that includes at least one SOE, the China Post Group (3 WTO, 1/6/15).
 
GPA members like the U.S. and the European Union urged China to expand its list of GPA-compliant state-owned enterprises during a Feb. 11 meeting of the Government Procurement Committee. China refused to expand the scope of coverage and said members should adopt a “practical attitude” to its latest offer.
 
The WTO's Government Procurement Committee concluded without a resolution to the disagreement and will next meet during the first week of June.
 
Ireland's deputy permanent representative John Newham will take over as committee chairman in March following the departure of current chairman, Krzysztof Trepczynski of Poland, who is returning to Warsaw.
 
Billions at Stake
 
GPA members are interested in opening up China's $88 billion annual state procurement marketplace to foreign bidders and have sought concessions in each of China's six GPA proposals over the past seven years.
 
China agreed in 2001 to accede to the GPA, which sets out rules guaranteeing fair conditions of international competition for government procurement contracts.
 
The goal of the GPA is to open up government procurement deals to international trade and competition, while ensuring transparency and a commitment to good governance. The GPA is a plurilateral agreement under the umbrella of the World Trade Organization, meaning that the market access concessions are only granted to suppliers in those countries that have acceded to the agreement.
 
There are 43 parties to the GPA, including: Armenia; Canada; the EU, with its 28 member states; Hong Kong; Iceland; Israel; Japan; Korea; Liechtenstein; the Netherlands with respect to Aruba; Norway; Singapore; Switzerland; Taiwan and the U.S.
 
More to be Done
 
Delegations from Korea, Japan, Norway, Singapore and the U.S. collectively said China's latest offer was an improvement but fell short because of inadequate inclusion of SOEs, among other concerns.
 
The EU said important gaps remain in China's latest offer, including the country's persistent refusal to cover procurement by SOEs, its demand for domestic content requirements and a three-year transition period to phase in the final thresholds.
 
Without substantial improvements to the offer, a broad swath of the Chinese government procurement marketplace would not be covered in the GPA, the Canadian delegation said.
 
China said it was willing to continue the negotiations with respect to domestic content requirements but did not say if it would make a further revised offer. Committee chairman Trepczynski asked China to reconsider its position on the scope of coverage and urged members to proceed in a constructive manner.
 
Ukraine, Moldova Bids Advance
 
GPA members commended the latest bids submitted by Ukraine and Moldova and said they are on track to accede to the agreement as soon as this summer.
 
Ukraine, which submitted its first offer in March 2014, said it would address any remaining concerns about its accession in a yet-to-be circulated third draft offer.
 
The EU, U.S., Canada, Japan and Taiwan hailed Moldova's fourth offer, which was submitted last month and cited few remaining clarifications standing in the way of its accession.
 
Separately, GPA members accepted Pakistan's request to join the negotiations as an observer and hailed Pakistan's commitment to negotiate its accession to the agreement.
 
Pakistan said it would consider procurement legislation in line with the model devised by the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law and said it was determined to undergo necessary reforms to join the agreement.
 
Buy America Concerns
 
Canada again urged the U.S. to curb domestic legislation that requires the purchase of American products in federal, state and municipal procurement deals.
 
Canada cited two specific U.S. initiatives of concern: 
•?U.S. Secretary of Transportation Anthony Foxx's Jan. 28 statement that the administration would seek to strengthen “Buy America” forced localization requirements for programs funded by the Department of Transportation, and

•?the Obama administration's Feb. 2 budget proposal for fiscal year 2015-2016, which indicated its intent to resubmit the GROW America Act to Congress.

Canada asked the U.S. to explain how such policies were consistent with Article XXII:6 of the revised GPA, which states that each party “shall seek to avoid introducing or continuing discriminatory measures that distort open procurement.” The EU, Japan, Israel, Hong Kong, China, Switzerland and Singapore echoed Canada's concerns.
 
The U.S. said it takes its international obligations seriously, including its obligations under Article XXII:6, and ensures all covered procurement complies with its commitments. The U.S. delegation further questioned whether such issues would be better addressed in pending free trade agreements like the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership or the Trans-Pacific Partnership.
 
 
U.S. Urges Brunei to Pursue Economic Diversification in WTO Trade Policy Review
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, February 12, 2015
 
Feb. 11 — Brunei Darussalam must do more to diversify its economy in order to reduce its dependence on oil and gas revenues, said a Feb. 10 statement issued by the U.S. mission to the World Trade Organization.
 
The U.S. would “welcome any updates Brunei can provide on the progress it is making toward economic diversification, and how Brunei expects low oil prices to impact its long-term economic growth and government financing,” said Chris Wilson, the deputy chief of the U.S. Mission to the WTO.
 
Brunei's dependence on oil and gas—which represented 96 percent of its total merchandise exports in 2013—“remains a cause for concern due to fluctuating international energy prices,” said a summary of the WTO's trade policy review.
 
The reduction in oil and gas export revenues in 2013 led Brunei's trade balance surplus to decrease from $7.8 billion in 2008 to $6.9 billion in 2013, the WTO found. The WTO Trade Policy Review Body will complete its review of Brunei Darussalam's trading status on Feb. 12.
 
TPP Participant
 
Despite concerns about Brunei's diversification programs, the U.S. remains “committed to close cooperation with Brunei with the goal of expanding our trade relationship here at the WTO, as well as bilaterally and regionally through [the] Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP),” Wilson said.
 
Brunei is among the dozen countries in the Asia-Pacific region participating in negotiations on the proposed TPP.
 
Two-way trade between the U.S. and Brunei totaled $576 million in 2013, up from $244 million in 2012. U.S. foreign direct investment in Brunei increased to $132 million in 2013, up 14 percent from $116 million in the year prior.
 
Brunei's economy grew at an average annual rate of 0.2 percent between 2008 and 2013, and real GDP growth is expected to be 5.3 percent in 2014, the WTO report said.
 
SOE Influence
 
The U.S. noted that the public sector continues to have a direct influence on Brunei's economy via an assortment of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) in sectors like oil and gas, telecommunications, transportation and energy generation.
 
Though these entities have a “strong trading component to them,” Brunei has not yet notified the WTO Working Party on State Trading Enterprises about its state trading enterprises, the U.S. said.
 
“We look forward to receiving more information about these enterprises from Brunei, as well as an update when Brunei will submit its notification to the WTO,” the U.S. statement said.
 
The U.S. said that it was also interested in knowing whether Brunei would seek membership in the WTO Agreement on Government Procurement.
 
Trade Facilitation, IP Enforcement
 
The U.S. hailed Brunei's submission of a category A notification for the WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement and requested a timeline for Brunei's ratification of the accord.
 
Brunei's e-Customs trade facilitation program, which permits trading partners to submit electronic applications, has been fully operational since 2008, the WTO report said.
 
The U.S. also commended steps Brunei has taken to improve the enforcement of intellectual property rights and has sought further information on any potential changes to Brunei's geographical indication system.
 
Brunei established an intellectual property office, enacted a new patent law in 2011 and acceded to three World Intellectual Property Organization treaties since its last trade policy review.
 
 
“ Medium Term Growth and Development Strategy lauded by WTO ” 
Nation News, February 6, 2015
 
THIS ISLAND’S EFFORTS at repositioning its economy were highlighted last month, when Barbados’ Third World Trade Organisation (WTO) Trade Policy Review was held on January 27 and 29, in Geneva, Switzerland. 
 
The Trade Policy Review is the process, mandated by the WTO, which examines the trade and related policies of all WTO Members. The review is facilitated by a chair and discussant, whose roles are to highlight key points from the review and stimulate discussion.

Minister of Foreign Affairs and Foreign Trade, Senator Maxine McClean, in addressing the forum, explained to the membership that the economic recession, which came about as a result of circumstances beyond Barbados’ control, had a significant impact on the economy.  She highlighted some of the programmes and projects being instituted to reposition the economy, including a comprehensive set of policies to encourage greater use of renewable energy, and the development of energy-efficient projects and programmes to reduce energy costs. 
 
Senator McClean also pointed out that Barbados’ trade policies had sought to bring balance to the economy and encourage the growth of manufacturing and the international business and financial services sectors.

The Discussant for the Review, Ambassador Tan Yee Woan of Singapore, lauded Barbados’ ability to sustain a high quality of well-being despite the grave challenges posed, and noted that Barbados’ Government nurtured a “business-friendly operational environment”.

Twenty-two of the countries present made interventions and contributors to the discussion included Barbados’ main trading partners namely the United States, the European Union, Canada, and China; CARICOM partners, Jamaica and the OECS; as well as India, Nigeria and Costa Rica.

The importance of flexibilities for small, vulnerable economies like Barbados was noted by members, and the country was also lauded for its resilience in the face of the devastating effects of the global recession.

Praise was also given to Barbados for its Medium Term Growth and Development Strategy, 2013–2020.

In the closing session on January 29, Minister McClean expanded on a number of initiatives being pursued by Barbados, including the National Agricultural Health and Food Control Programme; the modernisation of the Customs Department; and public procurement practices and procedures.  Barbados’ active involvement in CARICOM was also highlighted.

In the margins of Barbados’ Trade Policy Review, Minister McClean held bilateral discussions with the Heads of the WTO; the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and the World Intellectual Property Organisation.

Trade policy reviews are undertaken periodically for all WTO Members.  Barbados’ last Trade Policy Review was held in September 2008. 
 
All WTO reports are available at www.wto.org, and Barbados’ reports may also be downloaded from the website of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Foreign Trade at www.foreign.gov.bb. (Ministry of Foreign Affairs & Foreign Trade/BGIS)

 
Vilsack: Congress needs to be ready if U.S. loses COOL appeal
POLITICO
2/11/15 2:41 PM EST
 
Congress needs to be prepared to act to substantially rewrite or completely scrap the country-of-origin labeling law if the U.S. loses its appeal of a November ruling by a World Trade Organization panel that the USDA’s meat labeling regulations in place now treat Canada and Mexico unfairly, Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack said today.
Vilsack told lawmakers during a three-hour House Agriculture Committee hearing that he expects a decision on the appeal this spring and, if the U.S. loses, it will be up to Congress to prevent Canada and Mexico from retaliating with new tariffs on U.S. goods.
“We either win this appeal or Congress has to act,” Vilsack said.
The USDA’s hands are essentially tied now, Vilsack said in response to questions from North Carolina Rep. David Rouzer.
“Congress has said to us, ‘Look, we want a label that identifies U.S. product,’” Vilsack explained. “The problem from the WTO perspective is that once you have that label, then you have to segregate livestock that comes in from different sources. The WTO says, ‘Once you segregate, that’s a problem. It’s an undue burden. You can’t do that’ ... We either have to get rid of the rule or we have to pen the rule to provide a more generic label that gets away from segregation.”
— Bill Tomson
 
 
U.S. launches trade probes against China, among others 
 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 11 (Xinhua) -- The U.S. Commerce Department announced on Wednesday that it had initiated anti-dumping duty (AD) and countervailing duty (CVD) investigations against imports of certain uncoated paper from China, Australia, Brazil, Indonesia and Portugal.

The investigations are in response to a complaint from Domtar Corporation, Finch Paper LLC, Packaging Corporation of America, and P.H. Glatfelter Company which alleged that papers from China, Australia, Brazil Indonesia and Portugal were sold below the fair value of the products in the U.S. market. The company also claimed that exporters from China and Indonesia also received improper government subsidies.

Uncoated paper is typically used for office copy and printer paper, books, business forms, instruction manuals, inserts, flyers, brochures and maps.

The International Trade Commission (ITC), the U.S. trade authority, was scheduled to make its preliminary inquiry determinations on AD and CVD around March 9.

The probes will continue if the ITC determines that the imports of such products materially injure or threaten the domestic industry of the United States. The Commerce Department will then make its preliminary determinations of CVD in April, and AD in June.

Imports of these products from China were estimated at about 32 million U.S. dollars in 2013, according to U.S. official data.

The Chinese Ministry of Commerce has kept urging Washington to abide by its commitment against protectionism and help maintain a free, open and just international trade environment.
 
 
India mulls export incentives for 1.4 mln T raw sugar - minister 
 
NEW DELHI, Feb 11 (Reuters) - India, the world's second biggest sugar producer, is considering giving export incentives for 1.4 million tonnes raw sugar, Food Minister Ram Vilas Paswan said on Wednesday, as mills started distress sale of the sweetener to pay cane farmers.

"The ministry's views is that we should give subsidy for 1.4 million tonnes...the paper has been circulated for a cabinet meeting," Paswan told reporters.

Without any government incentive, Indian sugar is uncompetitive in world markets well supplied by low-cost producers Brazil and Thailand.

Subsidies of 3,300 rupees ($53) a tonne helped exports of raw sugar last year and government sources said last month India was considering a rise in the subsidy to 4,000 rupees this year. ($1 = 62.1250 Indian rupees) (Reporting by Mayank Bhardwaj; Editing by Malini Menon) 
 
 
Malaysian biodiesel makers seek to level playing field with Indonesia 
 
* Industry to discuss incentives with govt on Thursday
* Any financial incentives may drive palm oil prices higher

By Anuradha Raghu and Naveen Thukral

KUALA LUMPUR/SINGAPORE, Feb 11 (Reuters) - Malaysian producers of palm oil-based biodiesel will seek new incentives from their government after Indonesian makers of the biofuel were promised an increase in subsidies to counter the impact of lower energy costs.

Any move by Malaysian authorities to encourage biodiesel consumption could fuel another rally in Bursa palm futures , which jumped 9 percent last week after Jakarta said it would boost subsidies for biodiesel nearly threefold.

Representatives of Malaysia's biodiesel industry will meet the plantation industries and commodities minister Douglas Uggah Embas in Putrajaya on Thursday to discuss what could be done to help the ailing sector.

Biodiesel demand took a hit after crude oil prices tumbled more than 50 percent from a peak in June last year, wiping out profit margins for blending palm oil into diesel.

"We are unlikely to get anything similar to what Indonesians have got because Malaysia is moving away from subsidies," said one industry source who will be part of the delegation meeting the minister, noting that the government had recently removed subsidies on gasoline and diesel.

"The producers are looking for some sort of tax incentives, which would be really helpful," the source said.

The Indonesian government's proposal to ramp up biodiesel subsidies overcame the final parliamentary hurdle on Friday, an Indonesian energy ministry official said, with the increase possibly taking effect next month.

Indonesia is looking to protect its fledgling biofuel industry against lower crude prices and the increase in the subsidies could potentially boost demand for palm oil.

Last year, Malaysia abolished export tariffs on crude palm oil to boost shipments, prompting a similar move by Indonesia. Indonesia and Malaysia, the world's top two producers of palm oil - used largely as a cooking oil - account for 85 percent of global output of the commodity.

Some analysts and industry officials said Malaysia might not act quickly to buttress its bleeding renewable fuel industry.

"Indonesia's policy and its ability to act on biodiesel industry has been much more efficient than Malaysia," said one commodities analyst who declined to be named because he was not authorized to speak to the media.

While implementation of a mandatory 7 percent blend of biodiesel in Malaysian transport diesel faced major delays, for example, Jakarta's energy ministry in 2014 raised the mandate for its transport sector to 10 percent, up from 3-10 percent previously.

"Besides subsidy schemes, government incentive programmes, and the blending mandates, we definitely need more progression," said David Ng of Phillip Futures in Kuala Lumpur.

"B10 is in talks, but implementation is still anybody's guess," he said, referring to a policy that would mandate a 10 percent minimum bio content in diesel. (Editing by Tom Hogue) 
 
 
Russia has no intention of being isolated, won't allow anyone to do so - Naryshkin
 
MOSCOW. Feb 11 (Interfax) - No way will Russia be isolated from the rest of the world, State Duma Chairman Sergei Naryshkin said.

"Let me underline this: Russia cannot imagine itself detached from the global economy and, naturally, it has no intention of isolating itself and will not allow anyone else to do so, no matter how high and mighty their statements and actions may be," Naryshkin said at the State Duma's "Open Rostrum" debate dedicated to the oil price and new opportunities for the Russian economy on Wednesday.

The speaker admitted economic complications caused "by both objective and subjective factors."

"For instance, the governments of a group of Western states which used to defend market economic principles somehow became major violators of those rules and imposed the so-called anti-Russian sanctions which definitely had nothing to do with international laws or the WTO," Naryshkin said.

New approaches, up to "a revision of priorities", are necessary under these circumstances, the politician opined.

"It is as much important to bolster international cooperation, both in the political and economic fields, as to fight for the observation and purity of international laws," Naryshkin stated.

The political and legal system of contemporary democratic Russia, the Russian economic potential and a rather high degree of public cohesion enable the country to withstand any social challenges and "even to turn them into national development stimuli," he said.
 
 
Hurt by Russian embargo, Polish farmers hit roads in protest 
11 February 2015
Agence France Presse
 
Hundreds of Polish farmers on Wednesday tried to block roads with their tractors to the capital Warsaw, demanding government compensation for losses due to a Russian embargo on EU agricultural products.

Imposed in August, the embargo covers imports of meats, fruits and vegetables, fish, and dairy products from Australia, Canada, the European Union, Norway and the United States.

The move came in retaliation over a raft of Western sanctions imposed on Russia following its March 2014 annexation of Ukraine's Crimean peninsula and subsequent meddling in eastern Ukraine.

Poland is asking the EU for around 26 million euros ($29 million) in compensation for the losses its farmers incurred because of the embargo.

Protesting farmers are asking for compensation for depressed diary and pork prices but also for damages caused by wild boar to their crops and livestock.

Before the sanctions, Russia absorbed seven percent of Polish agricultural exports in 2013, with 86 percent going to fellow EU members, notably neighbouring Germany, according to the Polish agriculture ministry.

"I'm here to protest because pork farming has become unprofitable," said a 40-something pig farmer from the central town of Lowicz who refused to reveal his name.

Standing in front of the agriculture ministry, he told AFP that wholesale pork prices have fallen by half to 0.71 euro per kilogramme from 1.42 euros since the Russian embargo came into effect.

Talks between the protesting farmers and the agriculture ministry faltered Wednesday.

The head of the OPZZ farmers union, Slawomir Izdebski, said farmers would again descend on Warsaw next week along with miners who have threatened protests over job cuts.

Polish President Bronislaw Komorowski called the demands for compensation "unrealistic" given that the current EU farm subsidies were negotiated years ago.

"It's obvious that elections are just around the corner," Komorowski said in response to the protest, referring to the May 10 presidential ballot and a parliamentary election this autumn. Komorowski is tipped as a shoo-in for a second term.

 
Australia Implements TRIPS Agreement, Streamlines IP Arrangements with New Zealand
By Murray Griffin
WTO Reporter, February 12, 2015
 
Feb. 11 — The Australian Senate on Feb. 9 passed legislation to implement a WTO intellectual property agreement and streamline arrangements with New Zealand for assessing and issuing patents.
 
The Intellectual Property Laws Amendment Bill passed Feb. 9 with the support of both major parties. The bill would amend the Patents Act of 1990 to implement the WTO Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (the TRIPS Agreement), in line with a commitment made by the Australian government in 2007.
 
Implementation of TRIPS means that Australian laboratories will be able to apply to the Federal Court for a compulsory license to manufacture generic versions of patented medicines and to export them to developing countries to help fight health crises.
 
John Lee, a Sydney-based partner in the law firm of Gilbert & Tobin, told Bloomberg BNA that the legislation would establish a sensible regime for implementing TRIPS that reflected extensive consultation with industry and other experts.
 
“For example, the compulsory licensing regime is going to be administered by the Federal Court rather than the patent office or some government official,” he told Bloomberg BNA by phone Feb. 11.
 
“I think that is a sound regime, the Federal Court is experienced in dealing with intellectual property issues and is obviously quite neutral in its approach,” he said.
 
IP Harmonization With New Zealand
 
The bill also would introduce a single patent application and examination process and joint patent attorney regime for Australia and New Zealand, subject to the passage of similar legislation in New Zealand.
 
Under the single examination model, if separate patent applications for the same invention are filed in both Australia and New Zealand, then both applications can be considered by a single examiner in either country.
 
The regime would take account of the separate national laws and would lead to the granting of separate patents in Australia and New Zealand, but according to Lee that is likely to be only a first step.
 
“I am sure this is part of a process of continuing harmonization in the law, so that at some point in the not too distant future you will have an Australian and New Zealand patent that provides protection across both countries.”
 
The bill comprises five schedules, two of which deal with TRIPS and another with introducing the streamlined arrangements with New Zealand.
 
Another schedule would allow the Federal Circuit Court to hear disputes over alleged infringements of plant breeders' rights, while the fifth contains miscellaneous amendments.
 
 
After G20, U.S. says race to devalue a big mistake 
 
MUMBAI, Feb 12 (Reuters) - The United States will "push back very hard" against countries that target weaker exchange rates to gain an unfair trade advantage, Treasury Secretary Jack Lew said on Thursday, driving home concerns he expressed to the Group of 20 this week.

Speaking in India, Lew said the U.S. economy had turned the corner but the rest of the world needed to do more to revive growth. He urged Europe to make greater use of fiscal policy to reinforce monetary stimulus to boost growth.

Lew's remarks reinforced a message he gave to G20 finance ministers in Istanbul on Tuesday, but stopped short of naming any countries suspected of competitive currency devaluations.

The euro has weakened against the U.S. dollar following the announcement of 1 trillion euros in stimulus measures by the European Central Bank, while China and commodity exporters, such as Australia, have also seen currency weakness of late.

In an interview with NDTV Profit, Lew drew a distinction between policies of quantitative easing, which seek to stimulate credit and growth, and those targeting the exchange rate to gain an "unfair trade advantage".

"We have been clear, that kind of unfair policy is something that we will oppose and we will push back very hard on," Lew told the financial news channel.

"It would be a very big mistake for the world to get into a situation where ... there is kind of a race to devalue."

He said the U.S. economy had "turned a corner", and was showing sustained growth in jobs, wage increases and a recovery in housing and manufacturing.

"What we have now in the U.S. is the kind of recovery that will feed on itself and grow, but we can't look at the U.S. as if it is an island all by itself," said Lew.

"So we are very much concerned that there needs to be more growth in other parts of the global economy as well."

In contrast, Lew said, Europe was reluctant to use fiscal tools to lift growth because some countries did not have room to do so, while the continent faced "real challenges" to stabilise Ukraine and Greece.

"Having deployed the monetary policy tools, I think were Europe to use some of its fiscal space to grow demand, it would actually make monetary policy more effective," said Lew. "It will help to get the economy moving."

Lew spoke in Mumbai, the financial capital, on the first day of a two-day visit to India. He meets Finance Minister Arun Jaitley in New Delhi on Thursday, with a joint news conference to follow. (Reporting by Abhishek Vishnoi; Writing by Douglas Busvine; Editing by Malini Menon and Clarence Fernandez) 
 
 
Greece fails to reach bailout deal with Europe 
Alex PIGMAN 
12 February 2015
Agence France Presse
 
Greece's new prime minister is due to encounter German Chancellor Angela Merkel at his first European summit Thursday, after his anti-austerity government failed to reach a deal with eurozone ministers on renegotiating its huge bailout.

The EU summit is not expected to see direct talks between Alexis Tsipras and Merkel, but Greece will be high on the agenda along with the results of Wednesday's Ukraine peace summit in Minsk, which was still ongoing as dawn broke in the Belarussian capital.

Greek Finance Minister Yaris Varoufakis set out proposals for a new debt programme at an emergency meeting Wednesday with his European counterparts in Brussels, but Jeroen Dijsselbloem, head of the Eurogroup of eurozone ministers, said "not enough progress" was made and a new round of talks would be held.

As Varoufakis made his case during six hours of talks, more than 15,000 people turned out on Athens streets in a display of support for the government's programme, according to police.

Greece's 240 billion euro ($270 billion) EU-IMF bailout is due to expire at the end of February and failure to agree an extension would see Greece default on its giant debts, almost inevitably meaning that it would crash out of the euro.

"We had intense and constructive discussions but there was not enough progress at this point to reach joint conclusions," Dijsselbloem told a news conference after the talks.

"We will continue our talks on Monday and that's as far as I can go at this point."

The talks in Brussels on Monday would probably be the last chance before any new deal could be put to national parliaments for approval before the current bailout ends.

New Greek Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras, whose hard-left Syriza party stormed to victory in elections on January 25, has vowed to tear up the bailout programme and end austerity measures imposed under it.

"The extension of the agreement has not been accepted," a Greek government source in Athens said after the talks, adding that negotiations would continue with the aim of "a mutually beneficial agreement" for Greece's economy.

But the new Greek government has faced fierce opposition from its European partners, especially the austerity-focused economic powerhouse Germany.

The main task in Brussels for Varoufakis -- a former economics professor whose stylish tartan scarf and untucked shirt contrasted with the suits worn by his colleagues -- had been to lay out Greece's new debt plan.

"This was my first Eurogroup meeting, it was fascinating," Varoufakis told reporters.

"We had the opportunity to hear a lot of views and now we are proceeding to the next meeting which will be on Monday -- hoping that by the end of that one there's going to be a conclusion to the deliberations in a manner that is both optimal to Greece and our European partners."

The Greek proposal would see Athens stick to 70 percent of its bailout reform commitments but overhaul the remaining 30 percent. Greece also wants a debt swap that will free up funds for economic growth.

Crucially, the government wants a bridging loan until September to buy time to hammer out new reforms.

At the same time it insists on raising the minimum wage and ditching an unpopular property tax, reversing key reforms demanded by the EU and IMF of previous Greek governments.

It also wants to ditch inspections by the hated troika of creditors -- the European Commission, IMF and European Central Bank.

Tsipras announced plans on Wednesday to draw up a new programme of reforms with the OECD -- the economic club of rich nations that has criticised the EU's embrace of austerity.

Varoufakis meanwhile met with International Monetary Fund (IMF) head Christine Lagarde before he sat down with the ministers, hoping to win the backing of Greece's other major creditor from the bailouts that began in 2010.

European stocks pulled back on the continuing unease over Greece, with the Athens market slumping four percent, while US stocks were little changed as investors awaited the outcome of the Brussels talks.

But Greece has also ramped up threats to look to Russia or China for help, further raising the stakes for European unity as it wrestles with economic stagnation and the crisis in Ukraine.

Tsipras has been invited to Beijing to meet his Chinese counterpart Li Keqiang, a government source said Wednesday.

Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov meanwhile said during a visit to Moscow by Greek counterpart Nikos Kotzias that Moscow was ready to consider an appeal for aid by Athens.

 
Swiss outline plans to curb immigration from EU
Madison Marriage in Zurich 
Financial Times
February 11, 2015 9:46 pm
 
Switzerland has outlined how it will apply immigration curbs first backed in a referendum 12 months ago — prompting condemnation from the financial and pharmaceutical sectors.

Zurich also pledged to renegotiate a free movement of persons agreement, in force with the EU since 1999, which enables nationals on both sides to move freely between the two territories. Switzerland is not a member of the EU.
 
Under the measures unveiled on Wednesday, which will require parliamentary approval, quotas will apply to foreign workers who are in Switzerland for more than four months, while recruitment priority will be given to Swiss residents.

Ministers want to maximise the use of the Swiss workforce by encouraging more women and older individuals into the workforce.

Swiss banks and pharmaceutical companies, which tend to hire a high number of staff from the EU, have been outspoken in their opposition to the move to limit immigration from the bloc since the referendum.

One executive in the Swiss financial services industry, who requested anonymity, said: “This is an important topic and it will be very difficult to get a solution with the EU. The pharmaceutical and finance industries will be very affected by this. I think they will cope but it will be much more complicated for them and they will be at a disadvantage to corporations in other countries.”

Roche, the Swiss drugs group, said: “It is essential for Roche to be able to attract the most talented people globally to Switzerland.”

Eleanor Taylor-Jolidan, a Geneva-based fund manager added: “One of the strengths of Swiss companies is their very international staff. Look how international top Swiss company CEOs are, not because there is a dearth of quality in Switzerland but because nominations may be less political and more meritocratic than in some countries. Curbs are unhelpful.”

Switzerland already enforces quotas on immigrants from non-EU states but, under the free movement of persons agreement, bloc nationals are entitled to move freely to Switzerland. 
 
Just over half of Switzerland’s voters backed an initiative put forward by the ultraconservative Swiss People’s party requiring the government to extend the quota system to cover arrivals from EU states.

The Swiss Bankers Association said: “The banks are employing many people from other European countries and they need swift access to specialised staff today and tomorrow. The banks are therefore calling for a reliable, pragmatic implementation [of these measures].”

However, one senior banker, who asked to remain anonymous, doubted whether the new Swiss proposals will ever become reality. He said: “It will never be implemented. It is just a way to break the current standstill.”
 
 
Maid abuse case highlights plight of migrant workers 
Dennis CHONG 
11 February 2015
Agence France Presse
 
Foreign maids in Hong Kong are guaranteed wages and benefits rare elsewhere in Asia and the Middle East, but the recent ordeal of an Indonesian domestic helper has highlighted the abuses that still go on behind closed doors.

A six-week trial that saw a Hong Kong woman convicted of beating and starving Erwiana Sulistyaningsih has shone a spotlight on the financial hub's 300,000 maids, with campaigners hoping the ruling will convince more to speak out about abuse.

And while some argue the city is far ahead of much of Asia and the Middle East in its treatment of migrant maids, critics say lax enforcement and poor support mean domestic helpers are either afraid to speak out or unaware of where to look for help.

"I don't think there is any reason to rejoice," Hans Ladegaard, a professor at Hong Kong Baptist University, told AFP.

"Erwiana may have won the court case, (but) her case is unfortunately far from exceptional," said Ladegaard, who has been collecting cases of domestic worker abuse since 2008 as part of an academic project.

A Hong Kong judge on Tuesday found Sulistyaningsih's employer Law Wan-tung guilty of 18 charges of physical abuse and a failure to pay wages, saying the Indonesian was effectively kept prisoner.

Sulistyaningsih told the court in vivid detail how she was "tortured", starved, beaten and humiliated by her former employer.

She later told journalists she was happy with the ruling, but voiced hope for reforms in Hong Kong, calling on employers to treat "migrant domestic workers as workers and human beings and stop treating us like slaves".

In a 2013 survey of more than 3,000 foreign domestic workers in Hong Kong, nearly a fifth said they had experienced some form of physical abuse, while 58 percent said they had endured verbal abuse. Six percent said they had suffered sexual abuse.

The same year, Amnesty International condemned the "slavery-like" conditions faced by thousands of Indonesian women who work as domestic staff in Hong Kong and accused authorities of "inexcusable" inaction.

Local campaigning group HK Helpers has identified three issues in particular need of reform: the enforcement of maximum working hours, stopping illegal agency fees, and ending rules that gives domestic workers only two weeks to find new employers if they quit.

But others say that Hong Kong does more than most to protect its domestic workers, with laws requiring employers to provide a minimum wage, days off, and medical insurance -- which are rare in other countries.

The International Labour Organization said in 2013 that just three percent of Asian countries awarded migrant maids weekly days off, and no Middle Eastern countries did.

Only 12 percent of Asia, meanwhile, guarantees minimum wages for domestic helpers, a figure that stands at just one percent in the Middle East, according to the ILO.

Under the controversial "kafala" (sponsorship) system that several Arab states enforce, migrant domestic workers are left completely at the mercy of their employers.

It restricts workers from moving to a new job before their contracts end unless they obtain their employer's consent, trapping many in abusive situations.

While on the surface the legal protection that Hong Kong offers domestic workers may be better, enforcement remains lax.

"Structurally it (Hong Kong) has things in place, reasonable labour laws for migrants domestic workers, but the rule of law stands only if it works. But it doesn't," London-based Amnesty International researcher Norma Kang Muico told AFP.

"Hong Kong is relatively better," Laadegard echoed, "The main problem is that the laws are often not enforced."

"It happens every day. Physical assault on domestic helpers is shockingly common. And the majority of abuse cases don't go to court, not even to the police," he added.

One positive to emerge from Sulistyaningsih's case in the eyes of activists, however, is that when the case did go to trial, it encouraged other helpers to speak out.

"I think that the fact that Erwiana's case has reached this far is already a very fine example where a domestic worker has come forward and asserted her rights has demanded justice," said local rights activist Eman Villanueva.

According to Cynthia Tellez, who runs two shelters in the city for domestic workers who have suffered abuse, more than a thousand maids visited the facilities in the past year alone, and more were speaking out in general.

"There is one good sign that more maids are willing to speak out," she told AFP. "But it also shows that Erwiana is not an isolated case."

"The problem has to be seriously addressed."
END


  ________________________________  
Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.