Headlines:
Kazakhstan becomes full member of WTO 
WTO skips India on food security
India for protection of poor farmers’ interests at Nairobi WTO meet
Does Doha trade talks' failure suggest second age of globalisation is over?
Deal death knell for WTO
Paris climate talks spell end of fossil fuel era
COP21 Paris climate talks: a beginner’s guide
India seen as obstacle to meaningful climate deal in Paris
OECD report exaggerates warming funding: Study
IMF's yuan inclusion signals less risk taking in China
HK and mainland sign trade in services agreement
 
Details:
Kazakhstan becomes full member of WTO 
30 November 2015
BBC Monitoring Newsfile
Kazakhstan has become a full member of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization, President Nursultan Nazarbayev has said.
"Today, 30 November, Kazakhstan de jure became a full member of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO", the Kazakh president said in his annual state-of-the nation address, as broadcast live on state-run Khabar TV.
"This will be officially announced at a meeting of the General Assembly of the WTO," he said.
On 27 July, President Nazarbayev and WTO Director-General HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevedo signed the protocol on Kazakhstan's joining the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO following nearly 20 years of talks.
Kazakhstan ratified the protocol on 12 October.
Source: Khabar Television, Almaty, in Russian 
WTO skips India on food security
30 November 2015
The Times of India - Delhi Edition
The World Trade Organization's (WTO's) draft declaration for next month's ministerial meeting in Nairobi made no mention of finding a permanent solution to India's concerns on food security , but promised to "address all aspects of agriculture reform as a matter of priority". The first draft for the meeting in mid-December, however, did take note of the fa lure of the WTO membership to reach an agreement on most issues that were part of the Doha work programme and raised concerns about the rush of regional trade agreements (RTAs). "We welcome the advances made in the Doha Development Agenda. We regret that it has not been possible to reach agreement on all areas of the negotiations, including agriculture, non-agriculture market access (NAMA), services, rules, including fisheries subsidies, and TRIPS. In particular, we note the importance of agriculture to many WTO members, including LDCs (least developed countries).
We will therefore address all aspects of agriculture reform as a matter of priority," the five-page document, which was released to WTO members on Friday , said. Further, it said that the RTAs, such as the Trans-Pacific Partnership and RCEP, remained complementary and not a substitute for -the multilateral trading system. The government has so far refused to comment on the draft declaration, which has kept the issue of new agenda items open, including some contentious areas such as the link between trade and climate, currency and the global value chain. These are areas that India is not comfortable with and believes that some of them don't belong to WTO. WTO chief Roberto Azevedo said there was a need to reconcile views in view of the stalemate and the draft has sought to touch upon the less contentious issues. "Of course, we also need to tackle the most contentious issues -such as the reaffirmation of the Doha Development Agenda and instructions on the way forward, and openness to talking about new issues. I will set up a different process to deal with those tough, contentious issues, and we will be starting this process after the General Council is finished next week," he said in a statement.
Bennett, Coleman & Co., Ltd.
India for protection of poor farmers’ interests at Nairobi WTO meet
Arun S
30 November 2015
The Hindu
NEW DELHI,BUSINESS India, at the forthcoming Nairobi meeting of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO), will put “all its energies” on pushing through a plan meant to protect the interests and livelihood of poor and vulnerable farmers, government officials who didn’t want to be identified told The Hindu.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevedo, WTO Director General, recently said that the negotiations to firm up rules to liberalise global trade are currently “stuck” due to member countries finding it “difficult to reconcile their views” on a host of issues.
The Indian position echoed the one recently proposed by the G-33 on an effective Special Safeguard Mechanism (SSM). The G33 is a coalition of 48 nations including India, Indonesia and China, which took up the issue of developing countries getting considerable flexibility in limiting market opening of agriculture sector.
The SSM is a trade remedy that would allow developing countries to temporarily hike import duties on farm products to counter sudden import surges and price falls, thereby, protecting the interests of poor farmers. The same issue had led to the breakdown of a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO ministerial meeting in July 2008.
It has been generally agreed that the developing countries could have an SSM, but developed countries including the US have opposed a proposal to enable developing countries to raise tariffs (using SSM) over and above the duty commitments made by them (developing countries) in the farm sector during the earlier Uruguay Round of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO global trade pact negotiations. The Uruguay Round took place before the current Doha Round talks that began in 2001. The new SSM proposal was to include provisions to empower developing countries to impose additional duties (temporarily) on agriculture products when their imports breach specified ceilings on price or volume
India wants this SSM proposal to be taken up on a “high priority-basis” during the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO ministerial meeting at Nairobi (Kenya) slated to start on December 15, official sources said “There will not be any compromise on this (SSM) issue as it involves protection of poor farmers, which is of course a politically sensitive matter. It has to be given priority at the Kenya meet,” an official said.
However, the developed world, including the US, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union, Australia, along with leading agriculture producer and exporter Brazil, has expressed their disagreement with the proposal. The negotiations are over the extent to which different categories of (developing) countries will be allowed to hike duties (using the SSM) beyond their 'bound tariff' -- or the duty ceiling as per their HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO commitments.
Official sources said the developing countries including India had, during recent discussions at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO, wanted an “effective” SSM for “addressing volatilities and instabilities causing import surges and price depressions.” The developing nations added that if these import surges and price depressions were “not immediately and effectively addressed as they occur, (they would) undermine poverty reduction efforts, livelihood and food security, and rural development in WTO Members.”
The volatility in global prices of agricultural items, the developing countries claim, is caused by many factors, including huge subsidies given to the farm sector in developed countries. Developing countries members, including India, said that therefore, an effective SSM was “very important” for them. The developed countries instead want discussions on SSM to be linked to the issue of greater market access in farm products, the sources said. Another item that India wants to be taken up on priority at the Nairobi meeting is that of arriving at a permanent solution to the issue of public food stockholding in developing countries for the purpose of food security.
India wants SSM proposal to be taken up on a ‘high priority-basis’ 
Kasturi & Sons Ltd
Does Doha trade talks' failure suggest second age of globalisation is over?
Larry Elliott
1193 words
30 November 2015
The Guardian
Climate has changed since HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO round began in 2001, with extreme nationalism rising again on back of economic hardship triggered by system failure
It’s November 2001. The terrorist attacks on the United States on 9/11 are still fresh and raw. While George Bush plots revenge, a meeting of trade ministers takes place in the Gulf state of Qatar.
The gathering has two purposes. At one level, it is intended as a show of global solidarity with the US, a signal that the international community can unite in its opposition to fanaticism. But trade ministers also think the time is right to break down barriers to the free movement of goods and services around the world. After all, the last successful round of trade liberalisation negotiations was completed eight years earlier in 1993.
Thus the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" Doha development round is born, an ambitious and complex agenda that involves negotiations designed to free up trade in agriculture, services and manufactured goods. The word “development” in its name was there to demonstrate that the round would not be the traditional stitch up between the USand the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU but would bring benefits to poor as well as wealthy countries.
Related: HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" Borders are closing and banks are in retreat. Is globalisation dead?
Trade ministers have been talking (and, for long periods, not talking) ever since. It has taken them double the seven years it took their predecessors to complete the last set of negotiations – the Uruguay round – and they have achieved precious little in all that time. Next month, when the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO meets for a ministerial meeting in Nairobi, there is a good chance that the Doha round will be put out of its misery. Many will take the view that 14 years is long enough.
The failed attempt to put together a multilateral trade deal is significant. When the Doha round was launched, it was seen as marking the start of a new chapter in the story of globalisation. A decade-long process that had begun with the tearing down of the Berlin Wall had culminated with the birth of the euro and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" admission of China into the WTO – both seen as evidence that a new borderless world was in the making. The 1990s had been a decade of rapid growth and technological change.
Sure, there had been problems. There had been a succession of financial crises in the emerging economies. The tech boom had ended in the dotcom bust. And the first attempt to get a new trade round launched in Seattle had been a messy failure, with protests on the streets and negotiators at loggerheads.
At the time, these were seen as temporary setbacks to an inexorable process, but that now looks like a questionable assumption. In retrospect, the high tide of globalisation had been reached in the late 1990s and the attacks on New York and Washington were a better guide to the future than the launch of the Doha round. If the 1990s were largely dominated by the good aspects of globalisation – faster growth, a narrowing of the gap between rich and poor countries, more rapid communications, cheaper goods – the 2000s have exposed a darker side: financial instability, growing inequality within countries, burgeoning corporate power and the rise of the surveillance state.
The result has been that the forward march of globalisation has been checked. Take free movement of capital, which was central to the liberalisation agenda that dominated the final quarter of the 20th century.
The theory was that removing the post-war curbs on finance would allow capital to move to those parts of the world where it was most needed. Things did not work out quite as planned. There were certainly big flows of capital around the globe, but they tended to go into speculative construction booms rather than into the creation of new productive capacity. Financial globalisation did not raise growth rates – or if it did it only did so through the creation of enormous bubbles – but it did lead to regular and damaging banking crises, culminating in the big crash of 2007-08.
The public got the impression that the only real beneficiaries of this Frankenstein’s monster were the financial industry itself. And when it became clear that the cost of failure would not be paid by the bankers but by the public, a backlash began. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF admitted that capital controls could sometimes be useful and both HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" Cyprus and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" Greece deployed them during their sovereign debt crises. A HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" financial transaction tax is about to be introduced by a number of European countries, including Germany and France.
The benefits of trade came in the form of the cheap goods that were imported into western markets and this kept inflation and interest rates low. There was a dual boost: higher living standards and cheaper mortgages. The cost in the west was that as goods were imported, manufacturing jobs were exported.
It has proved impossible to complete the Doha round. The complexity of the issues coupled with the increased influence of the leading developing countries has made for permanent deadlock, and the impasse has led to a search for alternative ways of cutting trade deals. A drift away from multilateralism has meant greater emphasis on bilateral deals such as the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) being negotiated between the US and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU.
But TTIP has run into a storm of public opposition, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" particularly in Europe, mainly stemming from the fear that the interests of multinationals are being put before those of citizens. Trade has become intertwined with the broader issues of corporate power and inequality. TTIP will not be agreed any time soon.
People are also on the move. Mexicans want to get into the US. Refugees want to get out of Syria and into Europe. Enlargement of Europe to the east has resulted in workers taking advantage of free movement within the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU to seek out higher paid work in wealthier member states. Those migrating to the west tend to be young and well-educated; just the sort of workers that an HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" ageing country such as Germany needs to rejuvenate itself.
But free movement of people has always been more limited than the free movement of capital or goods and is likely to remain so. Even before the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" atrocities in Paris raised fears about Europe’s porous borders, politicians could not help but detect public disquiet about the pressure migration was putting on public services, housing and the wages of those on low incomes.
This is the second age of globalisation. The first, also hastened by developments in communication, involved the free movement of capital, goods and people. That era came to an end in 1914 and the next three decades were difficult ones because mainstream politics couldn’t cope with the collapse of the pre-first world war order, and an extreme form of nationalism was unleashed by economic hardship.
Those who say history will not repeat itself should pause for thought. There has been a system failure. Everywhere, an extreme form of nationalism is again on the rise.
Guardian Newspapers Limited
Deal death knell for WTO
By The Canberra Times
30 November 2015
The Trans-Pacific Partnership text confirms the federal government's rampant overselling of the economic benefits to Australia. While heralded by a few, mainly food exporters for opening foreign markets, any benefits from the TPP to our economic wellbeing will be small and short-lived. The TPP is not about multilateralism but discriminatory regionalism personified. It is further proof that efficient globalism (or multilateralism) founded on the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation's non-discrimination principle is being replaced by inefficient regionalism built on discriminatory preferential trading agreements (PTAs). Discrimination between trading partners distorts global trade. The TPP is another nail in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's coffin and globalisation on which Australian prosperity has relied.
Negotiated secretly, the TPP covers less than 40 per cent of world trade; major traders such as the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union and China are excluded. It is riddled with side deals, different transition periods, unequal member-specific and member non-specific tariff quotas, and incomprehensible rules of origin, just to mention some discriminatory measures. It is more about managing trade discriminatorily among members than open competition. The TPP is a bizarre mix of confusing negotiated outcomes bearing little resemblance to globalised trade. Its complexity guarantees it will be a nightmare to understand and administer. Trade in the Asia-Pacific region, as elsewhere, will now become even more of a "dog's breakfast", compromising global efficiency. Rather than simplifying the global trading system, PTAs such as the TPP are making it more cumbersome and less transparent. The TPP promotes discriminatory inefficient regional supply chains by encouraging firms to import inputs from and export to preferential markets. Yet establishing efficient global value chains requires cutting across regions. The US, a hegemon, wants to impose its trade rules on others through the TPP. President Barack Obama has admitted the TPP exists to enable the US, rather than China, to set the trade rules in the Asia-Pacific region. Australia has no interest in any hegemon setting the rules, which risk being biased in its favour. Global trade rules are best set multilaterally and enforced in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO. We want no repeat of Australia's bilateral with the US (the AUSFTA) where we agreed to US demands not just to offer preferential tariff and investment access to our market, but to strengthen intellectual property protection, seemingly contrary to Australia's own economic interests. These IP provisions, favouring US firms, have now essentially been extended to all other TPP members. After rejecting US demands to adopt investor-state dispute settlement provisions in the AUSFTA, we accepted them in the TPP (except with New Zealand). Foreign (and not domestic) investors can now sue our government in an outside forum. Australia should avoid trading off negative domestic policy changes simply to clinch a trade deal. It is inconceivable that discriminatory regionalism will somehow lead to globalisation and multilateralism. PTAs, as the TPP shows, are non-connectable. We are seeing the development of an international trading system that resembles a jigsaw puzzle with missing pieces.
The only solution lies in all governments multilateralising their "spaghetti bowl" of preferences to remove discrimination. However, this will not happen while governments choose discrimination over non- discrimination. Reviving the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO to effectively defend globalism and non-discrimination would help, but instead governments persist in destroying it. Those advocating PTAs due to the failed Doha Round are only hastening the destruction of globalism. Contrary to official claims, the TPP has not really advanced trade liberalisation in Australia or elsewhere. All tariff reductions negotiated are spoiled by being discriminatory, and have the minimal relaxation of tariff quotas on food. Further, the TPP, like all PTAs, is more concerned in other areas with negotiating commitments on paper (e.g. services and government procurement), which often are less restrictive than existing measures or contain loopholes and exclusions that ensure trade restrictions remain. Assertions on the benefits to Australia from the TPP rest largely on the greater market access gained for our exporters. However, such limited transitory gains do not guarantee national economic benefits to Australia. This requires much more. Greater market access abroad does nothing to improve our efficiency or to benefit our consumers and taxpayers. A far better approach would for Australia to unilaterally remove our own trade barriers. These reforms could be comprehensive and non-discriminatory, and should include abolishing domestic subsidies and our many protectionist quarantine measures, just to name a couple. Such reforms would deliver far greater national economic gains than the TPP and all other PTAs put together. They would improve Australia's productivity and permanently boost growth by benefiting all efficient Australian producers, whether exporting or competing domestically with imports and enabling our best activities to flourish. Australian consumers would gain from cheaper and more diversified goods and services. While Australia cannot control the proliferation of PTAs elsewhere, we can ensure those involving us are independently assessed and monitored to guard against continued overpromising and under delivering. In entering PTAs, the government should realistically recognise its limited role in advancing Australia's economic wellbeing. We should also avoid locking ourselves into bad domestic policy choices. Quite simply, the government should stop believing its own propaganda and instead base trade policy setting on transparent economic analysis. The way forward is for the government to ask the Productivity Commission to routinely monitor implementation of Australia's PTAs to see if they are delivering the claimed national welfare gains, and if not, to assess why not. Failing this, the commission should initiate its own monitoring as part of its statutory duty to publicly scrutinise industry assistance. It's worrying that both Trade Minister Andrew Robb and our chief trade negotiator, the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade secretary, have strongly defended secrecy by resisting calls to subject PTAs to ongoing transparency and public analysis, needed to evaluate their economic worth - they sound like vested interests guarding their turf. The biggest improvement the government could make would be to concentrate on unilateral reform, and playing down the role of PTAs. A decent dose of unilateral non-discriminatory reform, including in non-direct trade areas, would do more to recover our loss in international competitiveness, which our slippage in global rankings reveals. PTAs cannot undo the mess. Australia should start by unilaterally multilateralising all of our discriminatory trade-related measures adopted in the TPP and other PTAs; for example, extend negotiated zero tariffs, including on cars, to imports from all countries, and apply the more liberal investment screening thresholds now applied bilaterally to some investors to all sources. Such changes should become a pillar of the government's response to the Prime Minister's latest call for undertaking enlightened and soundly based economic reforms.
Malcolm Bosworth is a visiting fellow of the Arndt-Corden Department of Economics, ANU.
Federal Capital Press of Australia Pty Ltd
Paris climate talks spell end of fossil fuel era
Ambrose Evans-Pritchard
30 November 2015
The Daily Telegraph
Climate accord 'massive chance for investors'
A FAR-REACHING deal on climate change in Paris over the coming days promises to unleash a blitz of investment on new technology and renewable energy by 2040, creating vast riches for those in the vanguard and potentially lifting the global economy out of its slow-growth trap.
Economists at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Barclays estimate that greenhouse gas pledges made by the US, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU, China, India and others for the COP-21 climate summit amount to an epic change in the allocation of capital and resources, with financial winners and losers to match.
They said the fossil-fuel industries of coal, gas, and oil could forfeit $34 trillion in revenues over the next quarter century - a quarter of their income - if the Paris accord is followed by a series of tougher reviews every five years to force down the trajectory of CO2 emissions, as proposed by the United Nations and French officials hosting the summit talks.
By then, crude consumption would fall to 72m barrels a day - half HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Opec projections - and demand would be in precipitous decline. Most fossil-fuel companies would face run-off unless they could reinvent themselves as 21st century post-carbon leaders, as HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Shell, Total, and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Statoil are already doing.
The agreed HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN goal is to cap the rise in global temperatures to 2C above preindustrial levels by 2100, deemed the safe limit if we are to pass on a world that is more or less recognisable.
Climate negotiators say there will have to be drastic "decarbonisation" to bring this in sight, with negative net emissions by 2070 or soon after. This means CO2 will have to be plucked from the air and buried, or absorbed by reforestation. Such a scenario would imply the virtual extinction of the coal industry unless there is a big push for carbon capture and storage.
It also implies a near-total switch to electric cars, rendering the internal combustion engine obsolete.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Bank of England and the G20's HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Financial Stability Board aim to bring about a "soft landing" that protects investors and gives the fossil-fuel industry time to adapt by forcing it to confront the issue head-on.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Barclays said $21.5 trillion of investment in energy efficiency will be needed by 2040 under the current pledges, which cover 155 countries and 94pc of the global economy. It expects a further $8.5 trillion of spending on solar, wind, hydro, energy storage, and nuclear power.
Among those best placed to profit in Europe are: Denmark's wind-power group Vestas; Schneider and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" ABB for motors and transmission; Legrand for low-voltage equipment; HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Alstom and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Siemens for rail efficiency; Philips, and Continued on B3 Continued from B1 Osram for LEDs and lighting.
But this is a minimalist scenario. The Paris commitments do not meet the targets set by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPPC). The planet has already used two-thirds of the allowable "carbon budget" of 2,900 gigatonnes (GT), and will have used up three-quarters of the remaining 1,000 GT by 2030. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Barclays advised clients to prepare for a more radical outcome, entailing almost $45 trillion of spending on different forms of decarbonisation.
"The fact that COP-21 in itself is clearly not going to put the world on a 2C track does not mean that fossil fuel companies can simply carry on with business as usual. We think they should be stress-testing their business models against a significant tightening of global climate policy over the next two decades," it said.
The main enforcement tool would be a rise in carbon prices to an estimated $140 a tonne by 2040 - either in the form of a tax or an emissions trading scheme. The pincer coming from the other side would an assault on direct fossil-fuel subsidies, estimated at $550bn a year by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" International Energy Agency.
The mood in Paris is radically different from the Copenhagen summit in 2009, poisoned by a "North-South" split over who is responsible, and who should pay to clean up the greenhouse legacy.
"What has really changed everything is that the cost of renewables has come down so far: what looked impossible six years ago in Copenhagen is now possible," said HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Mark Lewis, the chief author of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Barclays report. Renewables made up half of all new power added worldwide last year.
"The average cost of global solar was $400 a megawatt hour worldwide in 2010. It fell to $130 in 2014, and now it has fallen below $60 in the best locations. Almost nobody could have imagined this six years ago," he said.
Michael Jacobs, from the Global Commission on Energy and Climate, said the Paris accord is telling markets and investors that there is "a massive opportunity before them".
Macro-economists say this is just what is needed to soak up the global savings glut and rescue the world from its 1930s liquidity trap. There might even be a boom.
Telegraph Media Group Ltd. 
COP21 Paris climate talks: a beginner’s guide
Pilita Clark in Paris
30 November 2015
Financial Times (FT.Com)
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN has been holding annual climate change talks for 20 years but the two-week HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" COP21 meeting that starts in Paris on Monday is a much more significant meeting than most.
Who is attending and what are they trying to achieve?
About 40,000 ministers, officials, business executives, climate campaigners and journalists are expected to descend on the Le Bourget airfield convention centre north of central Paris. Delegates from 195 countries are due to finalise an agreement to cut global emissions of the greenhouse gases scientists warn are on track to warm the planet to risky levels.
Governments have sought to do this since 1992, when they met in Rio de Janeiro and agreed the first global warming accord — the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN Framework Convention on Climate Change. Its chief aim was to stabilise greenhouse gases at a level that would avoid dangerous levels of warming. But with most of those gases coming from burning fossil fuels — which power almost every country’s economy — the talks have been deadlocked for decades as governments bicker over the extent to which each should cut their emissions and who should bear the costs.
Why is the meeting called COP21?
COP is short for “conference of the parties” to that 1992 Rio framework convention, which has now been ratified by 195 countries. There have been 20 COPs since 1995 — and this is the 21st, or in UN-speak, COP21.
How do Kyoto and Copenhagen fit into all this?
The 1997 Kyoto protocol treaty was supposed to fill in a big hole in the Rio framework convention by setting out legally binding targets for countries to meet specific emissions targets. However, it only applied to wealthy countries that now account for a dwindling share of global emissions, and the US never ratified it, largely because it did not require China to cut its pollution.
To make up for Kyoto’s deficiencies, countries tried to come up with a more universal climate deal in Copenhagen in 2009, at COP15. But that effort ended in acrimonious failure so a new round of negotiations was launched in 2011, aimed at coming up with a new accord in Paris that will require action from all countries, rich and poor.
Is COP21 likely to succeed?
That depends on the definition of success. The Kyoto protocol showed it was impossible to force countries to cut emissions, so the new deal is based on voluntary action plans. More than 180 nations have tabled pledges since March.
However, the commitments are not sufficient to prevent global temperatures warming more than 2C from pre-industrial levels, a threshold agreed at previous COPs. With a 1C increase nearly reached, scientists say evidence of a changing climate is already widespread, from rising sea levels to melting ice caps. The years 2011-2015 were the warmest five-year period on record, theHYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Meteorological Organization reported last week.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN officials say a Paris accord could still be effective because many countries want the national pledges to be reviewed every five years so they can be strengthened. But it is unclear if all nations will agree to this. If the final accord does not include such measures, it is hard to see how it can be called a success.
What are the main stumbling blocks to a deal?
The central bone of contention has long thwarted climate talks: the divide between wealthy countries that grew rich from burning fossil fuels after the industrial revolution and poor countries trying to emulate their prosperity. A large coalition of developing countries in the talks says it is unfair to expect them to stop using cheap, abundant coal and other fossil fuels unless rich nations give them a lot of money and technology to help them build cleaner energy systems.
Rich countries agreed in 2010 to deliver $100bn a year by 2020 in so-called climate finance, from public and private sources, and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD recently reported that at least $62bn was provided in 2014. But India and other countries have questioned that figure and say the Paris accord must require wealthy countries to deliver more than $100bn a year after 2020.
Developed countries are balking at including a specific figure in the agreement, arguing that today’s governments cannot be responsible for setting budgets so far ahead. If they hold out, poorer countries may say they cannot sign up to a global deal requiring five-year review periods and other measures wanted by richer nations.
Is that the only sticking point?
No. A host of other disagreements revolve around issues such as the long-term goal of a new climate accord. Oil-rich nations such as Saudi Arabia would be happy to stick with the target of limiting warming to 2C. But other countries want to “operationalise” this aim by spelling out a goal to cut emissions sharply by 2050 and phase out fossil fuel pollution by the end of the century.
Scientists say the latter move is what needs to be done to stop irreversible and risky changes in the climate, and some companies say clear emissions targets would offer a better signal to guide investments. But because the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN accord must be agreed by consensus, it is far from clear if a long-term emissions goal beyond 2C will make it into a final agreement.
The Financial Times Limited 
India seen as obstacle to meaningful climate deal in Paris
Victor Mallet in New Delhi
29 November 2015
Financial Times (FT.Com)
India probably has more at stake in the struggle against global warming than any other large economy represented at this week’s climate summit in Paris.
As temperatures rise — boosted by the global emission of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere — India becomes more prone to droughts, floods, crop failures and cyclones. Scientists predict that average temperatures on the densely populated plains of north India will rise by a startling 2.9-5C by 2080.
Climate change, says Ajay Mathur, a veteran of climate talks and one of New Delhi’s negotiators in Paris, is “amazingly serious” for India just as it is poised to overtake China as the world’s most populous nation.
India’s vulnerability to changes in the climate makes it all the more extraordinary that its government is seen as an obstacle to a successful deal, just as previous administrations were accused of obstructing world trade negotiations.
Two weeks ago in Turkey, India blocked efforts by the G20 countries to prepare for an ambitious climate accord. John Kerry, US secretary of state, recently praised China but expressed concern about the “challenge” of India and its desire to burn more dirty coal for electricity. “We’ve got a lot of focus on India right now to try to bring them along,” he said.
President Barack Obama is to meet President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xi Jinping of China and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Narendra Modi, the Indian prime minister, in Paris on Monday to try to ensure a successful summit, and Mr Modi has already promised co-operation. “We need power but we will not create problems for the world,” said the Indian prime minister.
India — which sees itself as a champion of developing countries and a regional rival of China — nevertheless insists it has been misunderstood in the lead up to the Paris climate talks.
In 2012, its annual per capita carbon dioxide emissions were just 1.6 tonnes per person, compared with 16.4 tonnes per person for the US and 7.1 tonnes per person for China. By 2030 its emissions will still amount to only about 5 tonnes per person per year — half the level in China.
The Modi government has also launched an ambitious programme to accelerate investment in renewable energy, particularly solar power, so that in 15 years more than a third of its installed electricity capacity will be based on solar energy, windmills and hydroelectric dams.
Prakash Javadekar, Indian environment minister, called Mr Kerry’s comments “unwarranted and unfair” and said the real challenge in Paris would be getting developed countries to offer more concessions.
Mr Mathur was also critical of Mr Kerry. “When action is happening, when the country has said it will agree to an agreement . . . I find it very surprising when the country is called obstructionist or a challenge,” he said recently.
India does not deny that its greenhouse gas emissions will increase dramatically in absolute terms — from 1.48bn tonnes of CO2 equivalent annually in 2005 to more than 7bn in 2030 — but says that is because of a growing population and the need to provide electricity to the 300m Indians who lack it today, and the requirement for new coal-fired power stations to supplement other sources of electricity. Half of India’s extra emissions are expected to come from coal.
An acceptable deal — “just” and “equitable” are the words used by India — would have to give India the “carbon space” to develop as other countries did before it. “Either we remain poor or you need to tell us a paradigm by which people can have a better quality of life with lower energy use,” says Mr Mathur.
India’s promise to cut its greenhouse gas emission intensity relative to gross domestic product by a third while quadrupling absolute emissions is unlikely to be a deal-breaker, given the equally unambitious targets set by other countries.
The sticking point is more likely to be India’s insistence that signatories reaffirm a pledge of $100bn a year in financial flows from rich countries to poor ones from 2020, to help with emissions reduction and climate change adaptation.
India’s domestic cost of capital is high at around 13 per cent and according to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" International Energy Agency the country needs to invest $140bn a year on everything from modernising electricity grids for handling fluctuating renewable energy supplies to improved technology for burning coal.
As the talks begin in Paris, India can be accused of two faults in its approach, say analysts and diplomats monitoring the negotiations. First, it has failed to trumpet from the rooftops its relatively low present and future per capita emissions; and second, it may be too pessimistic about likely technological advances that would permit it to adopt more ambitious carbon emission targets.
Manish Shrivastava, a fellow at the Energy and Resources Institute, a think-tank in New Delhi, argues that it makes sense “from a diplomatic point of view” to err on the side of technological pessimism during negotiations. And he compares what he sees as China’s meaningless carbon target unfavourably with India’s apparently unambitious stand.
“It’s a choice between precise and reasonable, and ambitious and ambiguous,” he says.
The Financial Times Limited 
OECD report exaggerates warming funding: Study
30 November 2015
The Times of India - Jaipur Edition
The government on Sunday said there is a need to establish more credible, accurate, and verifiable numbers on the true size of the mobilisation of climate change finance commitments and flows from developed to developing countries. Ahead of the Paris climate meet, the Centre found serious problems on all counts with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD report that claimed significant progress has been made. During the recent Lima World Bank and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF meets, India had raised the issue on a road map for $100 billion in climate change financing a year by 2020. Economic affairs secretary Shaktikanta Das said India had also raised questions on the correctness of the recent HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD report. The review of the report by experts in India suggests that it may have overstated the progress. The discussion paper suggests that much work has to be done. "Need genuine provision of climate change finance from developed to developing countries as per commitment and not clever accounting...
Clean technology is important. Not unreasonable standards which create markets for developed countries and escalate growth costs for others," Das tweeted. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD in partnership with Climate Policy Initiative released the paper 'Climate Finance in 2013-14 and the $100 billion goal'. The 'preliminary estimates' were that the mobilisation of climate change finance from developed to developing countries had reached $62 billion in 2014 and $52 billion in 2013, equivalent to an annual average over the two years of $57 billion. The review released by the finance ministry examined the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD report's accuracy, methodology and verifiability of the numbers and found serious problems on all counts. Numbers were derived on self-reported basis from self-interested players, and open to 'gaming' and exaggeration.
Definitions of climate change finance used were not consistent... Methodologies used were inconsistent with the literature and best practice and even 'bent' in ways to find more flows than reality ," the review by Indian experts have shown. Meaningful, independent verification was impossible since only aggregate numbers were reported with lack of transparency . No serious consultations were done with developing countries themselves. The paper discussed each of the main components of climate change finance identified in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD report, turn by-turn. This included official development assistance, multilateral development bank and private sector flows. In each, methods and reports of counting and tagging were found to be seriously questionable---on both theory and on facts.
Bennett, Coleman & Co., Ltd. 
IMF's yuan inclusion signals less risk taking in China
30 November 2015
Reuters News
* HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF expected to agree on Monday to add yuan to FX reserves
* Raises optimism inclusion will spur fresh capital account reform
* Resistance to reform could grow though, Chinese sources say
* HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF inclusion to boost yuan demand by $600 bln plus - analysts
By Pete Sweeney and Krista Hughes
SHANGHAI/NEW YORK, Nov 30 (Reuters) - When the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" International Monetary Fund agrees on Monday to add the Chinese yuan to its reserves basket in the biggest shake-up in more than three decades, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF can afford itself a congratulatory nod.
By acknowledging the yuan as a major global currency alongside the dollar, euro, yen, and pound, as is widely expected, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF members will endorse the efforts of China's economic reformers and by doing so hope that will spur fresh change in China.
But Chinese policy insiders and international policymakers say reforms may not continue at the breakneck pace of recent months. In addition, Chinese sources suggest adding the yuan to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF basket leaves economic conservatives better positioned to resist further significant reform in a reminder of the period following China's entry to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO).
A slowing in the pace has implications for those who bet that making the yuan a global reserve currency will give it a boost. The yuan has fallen almost 3 percent against the dollar this year, on course for its biggest annual fall since its landmark 2005 revaluation.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF decision will remove a key incentive - bolstering national pride - that reformers used to push otherwise reluctant conservatives to support reforms.
More importantly, however, are worries in Beijing that the rickety economy can't handle more aggressive reform that allows a freer flow of currency across China's borders.
Beijing is already rapidly losing a taste for more experimentation with capital flows, say the sources - economists involved in policy discussions who declined to be identified because of the sensitivity of the subject.
After the stock market buckled more than 40 percent in the summer - which many blamed on nefarious foreign capital - regulators have made it harder for money to leave China to counter yuan selling pressure and have intervened heavily in onshore and offshore currency markets. Not just conservatives, but more liberal economists are calling for a pause.
"Our ability to control financial risk has yet to be improved," said a senior economist at the China Centre for International Economic Exchanges (CCIEE), an influential Beijing think-tank.
"Any rush to open up the capital account completely could be unfavourable for controlling financial risks ... we will definitely be very cautious."
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF's executive board, representing the Fund's 188 members, is likely to approve inclusion of the yuan in the reserve basket, known as Special Drawing Rights (SDR). An HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF staff report and Managing Director HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Christine Lagarde have endorsed the idea. The United States has suggested it will not stand in the way.
The SDR basket determines the currency mix countries like Greece receive when the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF disburses financial aid. Some economists predict inclusion will boost demand for the yuan, or renminbi (RMB), by more than $600 billion.
Chinese media predicted entry will draw over 1 trillion yuan ($156 billion) of foreign money into China bonds. Both predictions rest on assumptions more capital account opening is on the way.
"The RMB (will be) included so the reform-oriented forces can keep the upper hand; there's no way back now for the conservative members in the party," said an HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF policymaker from an advanced economy, who spoke on condition of anonymity.
Seeing the SDR decision as the goal of China's reforms is "as if the tail were wagging the dog," said Otaviano Canuto, who represents Brazil and other Latin American and Caribbean countries on the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF board.
"The expectation is that the eventual inclusion of the RMB is a moment in the process ... (which) is being undertaken and implemented for itself, because it's part of the development of the Chinese economy," he said.
"WHY WOULD YOU TAKE MORE RISKS?"
China has pushed to make the yuan more international, setting up swap arrangements with countries so trade can be settled in the currency and China has said it will push ahead with financial reform. It has widened the yuan's trading band and this year went a long way to freeing up interest rates.
But Chinese policy advisers have always been divided, sometimes publicly, on how far China should go in opening up its borders to foreign capital; while few use vocabulary that rejects general reform principles, many domestic policy advisors - including some otherwise supportive of economic liberalisation - warn throwing open the gates to cross-border flows would be destabilising.
They have many quiet allies among China's state-owned banks and other inefficient industries, which fear that a freer market for capital will expose them to international competition and put them out of business.
Foreign access to financial markets is still tightly restricted and of late regulators have reversed some measures that were designed to make it easier to move the yuan offshore.
"The (Chinese) reform camp has been selling (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF inclusion) partly on the basis of international prestige, in particular equalling Japan," said Derek Scissors, chief economist at China Beige Book.
"What is the reform movement going to say now to move reform forward ... if the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF has already recognised China as an internationalised currency?" asked Scissors. "Why would you take more risks?"
Some see parallels with China's HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO entry in 2001, in which Chinese reformers used entry negotiations as an incentive to push through painful state sector restructuring, only to see their agenda sidelined shortly after inclusion.
China's retreat from its HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO commitments was widely blamed on the retirement in 2003 of reform-minded Premier Zhu Rongji. Current leading reformer HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Zhou Xiaochuan, the head of the central bank who has said the yuan will be basically convertible by this year, is at 67 years old already past the typical retirement age for senior Communist Party officials.
"Previous wording was 'accelerating' convertibility, now it's 'making RMB convertible in an orderly manner,'" said an economist, of the China Academy of Social Sciences (CASS), who is also close to policy discussions. He said China was well aware capital account liberalisation elsewhere - in particular Japan - has been blamed for causing "serious crises."
"The most important thing is to handle domestic issues well; we cannot afford to see another collapse of the stock market."
Thomson Reuters (Markets) LLC
HK and mainland sign trade in services agreement
Oswald Chan in Hong Kong
28 November 2015
China Daily-Hong Kong Edition
The SAR government and the central authorities signed the Agreement on Trade in Services under the Mainland and Hong Kong Closer Economic Partnership Arrangement (CEPA) on Friday - which is set to achieve liberalization of trade in services between the two areas.
Chief Executive Leung Chun-ying witnessed the signing of the agreement by Financial Secretary John Tsang Chun-wah and Vice-Minister of Commerce Wang Shouwen.
Under the new agreement, which came into immediate effect and is to be implemented from June 2016, the mainland will fully or partially open up 153 sectors to Hong Kong service providers, accounting for 95.6 percent of all the 160 HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization service trade sectors. In respect of the mode of "commercial presence", national treatment will be applied to Hong Kong in 62 sectors.
The agreement further enhances the ongoing liberalization in both breadth and depth: It extends the implementation of the majority of Guangdong pilot liberalization measures to the whole mainland; reduces the restrictive measures in the negative list; and adds 28 liberalization measures in the positive lists for cross-border services as well as cultural and telecommunications services.
The agreement's Most-Favored Treatment provision assures the SAR that if the central government accords to other economies any preferential treatment more than those specified under the CEPA, the preferential treatments granted to those economies will be extended to Hong Kong.
The agreement was signed under the CEPA framework and makes reference to the Agreement between the Mainland and Hong Kong on Achieving Basic Liberalization of Trade in Services in Guangdong signed last year.
The agreement becomes a standalone, subsidiary agreement relating to trade in services under the CEPA framework.
China Daily Information Company
END
 
Josep Bosch, Information Officer
Information and External Relations Division
+41227395681
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.