WTO Upbeat Ahead of Key Kenya Conference
WTO gives U.S. until April to comply with ruling on Chinese imports
DG Azevêdo: WTO members have identified a road to success in Nairobi
EU ready to assist Azerbaijan in joining WTO
'Liberia Stands a Good Chance to Tap On Opportunities Provided By WTO,' Addy
Togo ratifies Trade Facilitation Agreement
Africa and the WTO - the Perils of Weakening the Development Agenda
TPP opponents in Congress seek release of text


WTO Upbeat Ahead of Key Kenya Conference
by Maria Macharia
220 words
9 October 2015
17:09
All Africa
AFNWS
English
(c) 2015 AllAfrica, All Rights Reserved
Nairobi, Oct 09, 2015 (CAJ News Agency/All Africa Global Media via COMTEX) -- The Director-General of the World Trade Organisation (WTO), Roberto Azevedo, is hopeful of successful deliberations at the organisation's upcoming Ministerial Conference to be held in Kenya.
The event, which is the tenth edition, will be held in Nairobi from December 15-18.
"Through the various consultations over recent weeks I think members have identified a road to success in Nairobi," said Azevedo.
"Clearly there are many obstacles along the way, but none in my view are insurmountable. I think we have a general sense of what may be on the table in terms of substantive deliverables -- though it is not a closed package, or a sure package."
The Director-General also asked members to look beyond Nairobi.
He pointed to differences in members' positions on the future of the Doha Development Agenda (DDA).
DDA is the current trade-negotiation round of the WTO, which commenced in November 2001 under then director-general Mike Moore.
Its objective is to lower trade barriers around the world, and thus facilitate increased global trade.
"Clearly these views will be extremely difficult to reconcile. However, I think we cannot disregard important commonalities when thinking about the way ahead," said Azevedo.
 
WTO gives U.S. until April to comply with ruling on Chinese imports
141 words
9 October 2015
16:36
Reuters News
LBA
English
Copyright 2015 Thomson Reuters. All Rights Reserved.   
GENEVA, Oct 9 (Reuters) - The United States has until April 1, 2016 to comply with a World Trade Organization ruling that faulted its use of punitive import duties on a range of Chinese goods, including solar panels and wind towers, the trade body said on Friday.
In December 2014 the WTO's Appellate Body upheld a Chinese complaint that the United States had unfairly penalised $7.2 billion of Chinese exports.
The United States said it would need 19 months to implement the ruling, but China said 10 months. A WTO-appointed arbitrator, Georges M. Abi-Saab, split the difference and gave 14 months and 16 days from the result of the dispute. (Reporting by Tom Miles; Editing by Andrew Heavens) 
 
DG Azevêdo: WTO members have identified a road to success in Nairobi
636 words
9 October 2015
M2 Presswire
MTPW
English
© 2015, M2 Communications. All rights reserved.   
GENEVA, Switzerland — Director-General Roberto Azevêdo addressed all WTO members today (8 October) at a meeting of the General Council in Geneva. He looked ahead to the prospects of success at the WTO’s 10th Ministerial Conference which will be held in Nairobi from 15-18 December this year, and reported on recent discussions in Geneva and other discussions, including among G20 trade ministers in Istanbul.
He reported that some areas of negotiations still seemed more likely to yield outcomes in Nairobi than others. These include: development issues with a particular focus on least-developed countries (LDCs); export competition in agriculture; and a set of possible outcomes to improve transparency in a number of areas. He said that work should be intensified on these issues, but also that this did not preclude identifying other outcomes wherever members thought they could be achieved.
The Director-General said:
“Through the various consultations over recent weeks I think members have identified a road to success in Nairobi. Clearly there are many obstacles along the way, but none in my view are insurmountable.
“I think we have a general sense of what may be on the table in terms of substantive deliverables — though it is not a closed package, or a sure package. And I think we should recognize that agreement on the elements we are talking about would represent real progress. They would have a major economic and developmental impact, even though we must strive to do much more in the future. So now we need to firm these up with textual proposals that can be advanced through the negotiating groups.”
The Director-General also asked members to look beyond Nairobi. Pointing to differences in members’ positions on the future of the Doha Development Agenda (DDA), he said:
“Clearly these views will be extremely difficult to reconcile. However, I think we cannot disregard important commonalities when thinking about the way ahead. For example, I think we all agree that: i) we want to deliver something in Nairobi and that it should be meaningful; ii) whatever we deliver will not be agreed to be the end of negotiations on the DDA issues and; iii) we are still ready to keep pursuing the core issues of the DDA and their development dimension after Nairobi – although there is no agreement on how to do this, whether under the DDA framework or whether under a reformulated architecture. The question is whether we can – or whether we want – to capture these and other possible commonalities in a consensual text in Nairobi.”
He continued: “I would suggest that we start working on the basis that we will have a Ministerial Declaration that would take stock of the decisions taken at the 10th Ministerial Conference and that gives us guidance on our future work.”
The meeting saw a debate on these issues, with a range of views being expressed. The Director-General concluded the conversation by suggesting there was a need for further consultations with members on the substance of any potential Ministerial Declaration and the process of producing such a document.
These consultations will begin in the coming days. Negotiations on the potential deliverables for Nairobi will also continue, mainly through the formal negotiating groups and other relevant committees. In addition, the Director-General will be consulting ministers at forthcoming meetings of the African Union, the African, Caribbean, Pacific Group of States and a meeting of Arab Trade Ministers.
 
EU ready to assist Azerbaijan in joining WTO
397 words
9 October 2015
Today.az
DLSDAZ
English
© 2015. Today.Az. All rights reserved.   
/By AzerNews/By Nigar Orujova
The European Union is ready to take all efforts to help Azerbaijan in completing the country&s accession process to the World Trade Organization, the EU&s press office reported on October 9.
Azerbaijan began consultations with the WTO in 2004. Currently, Azerbaijan is in the process of negotiations with the U.S., Japan, Brazil, Ecuador, Sri Lanka, the European Union, Norway, India, South Korea, Taiwan Province of China, Canada, Switzerland, and Honduras to join the organization.
To achieve the goal, Azerbaijan needs to implement important reforms in customs and competition rules, according to the EU&s office.
"The EU recognizes the work completed by Azerbaijan in the recent years toward WTO conformity and is looking forward to Azerbaijan's completion of remaining reform measures envisaged under the WTO accession procedure.
"These reforms cover the legal, policy, and institutional framework which bring remaining non-conforming aspects of Azerbaijan&s foreign trade regime in line with the WTO agreements," said the office.
In June, Azerbaijan reported on the preparation of new proposals on tariffs for industrial and agricultural products as part of the talks on joining the WTO.
The objective of the Azerbaijani government during the WTO negotiation process is to ensure the maximum protection of national businesses and manufacturers.
The office added that the WTO accession procedure needs to be achieved through the harmonization of Azerbaijan&s laws with international standards.
There are no definitions for "developed" and "developing" countries in the WTO, the report said.
"Members announce themselves whether they are &developed& or &developing.& However, it is through the accession negotiations that members agree on specific level of commitments in each area which most appropriately reflects the individual characteristics and stage of development of any acceding economy," EU press office said.
According WTO provisions, a country with the status of a developing country can qualify for subsidies at a level of 10 percent of GDP. This figure stands at five percent for developed countries.
For Azerbaijan, the issue of the status of the country is core during the multilateral negotiations. Azerbaijan, claiming the status of a developing country, justifies the fact that despite the rapid development of the economy, the country still has one million refugees and internally displaced persons due to Armenian aggression.
 
 
'Liberia Stands a Good Chance to Tap On Opportunities Provided By WTO,' Addy
350 words
9 October 2015
13:45
All Africa
AFNWS
English
(c) 2015 AllAfrica, All Rights Reserved   
Oct 09, 2015 (Liberia News Agency/All Africa Global Media via COMTEX) -- Commerce and Industry Minister Axel Addy says Liberia stands a good chance of tapping into opportunities provided by the World Trade Organization (WTO) in fisheries, agriculture and tourism due to its accession to membership of the organization.
He added : "Liberia's accession to the WTO will also provide the enabling environment for growth and development, and promoting trade and commerce."
Addy made the statement in his remarks at the last Working Party Meeting in Geneva, Switzerland Tuesday.
He emphasized that Liberia's cooperation and belief in the global trading system, will improve the quality of life and reduce poverty in Liberia.
He noted that whatever progress will be achieved at the WTO will enhance productivity and prepare the way for a better future for Liberia's future generation.
"I strongly believe that Liberia stands a good chance to tap on opportunities provided by the WTO in many trade areas, fisheries, agriculture ,tourism and many others, to which the future seems bright and promising," he added.
The Chairman on the Working Party, former Ambassador of Sweden Joakim Reiter, said Liberia's accession to the WTO was a result of determination, strong will and commitment on the part of the Liberian Working Party team and the Liberian Government.
Reiter said the country's WTO accession is a positive signal of the sacrifice that Liberia has made in engaging global and international partners in its trading commitment and programs.
He described Liberia's success as not only for the country, but also as a win-win for least-developed countries.
The Chairman of the Liberian Senate Committee on Commerce and Trade, James Tornolah, praised the level of commitment and determination, coupled with the loyalty that the Liberian Working Party team exhibited throughout the process.
Tornolah said Liberia's WTO accession will begin a new paradigm of growth and national development through trade and commerce, thus adding value to the country's global trading initiative.
LINA/PR/JGT/TSS 
Document AFNWS00020151009eba9000p2
 
Togo ratifies Trade Facilitation Agreement
347 words
9 October 2015
M2 Presswire
MTPW
English
© 2015, M2 Communications. All rights reserved.   
Togo has ratified the WTO’s new Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA). Togo’s instrument of acceptance was received by the WTO on 1 October, making it the third least developed country to ratify the TFA.
GENEVA, Switzerland — Concluded at the WTO’s 2013 Bali Ministerial Conference, the TFA contains provisions for expediting the movement, release and clearance of goods, including goods in transit. It also sets out measures for effective cooperation between customs and other appropriate authorities on trade facilitation and customs compliance issues. It further contains provisions for technical assistance and capacity building in this area.
The TFA will enter into force once two-thirds of the WTO membership has formally accepted the Agreement. On 5 October, Director-General Roberto Azevêdo welcomed the ratification of the TFA Protocol by the European Union. The following WTO members have also accepted the agreement: Hong Kong China, Singapore, the United States, Mauritius, Malaysia, Japan, Australia, Botswana, Trinidad and Tobago, the Republic of Korea, Nicaragua, Niger, Belize, Switzerland, Chinese Taipei, China, Liechtenstein, Lao PDR, New Zealand and Thailand.
The TFA broke new ground for developing and least-developed countries in the way it will be implemented. For the first time in WTO history, the requirement to implement the Agreement was directly linked to the capacity of the country to do so. In addition, the Agreement states that assistance and support should be provided to help them achieve that capacity.
A Trade Facilitation Agreement Facility (TFAF) was also created at the request of developing and least-developed country members to help ensure that they receive the assistance needed to reap the full benefits of the TFA and to support the ultimate goal of full implementation of the new agreement by all members.
Distributed by APO (African Press Organization) on behalf of World Trade Organization (WTO).
((M2 Communications disclaims all liability for information provided within M2 PressWIRE. Data supplied by named party/parties. Further information on M2 PressWIRE can be obtained at HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/,DanaInfo=.awxyCq7Fjwv+" http://www.m2.com on the world wide web. Inquiries to HYPERLINK "mailto:info@m2.com" info@m2.com)).
Document MTPW000020151009eba9001ba
 
Africa and the WTO - the Perils of Weakening the Development Agenda
by Biraj Patnaik and Timothy A. Wise
1292 words
9 October 2015
13:30
All Africa
AFNWS
English
(c) 2015 AllAfrica, All Rights Reserved
Oct 09, 2015 (FIAN International/All Africa Global Media via COMTEX) -- In the 2013 WTO Ministerial in Bali, India stood mostly alone as the rich countries tried to isolate the government for its stockholding and food security program. But India is far from alone in recognizing the value of public food reserves as insurance against price volatility, emergency food in the event of shortages, and stocks for anti-poverty programs.
In fact, many African countries, including Kenya, Egypt, and Zambia manage such initiatives. They would be deluding themselves to think that the WTO measures taken against India will not be used against them. Most of these countries have exceeded, or are on the verge of exceeding, the de minimis limits set by the WTO's Agreement on Agriculture (AoA), tripped up by the same loophole that has snagged India. That technicality, which artificially inflates the calculation of subsidy levels, must be resolved in Nairobi along with additional progress on outstanding agricultural issues in the long-running Doha negotiations.
To put the Doha Round in perspective, suffice it to say that even if the entire round was concluded to the satisfaction of the developing countries, it would not address any of the issues of food sovereignty that are raised by social movements in the Food and Nutrition Watch 2015, released today at FAO in Rome. It is, thus, from the perspective of social movements, a minimalist package facilitated by the WTO - an agency that they believe does not have the  legitimacy to deal with issues of agriculture and food security, and which ultimately seems to favor corporations and profit interests of the most powerful States.
U.S.: Divide and Conquer
The AoA allows the rich countries to retain their farm subsidies while preventing developing countries, from providing similar level of subsidies to poor and marginal farmers. All attempts by the G-33 countries to push through their proposal on food security at the WTO, by treating public stockholding programs as allowable Green Box subsidies, have been stymied, particularly by the US and the EU.
On the other hand, issues like the Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA) where developed countries stand to benefit the most, continue to be pushed at breakneck speed, pushed aggressively by the WTO Chair, Roberto Azevedo.
Tragically, the US manages to have its way at successive WTO ministerials because of the divisive politics it plays. At Bali, it was the Least Developed Countries (LDC) package that was used to divide the developing countries. At Nairobi the tactic that is most likely to be used is to divide developing countries by trying to carve out an entirely different category of "Low Income Developing Countries" (LIDC).
The goal is to split them from the "emerging" economies, primarily the BRICS countries, then argue they are now too developed to receive the same special and differentiated treatment (S&DT) mandated for developing countries as a whole.
This divide-and-conquer strategy seems to be taking effect, as the African Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) countries presented a recent paper at the WTO, which argued precisely for separating off the emerging countries. This plays directly into the US designs for creating divisions at Nairobi.
Making the "First African WTO Ministerial" Meaningful
The Tenth Ministerial is already being touted as the first "African" Ministerial, raising the stakes for host Kenya to produce an agreement.
Failure, of course, is defined as the rich countries not having their way, yet again at the cost of some of the hungriest people on the planet.
By all indications, the US and other developed countries are not prepared to offer any concessions in key agriculture negotiations. They are likely to push for an end to the Doha Development Round (DDA) without comprehensively addressing all the issues that were agreed upon as part of the Doha framework.
This would enable the developed countries to introduce new issues at the WTO including the so-called Singapore issues such as services, competition policy, and investment, which had been put on the back-burner by member states until the DDA was comprehensively negotiated. They also want to target state-owned enterprises in the developing countries.
While Kenya, in its eagerness to host a successful Ministerial could possibly break ranks with the developing countries and call for a premature closure to the Doha round, the implications of doing so for other African countries are serious. Consider just four of these.
First, all developing countries would lose the policy space to be able to hold reserve food stocks without being hauled up before the dispute settlement mechanism of the WTO for distorting trade. Even under the peace clause that India managed to negotiate at Bali, only existing programs are covered, so no new programs are allowed. As pointed out earlier, many countries in Africa including Morocco, Kenya, Jordan, Zambia, Zimbabwe and Tunisia, have either breached the limits that they are allowed to subsidize or are likely to do so.
Continuing U.S. Cotton Subsidies
Second, U.S. negotiators are offering only minimal concessions to address the long-running issue of its cotton subsidies suppressing prices in international markets, at great cost to other cotton exporters in the world, including Africa's C4 cotton countries (Mali, Burkina Faso, Benin and Chad). The U.S. and Brazil settled their dispute over the programs, in part because the 2014 U.S. Farm Bill enacted special provisions on cotton.
But a recent study estimates that those reforms in no way ended the price suppressing effects of U.S. policies. In fact, researchers estimated the cost to the world's other cotton producers at $3.3 billion per year in the coming years, as U.S. subsidies lower the price of U.S. cotton on international markets. The C4 countries are projected to lose about $80 million per year (Burkina Faso - $33 m; Mali - $26.5 m; Benin - $16.5 m; Chad - $3.3 m). India's losses are projected at more than $800 million per year.
Third, the biggest concern of developing countries in seeking to reduce U.S. domestic support is to end unfair competition and eliminate the dumping of agricultural commodities on developing countries. The recent years of relatively high prices have given the world a reprieve from such cases, but there is evidence that we may be entering a new era of low crop prices and renewed dumping unless stronger domestic support caps are agreed in Nairobi. The United States is already exporting maize at prices below the costs of production, in part thanks to a projected $6 billion in subsidies to U.S. maize producers.
Finally, U.S. negotiators are trying to undermine provisions that facilitate access to life-saving medicines. They are proposing to terminate the existing moratorium on applying what are called "non-violation compliants" (NVCs) in the TRIPS agreement. Such a termination, which serves the interests of multinational drug firms, would make developing countries subject to trade disputes as and when they want to implement such public health measures. Developing countries have tabled an alternate proposal asking for NVC complaints to be made inapplicable to the TRIPS agreement.
On all counts, poor countries have much to lose in Nairobi if the US and other developed countries, backed by the WTO Secretariat, have their way at the Ministerial meeting. This is not the time for African negotiators to accept the tacit abandonment of the development mandate embodied in the Doha Declaration.
Biraj Patnaik is the Principal Adviser to the Commissioners of the Supreme Court in the Right to Food case. Timothy A. Wise is the Policy Research Director at Tufts University's Global Development and Environment Institute.
 
TPP opponents in Congress seek release of text
By Victoria Guida
Politico

Rep. Lloyd Doggett said today it was important for the Obama administration to release the text of the Trans-Pacific Partnership immediately so that corporations don't have the opportunity to change anything in the interim.
"There's a strategic reason for keeping it secret," he said at a press conference with other House Democratic opponents of the deal, adding that the administration is going through the deal "with a fine-tooth comb" to finalize the legal language.
"We want to see what was agreed to before they start changing thing," he said, noting a meeting last night at the White House with pharmaceutical industry representatives: "The first group the administration met with is Big Pharma."
Administration officials have said the text will be released in the next month.
Doggett said TPP can be defeated given the potential GOP opposition, but no one should underestimate the importance of the deal for corporate interests. "This is a battle that is far from over," he said.
Keith Ellison noted Republicans oppose parts of the deal that Democrats think are an improvement.
"The things some of the senators object to are the very things we think there should be more of," he said, citing provisions to block tobacco companies from filing investor-state disputes.
Meanwhile, North Carolina Republican Sen. Richard Burr announced he will oppose the pact, saying it singles out his state's agricultural industry unfairly and doesn't adequately protect intellectual property rights or prevent currency manipulation. "Anything less than a level playing field is unacceptable, and this deal simply does not accomplish enough for Americans," Burr said. "I oppose it and will do what I can to defeat it."

