Bruxelles imagine une cour spéciale pour raviver l’accord transatlantique TTIP
Africa to lobby for more access to duty free market at WTO meeting
Pharma industry: How to deal with WTO TRIPS ?
Abe sets next target: the economy
Brazil's sagging economy: Recession's sharp bite
 
Bruxelles imagine une cour spéciale pour raviver l’accord transatlantique TTIP
19 September 2015
Le Temps
L’Organisation mondiale du commerce (OMC) est en crise depuis 2008. Malgré les succès relativement mineurs à la réunion ministérielle de Bali en décembre 2013, la fonction de négociations de l’institution basée à Genève reste entravée. L’une de ses initiatives commerciales concurrentes, l’accord transatlantique (TTIP) entre l’Europe et les Etats-Unis, est également au point mort depuis plusieurs mois.
Pour tenter de remédier à leur inertie des pourparlers sur le libre-échange, Bruxelles et l’OMC se sont, cette semaine, tous deux fendus d’annonces contrastées, selon les observateurs. La première, intervenue mercredi: créer une cour de justice spéciale pour régler les litiges liés aux investissements dans l’accord de libre-échange entre l’Union européenne et Washington. Car le mécanisme d’arbitrage actuel, instance mise en place pour régler un conflit entre une entreprise et un Etat, fait hurler les opposants au TTIP. Il cristallise les inquiétudes – une justice ad hoc – d’une partie de l’opinion publique.
La réforme propose un dispositif plus stable, soit un mécanisme permanent, avec un tribunal de première instance et une chambre d’appel, le tout à vocation multilatérale. Innovant? «C’est une opération d’enfumage, où l’on change le nom sans remettre en cause ce système de justice privée», résumait aux médias Yannick Jadot, député européen vert. Le nouveau système proposé doit encore être validé par les Etats et le Parlement européen.
Du côté de l’OMC, le sursaut prend la forme d’un communiqué, datant de jeudi dernier, avec pour titre alléchant: «[…] un ensemble de dispositions pour Nairobi [10e Conférence ministérielle du 15 au 18 décembre prochains] pourrait être à portée de main.» Après des mois de consternation, l’espoir renaît-il enfin? A parcourir le contenu du texte, compte rendu du discours du directeur général de l’institution Roberto Azevêdo, à l’occasion d’une réunion de tous les membres de l’OMC à Genève, le lecteur ne peut que se rendre à l’évidence: «Les difficultés importantes détectées jusqu’ici sont encore présentes», stipule le texte. Les «problèmes les plus sérieux demeurent», indique-t-il encore. Mais on a «le sentiment de pouvoir aboutir», nuance-t-il enfin. Dans un cas (Bruxelles) comme dans l’autre (OMC), les institutions peinent visiblement à rassurer objectivement leur public respectif.
 
Africa to lobby for more access to duty free market at WTO meeting
19 September 2015
African countries are expected to lobby for more access to the duty free global market for agricultural products at the upcoming World Trade Organisation Ministerial Conference in Nairobi.
Top on the agenda during the December 15-18 meeting is the issue of reduction of agricultural subsidies and implementation of domestic support measures to reduce competition from exports from developing countries.
According to Peter Kiguta, EAC Director General of Customs & Trade, African countries are already negotiating on how to present these key issues to the other partners for negotiations.
“This is the right time is Africa lobbying for support from developing countries to comprehensively address their issues,” said Mr Kiguta.
African countries are seeking to address the issue of agricultural subsidies, “anti-dumping” barriers by rich countries like the US, Japan and Korea that restrict exports of agricultural products, steel and other goods from developing countries; the impact of lower industrial tariffs on domestic industries in many African countries; and the failure of the rich countries to provide adequate technical assistance to enable developing countries to comply with trade regulations and compete effectively.
READ: Africa to negotiate for better terms at WTO meet
“Under the WTO, African countries have been forced to open their markets to cheap imports that undermine domestic agriculture and industry while rich countries have failed to lower their own trade barriers, which cost developing countries some $100 billion in lost opportunities,” said Mr Kiguta.
He added that instead of addressing these concerns, the rich countries and the WTO secretariat are pressing for a new round of negotiations.
Despite a commitment under WTO to reduce certain agricultural subsidies by 20 per cent, overall subsidy levels in the industrialised countries of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) have continued to rise.
Payments to farmers now reach some $1 billion a day, equivalent to the total daily income of the world’s poorest 1 billion people.
Additional earnings
A World Bank report indicates that the elimination of such farm subsidies along with reductions in high agricultural tariffs and the granting of duty- and quota-free access to OECD markets for exports from the LDCs could bring developing countries additional earnings of $15,000 billion over 10 years.
“African ministers want to obtain binding commitments from especially the high-subsidy countries, such as the US, Japan, China and the Republic of Korea, to reduce the agricultural subsidies that enable the developed countries to export cheap food to developing countries, to the detriment of farmers in Africa,” said Joshua Mugodo, director of economic affairs at the Kenyans Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Trade.
He said that agricultural subsidies to farmers in the US, Europe, and Japan $1 billion a day are six times the amount these countries provide in development assistance. Together with other measures, such as tariffs and quotas, these subsidies make it difficult for developing countries to compete in rich country markets.
Even more damaging, they allow agricultural exports from the rich countries to drive small farmers out of business in developing countries.
The upcoming talks will also review past trade agreements for inequities that African and other developing countries argue have unfairly denied them the benefits of increased global commerce.
Keith Rockwell, chief spokesman at the WTO, said African countries are negotiating on an earlier proposal by Kenya, Nigeria, Senegal, Uganda and Zimbabwe that a package of reforms, known as the “development box,” be implemented by WTO members.
The reforms were intended to allow poor countries to raise import tariffs on staple foods, in order to meet their food security needs and support vulnerable rural populations.
“They also wanted to be able to directly subsidise crops that provide the main source of livelihood for poor farmers, a practice the agreement currently prohibits,” said Mr Rockwell.
Liberalisation
“The current agreement protects the interests of the developed countries at the expense of developing countries. Despite a commitment by WTO partners to reduce import duties, some developing country products exported to industrial nations, such as sugar, metals, cereals and textiles, continue to face tariff barriers, in some cases of more than 100 per cent.”
He noted that the other controversial issues to be discussed at the ministerial conference include proposals on investment, competition policy, transparency in government procurement and trade facilitation, all of which could further open domestic markets to competition from foreign companies.
Opponents claim liberalisation in these areas will reduce governments’ ability to protect their countries’ national interests
Agriculture is only one example of the many trade sectors in which Africa and other developing countries have not benefited as promised from previous agreements.
 
 
Pharma industry: How to deal with WTO TRIPS ?
19 September 2015
The Financial Express (Bangladesh)
While the Doha Declaration of WTO/ TRIPS for the LDCs' patient waiver is due to expire on December 31, 2015, a confirmation request for its extension at least up to 2021 has not yet been accepted. As such, the greatest challenge to be faced by the Bangladesh pharmaceutical industry is the end of the patent-free regime in 2016 as per WTO/TRIPS agreement adopted. The least developed countries (LDCs) have been enjoying the exemption from complying with it since then. But now under this TRIPS agreement, the WTO member-states have to legislate and enforce the minimum standards for the protection of intellectual property such as copyrights, patents, designs and trademarks. Otherwise, local pharmaceutical manufacturers will have to cease production, distribution and sales of medicines that should come under this intellectual property rights agreement for protection as elsewhere in the world.
But the WTO could not specify as yet the number of products to be under patent protection rights that may be 25 per cent of the total branded generics. This will create a radical change in the industry scenario as several major changes are to be expected. First, price control will be lifted. Producers have to pay for patented products as well as license fees and stipulated agreement clauses for export of patented products may create problems, as Bangladesh cannot export patented products without paying / patent owner's approval which will be more costly.
In addition, foreign firms will get free access to local market, and multinational companies (MNCs) can produce several products in Bangladesh that are not allowed now. At the same time, the impact may not be as devastating as it seems. Because, about 75 per cent of the drugs in the WHO list are not subject to patent protections. And many of the products in Bangladesh are generics, thus not subject to WTO patent protection jurisdiction. However, costs of licensing fees, impeded access to export markets, withdrawal of local protection, and potential rise in import costs are issues that need to be considered. So for the forward-thinking local drug manufacturers will have to adapt their product portfolio as necessary or suffer a steep drop in their sales.
However, the global 'patent cliff' may mitigate this a little if we could develop reverse engineering mechanism like India/China along with the recognised bio-equivalent test laboratories in Bangladesh to comply with the original products.
As implementation of the much-dreaded TRIPS has been haunting the global pharmaceuticals for years, 20 drugs, including Pfizer's cholesterol-lowering atorvastatin lipitor, Bristol-MyersSanofi's blockbuster blood thinner plavix, Eli Lilly's atypical antipsychotic zyprexa and Takeda's diabetes medication actos will become generic drugs in the years ahead. It's critical that all traditional pharma companies go through a conscious process to evaluate generics as part of their brand strategy.
Between 2011 and 2016, the world's best-selling drugs, with about $255 billion in global annual sales, are set to go off patent, as recent data from London-based research firm EvaluatePharma has revealed.
Once the blockbusters lose their patent protection lower-price generics are expected to decimate as much as 90 per cent of the sales of innovator companies.
So after the implementation of WTO/TRIPS, can LDCs like Bangladeshi consumers and companies providing healthcare will gain from the substantial slashes in costs as we are 97 per cent dependent on import-based API from India/China? Leading pharma companies have to look at new ways and strategies to fill the gap instead of relying on traditional patent blockbuster models. All industry players will have to embrace the generic market model as an increasingly important part of the overall pharmaceutical lifecycle in compliance with the economy/per capita income of Bangladesh in comparison to the developed countries of the world.
Among all the 50 LDCs, Bangladesh is the only country that has quality pharmaceutical manufacturing base with marketing capability overseas. Moreover, the country has also the potential to export its medicines and pharmaceutical items to at least 87 market destinations across the world. There is a need to form a platform among 50 LDCs within the Asia Pacific and Africa Pharmaceutical Union (AAPU) to minimise the existing registration requirement for companies and products within themselves so that pharmaceutical products, which are registered by the Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA) of the Bangladesh government may be registered in the LDCs in a fast-track way. If required, the issues relating to free sales certificates/certificate of pharmaceutical products, a valid good manufacturing practice (GMP) certificate and product approved annexure can easily be dealt with the counties applied for.
"This will not only save time and money but also enable the medium-ranking companies to get the access to the international marketing domain and the current export sales turnover of pharmaceuticals will grow by many folds within the shortest possible tenure", said this writer in seminars of EPB/MOFA/DCCI and also published in different national dailies.
The gap in the provision of medical services in Bangladesh provides a strong business opportunity for private healthcare providers to make a foray into the market and establish a first mover advantage. This is further affirmed by the persistent challenges facing the Bangladesh government in remedying the system's shortcomings including a lack of medical infrastructure, illegal clinics and budgetary constraints.
According to Export Promotion Bureau (EPB) data, the sector made $41.17 million shipments, registering a 2.8 per cent decline compared to that of FY'14 mark which was $42.4 million in the first seven months (July-January). The current financial year's (FY'15) target has been set at $73.02 million.
Among the 258 licensed pharmaceuticals, 30 top ones enjoy almost 80 per cent of the pharmaceutical business and top 50 companies share almost 98 per cent of over US$ 2.17 billion pharma market of Bangladesh. It's also appreciable that meeting the 97 per cent of local market demand, Bangladesh is exporting medicines to 87 countries including the US and a few European countries and it has already received global recognition. A number of companies are also in the process of obtaining recognised certifications. Bangladesh is also exporting medicines to the mildly-regulated countries like the Philippines, Vietnam, Singapore, Sri Lanka and LDCs of Asia-Pacific region and Africa.
Besides export opportunity, this also provides huge potential for Bangladesh for contract manufacturing and compulsory licensing. Since the country is a market of cheap labour, MNCs /Asia Pacific pharma marketing agents are interested in joint venture/ contract manufacturing under strategic business alliance with the top edge pharma manufacturing and marketing companies of Bangladesh.
Ministries and Bangladesh missions abroad should form a joint mission to address the extension of WTO/TRIPS by 2016. Unless Bangladesh crosses the barrier from status of LDC to mid-level developing country, the government should give top priority to start its own API industry at Gazaria Munshiganj and bioequivalence test laboratory for a cross-examination of a generic drug with the original one before the implementation of WTO/TRIPS.
 
Abe sets next target: the economy
20 September 2015
The Japan News
Prime Minister Shinzo Abe -- who cleared a major political hurdle by having the security-related bills passed into law -- now intends to boost his administration's foundation by giving the highest priority to economic issues, sources said.
Abe plans to reshuffle his Cabinet and the Liberal Democratic Party's executive members in early October.
"The Abenomics economic policy has entered its second stage. I'd like to make best efforts on the economy after the security-related bills are enacted," Abe said on an Internet program on Sept. 11, indicating his intention to return to the goal of revitalizing the economy now that Diet deliberations on the security-related bills are over.
The latest economic issue is how the government should conclude the plan to alleviate the burden on the public when the consumption tax rate is raised to 10 percent in April 2017. The Liberal Democratic Party and Komeito plan to introduce a reduced tax rate system, but there remains a perception gap over items to apply the system to, and also when to introduce it, among senior officials of the two parties' tax system panels.
Abe may be required on some occasions to take the initiative in bringing views into agreement, observers said.
In light of a meeting of ministers from nations negotiating the Trans-Pacific Partnership free-trade agreement that will begin at the end of this month in Atlanta, the government is to try its utmost to reach a broad agreement on the TPP, which is expected to boost the administration's Abenomics policy.
Abe plans to reshuffle his Cabinet following a trip to New York, to attend a U.N. General Assembly session, and also Jamaica, sources said.
Abe intends to maintain the framework of his current administration, retaining key Cabinet members such as Chief Cabinet Secretary Yoshihide Suga and LDP Secretary General Sadakazu Tanigaki. Many LDP members have said they want Deputy Prime Minister and Finance Minister Taro Aso, Foreign Minister Fumio Kishida and LDP General Council Chairman Toshihiro Nikai to remain in office.
 
Brazil's sagging economy: Recession's sharp bite
19 September 2015
The Economist
JOB centres are rarely upbeat places. In Brazil, where they are often a last resort for those who lack the personal connections that lubricate much of life in the country, they can be particularly bleak. Francisco, a 54-year-old driver queuing at one in downtown São Paulo, has had no work for over two years. The lines have never been longer, he sighs. "It's the crisis."
Brazil's growth has been anaemic for years. It averaged 2% a year during President Dilma Rousseff's first term in office from 2011 to 2014--despite booming global demand for the country's soyabeans, iron ore and oil. Government meddling with the private sector, combined with excessively loose monetary and fiscal policy, sapped confidence; investment dried up and inflation soared. Without the crutch of high commodity prices, GDP has now collapsed (by 1.9% in the second quarter of 2015, compared with the first), pulling the hitherto resilient labour market with it.
Nearly 500,000 jobs have been cut since January. Researchers at Fundação Getulio Vargas, a business school, reckon another 2.5m will be shed before the end of 2016. Unemployment rose to 7.5% in July, from 4.9% a year earlier--the fastest annual rise on record. It is expected to hit roughly 10% at the end of next year, and stay there for some time. Speak to Brazilians and it is hard to find anyone without a friend or family member on the dole.
From flophouses to boardrooms, moods darkened further in the wake of the decision last week by Standard & Poor's to demote Brazil's debt to junk status, following Ms Rousseff's inept efforts to cast onto an unco-operative Congress the responsibility for balancing the budget. The rating agency subsequently downgraded dozens of big Brazilian companies, including several large banks. Petrobras, the state-controlled energy firm which is also at the centre of Brazil's biggest-ever corruption scandal, earned another dubious distinction as the world's largest company without an investment-grade credit rating. At the start of the year Petrobras accounted for about one-tenth of total Brazilian investment; now it may need to trim its capital expenditure by even more than the 40% it announced in June.
S&P's decision mainly reflected pre-existing worries about the Brazilian economy. Neither the stockmarket nor the real--down by 30% against the dollar since January--nosedived in the days after the announcement; this suggested that a return to junk status had largely been priced in. But the news has certainly added to the gloom. Already-high borrowing costs for both the public and private sector will rise, and with them the risk of further downgrades. Pension and mutual funds that can only hold investment-grade assets will offload Brazilian bonds at a brisker pace, in anticipation of similar moves by Moody's and Fitch. (Typically, two of the big three rating agencies need to slap a "junk" label on a country's bonds before such funds are obliged to divest.)
This will not cripple the Brazil of today, with its diversified economy and plump foreign-exchange reserves, as it might have in earlier, more chaotic times. Ilan Goldfajn of Itaú, a big Brazilian bank, expects net inflows into Brazil's capital markets to bottom out at $10 billion in 2016, down from $45 billion in 2014.
But divestment will make it harder for Brazil to shake off its worst recession in decades. This week analysts polled by the Central Bank once again once took an axe to growth forecasts . The OECD, a rich-country club, thinks GDP could shrink by 2.8% this year and 0.7% next. A weaker currency has stoked inflation, which the Central Bank has been trying hard to quench with (contractionary) interest-rate rises. This has failed to boost exporters much--leaving aside Brazil's hyper-competitive farmers. Few expect growth to rebound before 2018, when the next presidential election is due. Income per person, which peaked in 2011, may take longer to recover.
Since disavowing the interventionist policies of her first term, Ms Rousseff has tried, unsuccessfully, to pick a path between fiscal orthodoxy, championed by her finance chief, and stimulus demanded by her planning minister and many in her left-wing Workers' Party. To appease the former camp, on September 14th the government presented another set of belt-tightening measures worth 65 billion reais ($17 billion), including a pay freeze for some public servants and a controversial tax on financial transactions.
Just like the government's earlier efforts, these look half-hearted: insufficient to repair public finances and unleash a spirit of exuberance, but more than enough to enrage Congress, over which the increasingly unpopular president has no control and where a movement to oust her is gaining steam. Ms Rousseff is clinging on to her job for the time being. Many ordinary Brazilians have not been so lucky.
 




Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.