Headlines:

Greek Plan Accepts Austerity to Get Debt Relief

OECD warns on 'chronic' low pay and job insecurity; Crisis legacy

Unilateral sanctions hurt global economy, Modi tells West

Some anti-Russian sanctions may stay forever

BRICS Leaders agree on partnership blueprint

Brics leaders warn of financial instability amid global upheaval; 

BRICS nations launch new bank, currency pool

Emerging financier: BRICS bank to fund first project around April 2016

New Brics bank sends strong message to World Bank, IMF on 'bully tactics'

U.S., Japan enter 'final' trade talks ahead of possible TPP agreement

 

Details:

Greek Plan Accepts Austerity to Get Debt Relief

International New York Times

By HYPERLINK "http://topics.nytimes.com/topics/reference/timestopics/people/a/liz_alderman/index.html"LIZ ALDERMAN and HYPERLINK "http://topics.nytimes.com/top/reference/timestopics/people/k/james_kanter/index.html"JAMES KANTERJULY 9, 2015

ATHENS — Only a day after grim predictions of financial and social collapse in HYPERLINK "http://topics.nytimes.com/top/news/international/countriesandterritories/greece/index.html?inline=nyt-geo"Greece, a scramble appeared underway to work out the details of a new bailout package to bring the country back from the brink of falling out of the euro.

As details of HYPERLINK "http://www.amna.gr/english/articleview.php?id=10546"the new offer emerged, it appeared that Prime Minister HYPERLINK "http://topics.nytimes.com/top/reference/timestopics/people/t/alexis_tsipras/index.html?inline=nyt-per"Alexis Tsipras was capitulating to demands on harsh austerity terms that he urged his countrymen to reject in the referendum last Sunday, like tax increases and various measures to cut the costs of pensions.

But Mr. Tsipras sought a three-year bailout loan totaling 53.5 billion euros (about $59 billion) and asked creditors to commit to discussing restructuring the nation’s massive debt. The amount was more than it would have been without a nationwide banking shutdown that has pummeled the economy. If granted, it would come on top of 240 billion euros in bailout loans HYPERLINK "http://topics.nytimes.com/top/news/international/countriesandterritories/greece/index.html?inline=nyt-geo"Greece has received since 2010. Mr. Tsipras seemed to have gained ground on debt relief, his one bedrock demand. Germany’s finance minister, Wolfgang Schäuble, finally gave a little on that Thursday, admitting that “debt sustainability is not feasible without a haircut,” or write-down of debt, even if he then appeared to backtrack.

Donald Tusk, a former prime minister of Poland and the president of the European Council, said on Twitter that any “realistic proposal from Athens needs to be matched by realistic proposal from creditors on debt sustainability to create win-win situation.”

Mr. Tsipras went before his cabinet to seek a commitment for reform measures in the new plan that, presumably, went beyond what had been offered previously. He will seek the approval of Parliament on Friday. Much may hinge on his ability to persuade the more radical elements of his Syriza party to support a package that in essence was anathema to many of them last week.

It is still too early to gauge whether this prospective bailout will be any more effective than earlier pacts in balancing the demands of the creditors against some relief from austerity.

What was breathtaking, however, was how in a matter of hours the entire dynamic in the Greek crisis seemed to shift, from apocalyptic warnings of a Zimbabwe in the Balkans, to a fresh optimism that the basics of a deal could be worked out.

The question now is whether that apparent change of heart reflected a new political determination to cut a deal that keeps Greece in the eurozone.

OECD warns on 'chronic' low pay and job insecurity; Crisis legacy

By Sarah O'Connor in London 

10 July 2015

Financial Times

Time is running out to stop millions of people from becoming permanently unemployed or trapped in low paid and insecure jobs, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development has warned.

The Paris-based organisation said young people who entered the jobs market during the 2008-09 financial crisis were approaching a "make or break point" in their working lives. Its research shows a person's longterm career prospects are largely determined by their first decade in the labour market.

"Governments need to act now to avoid a permanent increase in the number of workers stuck in chronic joblessness or moving between unemployment and low-paid precarious jobs," said Angel Gurría, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD secretarygeneral. "If that happens, the long-run legacy of the crisis would be to ratchet inequality up yet another notch from levels that were already far too high."

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD's annual Employment Outlook shows unemployment is starting to recede slowly in developed countries, including in those hardest hit by the crisis. But about 42m people were still jobless in the 34 HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD countries in May, 10m more than before the crash. In addition, real wage growth remains unusually weak, averaging 0.5 per cent a year since 2007.

There are vast disparities between countries: by the end of 2016, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD predicts unemployment will have dropped to about 5 per cent in the UK and US, but expects it to remain above 20 per cent in Spain and Greece.

As Greece's debt crisis intensifies , the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD data demonstrate just how badly its workers have suffered: youth unemployment is about 50 per cent, in spite of a sharp fall in average real wages and a 22 per cent cut in the cash value of the minimum wage between 2011 and 2012.

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD's biggest concern is the sharp increase in long-term unemployment since the crisis, particularly among young people. More than a third of the unemployed in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD area have been out of work for a year or longer, and their ranks have swollen 77 per cent since 2007.

Mr Gurría urged policy makers to spend more to help the unemployed back into work, pointing out that many countries had slashed spending on this area as they tried to repair their budget deficits after the crisis. Real spending on active labour market programmes per unemployed person fell between 2007 and 2013 by more than 50 per cent in Ireland, Italy, Spain and the UK.

Like the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"International Labour Organisation , the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"UN's labour market division, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD is becoming increasingly worried about the quality and security of jobs at the bottom of the labour market, which are partly the result of globalisation and long-term technological shifts, as well as the cyclical effects of the crisis. It endorsed policies that support the incomes and upward mobility of people at the bottom, such as minimum wages and better skills training.

It published research that suggests countries with a large number of workers with poor information-processing skills can boost upward mobility and reduce inequality if they can find and fund ways to improve those skills. The Financial Times Limited 

Unilateral sanctions hurt global economy, Modi tells West

Sachin.Parashar@timesgroup.com 

10 July 2015

The Times of India - Mumbai Edition

In a direct message to the West, PM Narendra Modi on Thursday said unilateral sanctions against countries were hurting global economy . Modi's remarks at the BRICS business council came afer his bilateral meeting with Iranian President Hassan Rouhani, who is here to attend the SCO summit where Tehran is an Observer. "Unilateral sanctions are hurting the global economy ," said Modi. "So it is very essential that BRICS economies deepen their cooperation. BRICS should also work with other developed regions," he said. Modi, in fact, led the BRICS charge against sanctions as the 5-nation group con demned unilateral military interventions and economic sanctions in "violation of international law and universally recognized norms of international relations". "Bearing this in mind, we emphasize the unique importance of the indivisible nature of security, and that no state should strengthen its security at the expense of the security of others," said the BRICS 2015 Declaration.

Elaborating the PM's remarks, MEA secretary (multilateral and economic relations) HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Sujata Mehta said sanctions imposed by any country needed to be approved by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"UN and there is no need to adhere to those which don't have the approval of the world body . For the full report, log on to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"http://www.timesofindia.com

Some anti-Russian sanctions may stay forever

9 July 2015

Prime News

MOSCOW, Jul 9 (PRIME) -- Some anti-Moscow sanctions, imposed by the Western countries after accession of Crimea, may stay forever as the Kremlin will not change its stance, Deputy Foreign Minister Sergei Ryabkov told reporters Thursday at the sidelines of the BRICS forum.

“I think that some part of sanctions, like those imposed after the referendum held in Crimea and Sevastopol last year, this part of sanctions will stay forever. As we are not going to change anything in our position over Crimea,” he said.

After Crimea joined Russia and a military conflict broke out in eastern Ukraine, the U.S. and the E.U. gradually imposed sanctions on Russian companies, banks and some sectors of economy.

ZAO PRIME

BRICS Leaders agree on partnership blueprint

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"fu jing, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Zhao Shengnan

Wu Jiao and Fu Jing in Ufa, Russia and Zhao Shengnan in Beijing 

10 July 2015

China Daily

Strategy will provide guideline to expand trade and investment

The BRICS group of five major emerging economies vowed to forge a closer economic partnership on Thursday by adopting a milestone blueprint for cooperation as they concluded an annual summit amid slowing growth in developed and emerging markets.

An agreement on the New Development Bank, a financial institution designed to support the BRICS countries' economic development and prevent financial crises, was also entered into force during the meeting in the Russian city of Ufa.

The Strategy for BRICS Economic Partnership will be "the key guideline" for expanding trade, investment and cooperation in wide-ranging areas including manufacturing and energy, according to the Ufa Declaration.

Observers said the landmark meeting has elevated the group's level of cooperation to a new high as the leaders mapped out a detailed road map and agreed on concrete plans.

President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Xi Jinping called on the BRICS nations to identify key sectors for cooperation and increasingly integrate the newly adopted strategy with each member's development plans.

Members should promote the development of the bank's headquarters and a regional center in Africa, said Xi, who urged more countries to support the bank.

The Shanghai-based bank, with an initial authorized capital of $100 billion, plans to raise money both on local markets and internationally, and to issue its first loans in April next year, said its president, India's K.V. Kamath.

Russian President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Vladimir Putin said the bank will focus on handling loans for large-scale joint projects in the transportation and energy sectors as well as in industrial development.

The Ufa Declaration said, "We welcome the proposal for the New Development Bank to cooperate closely with existing and new financing mechanisms including the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank."

Zhu Jiejin, an expert on BRICS studies at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Fudan University in Shanghai, said the bank shows that the level of cooperation among the group's members has been raised from a mainly strategic approach to a more pragmatic one.

The bank will bring great benefits and support specific projects in various areas including industrial cooperation, said Zhu.

Although the bank is not designed to challenge the existing global financial system, Xi urged the BRICS countries to push for reform of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"International Monetary Fund's governance structure by increasing the rights of emerging-market countries and developing countries to speak out.

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"IMF data show that the BRICS countries contributed half of the world's economic growth in the past decade, and their growth is expected to exceed that of the developed countries and other emerging economies by 2030.

Xu Xiujun, an expert on international political economy at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, expressed optimism over the five economies' prospects for development, saying the five remain the powerhouse of global growth.

The newly adopted strategy will convert ideas for cooperation into concrete measures, said Xu. The BRICS countries have all launched new reforms and prioritized the expansion of domestic demand to tap growth potential, the expert added.

Contact the writers at wujiao@chinadaily.com.cn.

China Daily Information Company

Brics leaders warn of financial instability amid global upheaval; 

Fears over China market jitters and Greek crisis •Commodities dependency highlighted

By Kathrin Hille in Ufa and Josh Noble in Hong Kong 

10 July 2015

Financial Times

Leaders of the Brics group of big emerging economies have warned of the threat of financial instability and volatile commodity prices following the Greek crisis and acute market turbulence in China.

They voiced their concern as a barrage of measures taken by Beijing to calm investor nerves stemmed the recent market rout in China, with equities rising strongly yesterday after a string of sharp declines wiped trillions off the value of stocks.

European equity and bond markets also rallied as Athens prepared a new reform plan for its creditors ahead of a weekend deadline for a bailout deal to avert Greek exit from the euro.

"We are very concerned with the market instability, the high volatility of prices of some commodities and the high public debt of a number of big countries," Russian president HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Vladimir Putin said after hosting the annual summit of the leaders of Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa.

The leaders avoided specific reference to the Chinese equity tumble, but delegates at the summit said it was a key concern for Russia, Brazil and South Africa, which are highly dependent on commodities exports.

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Anton Siluanov, Russia's finance minister, blamed raw material price drops on the fallout from the Chinese bubble. The overheating of the Chinese market "had an impact on the world financial system, raw materials prices fell, that is a direct impact on Russia", he said on Wednesday.

"Of course [China's equity turbulence] was discussed on the sidelines," said Sergei Katyrin, head of the Russian Chamber of Commerce and chairman of the Brics Business Council. "We are confident that China can control this, but of course such volatility creates tension and has an impact on the entire world."

Another senior member of the Russian delegation said that during their talks, leaders also expressed confidence that Beijing had "the money, the experience and the determination" to halt the market turbulence. "It is part of the growing pains of the market," he said.

Chinese market jitters "could of course have an impact on every Brics country", said Brian Molefe, chief executive of South African public utility Eskom. "I'm not sure that there would be an intervention by Brics at any stage in this, but it underscores the case to set up our joint development bank and currency pool."

The Shanghai Composite rose 5.8 per cent yesterday, its biggest one-day gain since 2009. The Shenzhen market rose 3.8 per cent, and the small-cap ChiNext board added 3 per cent. Movements have been restricted by a wave of share suspensions, as companies try to shield themselves from the sell-off.

In Hong Kong, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Hang Seng index rose 3.7 per cent, while the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"China Enterprises index climbed 3.1 per cent. A number of Hong Kong-listed exchange traded funds tracking mainland Chinese markets soared, with iShares' popular FTSE A50 fund up over 13 per cent.

Commodity-related stocks - among the worst hit in the past few days - lead gains in Shanghai. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Chinalco, the aluminium producer, and coal miner HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"China Shenhua Energy both rose by the maximum daily limit of 10 per cent.

The break from the rout followed another raft of measures from Chinese authorities aimed at halting the share slide. China's banking regulator said yesterday it would allow lenders to ease margin requirements for some wealth management clients, and encouraged banks to offer financing to companies seeking to buy their own shares.

Chinese police also vowed to "punch back" against allegedly illegal market activities and would investigate "malicious" short selling, state media reported.

That came on the heels of a new rule imposed late on Wednesday by the securities regulator banning investors with shareholdings of more than 5 per cent in a company from selling shares.

China slide page 3 James Kynge page 11 Lex page 14 Short View page 15 Markets pages 22-24

The Financial Times Limited 

BRICS nations launch new bank, currency pool

9 July 2015

Deutsche Welle

Leaders of BRICS emerging nations have managed to present a unified front at a summit in Russia, expressing concern over the world economy. They also finally launched two of the group's largest initiatives to date.

At a summit in the Russian city of Ufa on Thursday, heads of state from Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa said a new development bank with an estimated start capital of $50 billion (45 billion euros) would begin financing projects as early as next year.

The initiative has taken three years to cobble together, with protracted negotiations on funding, the location of the bank's headquarters and personnel issues.

Russian President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Vladimir Putin said he saw the bank - dubbed the New Development Bank - as an alternative to international financing institutions like the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Bank and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"International Monetary Fund, both of which are dominated by the United States.

A currency pool

A second element of the group's plans to counterbalance the Western-dominated financial system includes a pool of currency reserves, worth $100 billion, which was also announced on Thursday.

For Russia, which has seen its access to Western funding cut off completely since it annexed the Crimean peninsula from Ukraine in March 2014, the launch of the bank and the currency pool had been key priorities. At the summit, Putin lamented what he perceived as the accumulation of sovereign debt by "a number of countries."

"These imbalances affect the growth rate and our economies," Putin said. "In these circumstances, the BRICS states intend to actively use their own resources and internal resources for development."

The development bank would start lending next year to finance large-scale infrastructure projects, according to Putin. The bank's initial starting capital of $50 billion would eventually be doubled within the next few years.

"The New (Development) Bank will help finance joint, large-scale projects in transport and energy infrastructure, [as well as] industrial development," Putin said.

Obstacles to growth

The BRICS countries make up 40 percent of the world's population and account for about a fifth of global economic output. But their attempts to provide a counterweight to Western-dominated financing have been complicated in recent years.

Russia and Brazil, with their massive deposits of raw materials, have watched as global demand for their exports has waned. The price of oil - a central pillar of the Russian economy - has tanked since the beginning of this year.

Brazil is still reeling from a massive corruption scandal over its energy company HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Petrobras, which accounts for around 10 percent of Brazil's annual economic output. Russia's currency, the ruble, is also in the midst of a crisis as international sanctions over Moscow's role in the Ukrainian civil war take effect.

Meanwhile, South Africa has been hindered by an energy crisis and a national crime wave. In China, Beijing's ability to maintain market stability were tested in recent days as stocks crashed and the government was forced to intervene, which it did successfully but at a high cost.

With that in mind, summit participants agreed to coordinate their efforts to keep their respective economies stable. cjc/pad (Reuters, AFP). Deutsche Welle

Emerging financier: BRICS bank to fund first project around April 2016

10 July 2015

Nikkei Report

YUJI KURONUMA, Nikkei staff writer

UFA, Russia -- The BRICS nations' new development bank will fund its initial project around next April, President K.V. Kamath said Thursday.

Kamath spoke to reporters here the day of the summit between the leaders of Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa.

The five countries plan to contribute equally to the New Development Bank's $50 billion in capital. Unlike the China-led HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"BRICS bank will finance projects beyond Asia.

The bank will initially fund projects in the five countries and will start supporting operations in other nations after it starts expanding membership, Kamath said.

He ruled out offering support to Greece, saying the bank currently lacks the jurisdiction. He also said the bank can build cooperative relations with the AIIB and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Bank instead of competing with them. Nikkei Digital Media Inc.

New Brics bank sends strong message to World Bank, IMF on 'bully tactics'

10 July 2015

Cape Times

The launch of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Brics New Development Bank (NDB) in Russia this week is very much political. It seems the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Bank and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"IMF got a clear message this week from the world's most important emerging economies - don't use your economic power to threaten us or dictate the terms of our development any longer.

As the powerful Brics grouping launched the NDB at the 7th Brics Summit, it sought to find alternatives to a system which has been built on Western dominance and control. In terms of what Brics is seeking to accomplish, it is important to understand that Brics is not looking to jump off the global capitalist bandwagon, but is looking for more room to manoeuvre within it. Brics are buying themselves more room in terms of their foreign |policy. They no longer want the West to be able to threaten them along the lines of "if you don't do what we want, we can block your currency payments, block the banks and strangle you".

President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Jacob Zuma shone a spotlight on the thinking of Brics leaders when he told Russia Today this week: "We've had difficulties, even with the help that we get. |It comes with so many strings attached… the lenders want to dictate what you should do.

"You can't utilise that kind of assistance the way you want. So, in a sense, it has conditions that will keep you dependent all the time. That's what we're trying to take ourselves out of and we believe that an alternative bank - like the NDB |- does provide an opportunity for us," Zuma said.

The NDB will provide Brics and other developing countries much- needed financial assistance without onerous conditionalities, and there will be capital available to fund major infrastructure development projects. What the NDB will help us avoid is the subsidising of economic and food dependency by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Bank and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"IMF.

The NDB will be far more democratic in its operating procedures. Each member will have an equal vote and there will be no veto power. This stands in contrast to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Bank, which assigns votes based |on capital share, and gives the US |a veto. The campaign to reform and democratise the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Bank and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"IMF always came to naught. The issue of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"IMF granting more voting powers to developing economies was continually blocked by the |HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"US Congress for years, and it was unlikely to be passed anytime soon.

We only need to look at Greece to see that the interests of the Western financial institutions have never been the same as those they purport to help. Greece was told that they had to privatise their natural resources and sell off their gas rights in order to pay their debts. It was only when Russia's HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Gazprom offered to buy Greek gas that the European creditors decided that Greece didn't need to sell its gas after all as they didn't want Russia to buy it.

Even Greece has indicated that |it wants to find an alternative to |the Western-controlled financial lending system which has never had Greek interests at heart. The government of Alexis Tsipras has even made noises about the possibility of joining the NDB, although no official request has yet been made. Russian Deputy Finance Minister Sergey Storchak has said "becoming part of the NDB will require Greece to make a political decision".

A number of other developing countries, such as Argentina and Indonesia, may also want to join the NDB. According to South Africa's Leslie Maasdorp, the newly appointed vice-president of the NDB, "the membership of the bank is open, but its core members will define the bank. In the future we |will need to determine how new members can join, and the process involved".

Maasdorp, who will take up his six-year post at the new headquarters of the NDB in Shanghai, has hailed the launch of the Bank as |"an exciting opportunity for Brics to give meaning and real economic depth to what it is about". After all, together the Brics countries account for 41 countries of the world's population and 21 percent of global GDP.

Maasdorp was quick to point out that the NDB is not being set up as an alternative to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"IMF and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Bank, but to work in a complementary fashion with all other development finance institutions. Independent Online

U.S., Japan enter 'final' trade talks ahead of possible TPP agreement

Eric Johnston 

STAFF WRITER

10 July 2015

The Japan Times

Trade negotiators from the U.S. and Japan met Thursday in Tokyo to work out what they hope will be a final bilateral deal needed for the Trans-Pacific Partnership agreement.

The meeting took place as HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Kyodo News reported that the government was discussing a nontariff framework for certain imports in return for allowing Japan to maintain high tariffs on rice.

Along with beef, pork, wheat, sugarcane, and dairy products, rice is one of Japan's so-called sacred sectors, where political pressure to maintain high tariffs in the face of cheaper imports from the U.S. has stymied efforts to conclude a TPP agreement.

The U.S. is pushing Japan to accept 175,000 tons of American rice above current levels, plus another 40,000 tons of rice products, for a total of 215,000 tons. The Japanese government has said it cannot accept more than an additional 50,000 tons of rice.

According to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Kyodo, Japan is also considering expanding imports of rice from Australia under a special quota, the amount of which is expected to be around 12 percent of that for the United States.

Despite the tough negotiations so far, Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Shinzo Abe expressed confidence ahead of the bilateral meeting.

"We're approaching the finish line," Abe said at a symposium in Tokyo on Thursday morning.

Japan is also moving toward reducing tariffs over the next 10 to 15 years on imported beef from the current 38.5 percent to around 10 percent and tariffs on imported pork, which are as much as ¥482 per kilogram, to about ¥50 per kilogram, also within at least a decade. That's under the condition that Japan would be allowed to temporarily raise the tariff again if there is a sudden increase in imports.

While Japan is anxious to guard its politically sensitive agricultural sector against cheaper imports, the U.S. wants to protect its politically sensitive auto parts sector, especially ahead of the U.S. presidential election late next year. Tough negotiations to eliminate tariffs on parts where both U.S. and Japanese firms fiercely compete have yet to produce a final agreement.

If Tokyo and Washington do conclude negotiations, it's expected to boost talks later this month between the 12 countries negotiating the broader TPP deal.

While the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"U.S. Congress granted President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Barack Obama the authority last month to negotiate TPP, it remains unclear whether a final deal would be approved by the legislative branch, given stiff opposition from many trade groups, small businesses, unions, environmentalists, consumer rights advocates, and human rights groups.

The Japan Times

END

 

 

cid:image001.png@01CC55E4.A4F90770

 

Josep Bosch, Information Officer

Information and External Relations Division

+41227395681

 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.
