HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "OMC designa a mexicano Fernando de Mateo presidente de Consejo General
·         HYPERLINK \l "Gaps Remain in WTO's Recent Efforts to Conclude Doha Round
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO Week Ahead: Members to Discuss Ongoing Trade Disputes, TRIPS Agreement
·         HYPERLINK \l "Dhaka again named LDC coordinator
·         HYPERLINK \l "Envoy Blasts US for Preventing Iran Membership in WTO
·         HYPERLINK \l "India's wheat subsidies illegal under WTO pledge: US industry
·         HYPERLINK \l "MCFL, 2 others seek subsidy for urea plants beyond Apr 16
·         HYPERLINK \l "Embargo russe: Bruxelles annonce un soutien aux éleveurs de porcs
·         HYPERLINK \l "Global dairy crisis simmers as supply overwhelms
 
OMC designa a mexicano Fernando de Mateo presidente de Consejo General 
 
MEXICO, 20 feb (Xinhua) -- La Organización Mundial de Comercio (OMC) designó al economista mexicano Fernando de Mateo como presidente del Consejo General del organismo, informó hoy la Secretaría (ministerio) de Economía (SE) de México.

La entidad mexicana indicó en un comunicado en la capital del país, que el nombramiento se produjo en la primera reunión del Consejo General de la OMC realizado en la ciudad europea de Ginebra, capital de Suiza.

De Mateo cuenta con una larga trayectoria como economista y negociador comercial, quien fungió hasta la víspera como presidente del Organo de Solución de Diferencias de la OMC, que es el foro de solución de disputas internacionales más activo y efectivo del mundo.

Previamente, de Mateo ocupó durante varios años la presidencia del órgano responsable de supervisar las negociaciones en materia de servicios en la Ronda de Doha, negociaciones celebradas en la capital de Qatar en 2001 para liberar el comercio mundial.

En los últimos años, el representante mexicano tambié fue presidente del Comité de Comercio de la Organización para la Cooperación y el Desarrollo Económicos (OCDE).

De acuerdo con el comunicado, la designación del funcionario posiciona de mejor manera a México frente al organismo internacional.

Al aceptar la presidencia, de Mateo indicó que es un año decisivo en el futuro de la OMC, porque es la ocasión de que las voluntades de sus miembros se conjunten para avanzar de manera definitiva en la conclusión de la Ronda de Doha.

El mexicano ofreció a los intergrantes del organimo internacional poner todo su esfuerzo para que los trabajos del Consejo General refuercen su papel en la economía mundial.

La OMC se creó en 1995 en reemplazo al GATT (Acuerdo General sobre Aranceles Aduaneros y Comercio) y como resultado de la Ronda de Uruguay iniciada en 1986 y concluida en 1993.

El Consejo General es el órgano con más alto nivel de la OMC y lo integran los miembros permamentes del organismo.

Tiene la facultad de actuar en representación de la Conferencia Ministerial que se reúne una vez cada dos años, la cual cuenta en la actualidad con 160 ministros de todos los países miembros.

La OMC celebrará a mediados de diciembre de 2015 su Décima Conferencia Ministerial.
 
 
Gaps Remain in WTO's Recent Efforts to Conclude Doha Round
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, February 23, 2015
 
Feb. 20 — The Director-General of the World Trade Organization, Roberto Azevedo, acknowledged that members' “substantive positions have not changed a great deal” since they last sought to conclude the 2001 Doha Round of trade negotiations.
 
In a speech delivered at the WTO's Feb. 20 General Council meeting in Geneva, Azevedo also commended members for a “productive start” in their recent discussions regarding agriculture, non-agricultural market access (NAMA) and services and urged them to “intensify” their work to produce a detailed post-Bali work program by July 31.
 
Specifically, he urged members to “identify more clearly the problems and challenges ahead of us” and “explore potential solutions for each of those problems and challenges.”
 
Azevedo stressed the narrowing timeline between now and the July 31 deadline and said that the negotiations “still have a long distance to travel.”
 
No Consensus
 
Members agreed that consensus on some of the most difficult issues of the Doha Round—like agricultural domestic support and market access—remain elusive, in separate comments delivered at the meeting.
 
The U.S. said that members are “nowhere near consensus” on “what a work program should look like, or how it could realistically enable us to conclude the round in a manner that works for everyone, and that can be accomplished in a relatively rapid timeframe.”
 
China's Ambassador Yu Jianhua said that it is “true that we have not seen any substantial results, but we have a better understanding of each other's concerns, particularly the ‘red lines’ ” where members cannot agree.
 
India said that members should embrace an appropriate level of ambition regarding the agricultural negotiations and seek an equitable balance with development-oriented outcomes.
 
Several WTO members noted that the amount of work required may extend the work program negotiations past July and into December, when members meet in Nairobi, Kenya, for the 10th WTO Ministerial Conference.
 
Agriculture Negotiations
 
“There has been a good level of attendance and engagement at these consultations which has highlighted the growing realization among members that the key issues need to be tackled in a detailed and concrete way,” Azevedo said.
 
Azevedo's comments echoed those of John Adank, the Chairman of the Agriculture Committee in Special Session, who recently called on members to tackle the key issues of market access, export subsidies and public stockholding for food security purposes in a more “detailed and concrete way.”
 
Adank said that the recent discussions have “highlighted some significant divergences about the present day viability” of the December 2008 draft modalities (Rev. 4), according to a Feb. 19 report (34 WTO, 2/20/15). Modalities are formulas for various outcomes, including reducing tariffs and trade-distorting remedies, last revised in 2008.
 
“Some members continue to state that the 2008 draft modalities reflected the maximum possible ambition for agricultural market access given their domestic sensitivities,” the report said. “Others have stressed that the 2008 draft modalities would not provide commercially meaningful new market access given the flexibilities embedded in it and thus an outcome based on these draft modalities would fall short of their market access goals.”
 
Adank will convene an informal meeting “in the near future,” and members of the WTO Agriculture Committee will meet on March 4 and 5.
 
‘Blood for Water.’
 
Deputy U.S. Trade Representative Michael Punke said that the U.S. would not support a scenario whereby it would agree to make cuts to its domestic support programs while countries like India and China “make no meaningful contribution,” according to a transcript of his speech at the General Council meeting. “We view that as blood for water—or, blood for air—which is simply not an outcome that we could endorse,” Punke said.
 
Punke's comments refer to a recent paper that detailed how key WTO members—the U.S., Brazil, India, China, Japan and Australia—would be affected if they adjusted their present domestic support levels according to the Rev. 4 proposal. The paper found that only the U.S. would have to adjust its domestic support levels to achieve compliance under the Rev. 4 proposal.
 
Such a scenario makes little sense for the U.S. when India and China are now the top two users of trade-distorting agricultural subsidies, said U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman in a Jan. 22 blog post.
 
“In our view, we must continue to recalibrate,” Punke said. “We are collectively better positioned than we were a few weeks ago to really start tackling the question of what recalibration means.”
 
‘Big, Rich Farmers.’
 
The Chinese ambassador said that members should recognize the stark differences in how domestic subsidies are applied in different countries.
 
“We should not mislead the discussions by mixing up the support of different natures, of different histories, of different size in terms of per capita and for different purposes,” Ambassador Yu said. “We should be honest to look at whether the support is provided to big, rich farmers for their export, commercial interests, or for the food security and livelihood of hundreds of millions of small and poor farmers; whether these are the measures to actively distort the market or to offset the impact of [a] distorted international market.”
 
“For the next steps, we believe that members should build upon the discussions in the past few weeks and engage in more substantive and solution-oriented deliberations on the basis of 2008 modality texts,” Yu said.
 
“Recalibration must be done in a non-discriminatory way, that is, if some members' obligations are readjusted, then obligations of other members should also be readjusted accordingly,” he said. “Only win-win solutions could survive.”
 
“If we throw away all we have achieved in the past and start from scratch, we are going nowhere,” he said. “If we choose an uncharted route, we are going nowhere. Neither of these would make our life easier at all.”
 
‘Differentiation.’
 
Punke clarified the U.S. position towards “differentiation” in the roles and contributions of developing country members within the context of the ongoing trade negotiations.
 
What the U.S. means by differentiation is that “a developing country member that today maintains very significant agricultural domestic support programs and has the productive capacity to affect global markets will necessarily have to participate in negotiations, and contribute to outcomes, in ways that are different than developing countries that don't have such programs,” Punke said. “Such developing countries are different from other developing countries, and we cannot succeed if we pretend otherwise.”
 
“We do not mean that we are seeking a new categorization of members within the WTO. We are not talking about ‘graduation,' ” Punke said. “None of this requires any revision of categories within this institution, but it does implicate the need for a flexible approach that recognizes that there can be no one-size-fits-all approach for development.”
 
Members are generally moving into “interesting and at least somewhat encouraging new territory,” Punke said. The past few weeks of trade negotiations mark “a relatively productive period in our development of a post-Bali work program” for the Doha Development Agenda (DDA), Punke said. “Compared to the work we did last year, we now are aiming much more directly at substance, tackling hard issues, and engaging in meaningful, if difficult, exchanges,” he said.
 
Market Access Negotiations
 
More “concrete proposals” are required for members to achieve progress in the negotiations regarding market access, Azevedo told members. “The consultations have shown that work should mainly focus on the so-called ‘formula-applying members,' in a first stage,” he said.
 
The chairman of the negotiating group on market access, Remigi Winzap of Switzerland, said that the current discussions are determined by four different elements, according to a report circulated among members.
 
“The first one is the level of ambition of a) negotiations in the WTO in today's international trading environment and b) in other WTO negotiating areas, in particular in agriculture,” the report said.
 
“The second determinant, which is linked to the first one, is what members can give and what specific NAMA (non-agriculture market access) aspirations they are pursuing in respect of binding coverage, reducing binding overhang and acquiring real market access,” it said.
 
“The third, and very difficult, element in the equation for finding a NAMA outcome are the very different tariff profiles of members,” the report said. “The difficulty being that whatever approach is chosen, it could have quite different implications for members.”
 
“The fourth component which is important to many members is how to take into consideration in a NAMA outcome potential concessions which would be granted on an MFN (most-favored nation)-basis on NAMA-products in plurilateral negotiations like the ongoing ITA (Information Technology Agreement) expansion negotiation,” the report said
 
Members of the Negotiating Group on Market Access plan to meet on March 2 to further discuss these issues, Azevedo said.
 
New Chair Announcements
 
Members elected Mexican Ambassador Fernando de Mateo to replace Jonathan Fried as the next chair of the General Council.
 
Ambassador Harald Neple of Norway becomes the chairman of the WTO Dispute Settlement Body (DSB), the position formerly held by de Mateo.
 
Members agreed to the following list of chair assignments: 
• Trade Policy Review Body Chairman, Atanas Atanassov Paparizov of Bulgaria;

• Council for Trade in Goods Chairman, Hector Casanueva of Chile;

• Council for Trade in Services Chairman, Martin Eyjolfsson of Iceland;

• Council for TRIPS Chairman, Abdolazeez Al-Otaibi of Saudi Arabia;

• Committee on Trade and Development Chairman, Bassirou Sene of Senegal;

• Committee on Balance-of-Payments Restrictions Chairman, Bertrand de Crombrugghe de Picquendaele of Belgium;

• Committee on Budget, Finance and Administration Chairman, Daniel Blockert of Sweden;

• Committee on Trade and Environment Chairwoman, Irene B.K. Young of Hong Kong, China;

• Committee on Regional Trade Agreements Chairman, Francisco Pirez of Uruguay;

• Working Group on Trade, Debt and Finance Chairman, Xavier Carim of South Africa;

• Working Group on Trade and Transfer of Technology Chairman, Luc-Joseph Okio of Congo; and

• Committee on Trade and Development in Special Session Chairwoman, Tan Yee Woan of Singapore.

The chairpersons of negotiating bodies will serve until the next session of the Ministerial Conference.
 
 
WTO Week Ahead: Members to Discuss Ongoing Trade Disputes, TRIPS Agreement
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, February 23, 2015
 
Feb. 20 — World Trade Organization members will discuss a number of ongoing trade disputes and review the work of the Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) Council in separate meetings.
 
On Feb. 23, the WTO Dispute Settlement Body (DSB) meeting will discuss, among other items, a European Union panel request to investigate U.S. domestic subsidies to manufacture Boeing aircraft parts.
 
Last year, the EU criticized U.S. officials for offering billions of dollars in tax subsidies in 2013 aimed at encouraging Boeing to manufacture its 777X commercial aircraft parts in Washington state (245 WTO, 12/22/14).
 
The panel request marks the latest salvo in the long-simmering dispute between the EU and U.S. over their respective tax regimes regarding aerospace manufacturing.
 
PET, Pulp and Steel
 
The DSB will also consider Pakistan's dispute with the EU over imports of certain polyethylene terephthalate (PET) products. Pakistan asked the DSB to determine whether the EU unfairly characterized the country's domestic tax laws when it imposed countervailing measures on Pakistani PET products.
 
The EU in 2010 issued a decision to assign a 5.1 percent countervailing duty rate on imports of certain PET products from Pakistan, such as plastic food and beverage containers. The EU said that Pakistan had implemented at least seven forms of domestic subsidies, favorable tax regimes and tariff protections that unfairly harmed the EU's PET industry.
 
The DSB will consider Canada's request for a panel investigation of China's antidumping duties on imports of cellulose pulp from Canada. The parties failed to reach an agreement on the dispute after it was first initiated Oct. 15, 2014.
 
Taiwan (Chinese Taipei) requested a DSB panel investigation of its dispute with Canada regarding antidumping measures related to imports of certain carbon steel welded pipe originating from Taiwan. Taiwan initially requested consultations with Canada to resolve the matter on June 25, 2014.
 
TRIPS Review
 
On Feb. 23, the TRIPS Special Session Committee will review its ongoing work to create a multilateral system for notifying and registering geographical indications for wine and spirits.
 
The committee's work has largely stalled since 2011, with just three committee meetings being held since then.
 
During the committee's last meeting in December 2014, members said that they are committed to meeting the July 31 deadline for advancing a work program to complete the Doha Round.
 
The geographical indications register for wines and spirits is the only intellectual property subject officially in the Doha Round. The meetings are considered special sessions of the TRIPS Council.
 
Tobacco Labeling Dispute
 
The TRIPS Council will hold regular meetings Feb. 24–25 to discuss proposals by the United Kingdom and Ireland to implement rules regarding plain packaging of tobacco products.
 
The Dominican Republic plans to express its concerns that the U.K. and Ireland are considering a proposal that requires mandatory colors for tobacco packaging—dull brown for the outside, white for the inside—and permits only specified text, such as the brand and type (22 WTO, 2/3/15).
 
The Dominican Republic and four other WTO members—Ukraine, Honduras, Indonesia and Cuba—are embroiled in an ongoing legal challenge against Australia's 2011 Tobacco Plain Packaging Act and are worried that more countries will seek to restrict how tobacco manufacturers label cigarette packaging.
 
The countries argue that such laws impose unfair restrictions on the use of trademarks, geographical indications and other markings in violation of the TRIPS agreement, the agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
 
New Zealand and France also have considered implementing such rules as a means to reduce smoking. The U.S. is not directly involved in the complaint but has reserved its right to participate as a third party.
 
Other Meetings
 
On Feb. 24, there will be an informal meeting regarding the WTO's services negotiations related to members' goal of concluding the Doha Round of trade negotiations.
 
On Feb. 26, there will be an informal meeting of the WTO's negotiating group on rules.
 
 
Dhaka again named LDC coordinator 
23 February 2015
The Financial Express (Bangladesh)
 
Bangladesh, Feb. 23 -- Bangladesh has been nominated again as coordinator of the least developed countries (LDCs) in the World Trade Organisation (WTO), says a press release. A meeting of the LDC Consultative Group on February 19 gave Bangladesh the nomination for 2015 to work as coordinator. Bangladesh for the first time worked as LDC coordinator in 1996 after formation of the group in 1995.
 
 
Envoy Blasts US for Preventing Iran Membership in WTO 
22 February 2015
FARS News Agency
 
TEHRAN (FNA)- Iran's Representative to the World Trade Organization Esmayeel Jalili lashed out at the US for hindering Iran's membership in the WTO.

"The Islamic Republic of Iran was admitted as an observer member of the WTO in 2005 after 10 years of waiting, but due to the US opposition no workgroup has been set up for Iran's accession to the WTO (as a permanent member)," Jalili said.

He pointed to the recent WTO meeting, and said, "The two-day WTO meeting was very intensive and it was held to study the latest conditions of the member-states and applicants and Iran's representatives also submitted their proposals to expedite Iran's membership process."

The World Trade Organization deals with the global rules of trade between nations. Its main function is to ensure that trade flows as smoothly, predictably and freely as possible.

While the WTO is driven by its member states, it could not function without its Secretariat to coordinate the activities. The Secretariat employs over 600 staff, and its experts (lawyers, economists, statisticians and communications experts) assist WTO members on a daily basis to ensure, among other things, that negotiations progress smoothly, and that the rules of international trade are correctly applied and enforced.

 
India's wheat subsidies illegal under WTO pledge: US industry 
From Lalit K Jha

Washington, Feb 22 (PTI) America's wheat industry has accused India of offering export subsidies to its farmers which are illegal under its WTO pledge, saying countries like China and India have far exceeded their WTO commitments on key commodities resulting in serious trade distortions.

"Increasing support levels gave Indian farmers an artificial incentive to produce more wheat. In fact, India's wheat production increased by 35 per cent over those seven years (2005-06 to 2013-14) to record levels. That buoyed world wheat supplies and increased pressure on prices that hurt wheat farmers in other countries," the US Wheat Associates said in a media release.

Referring to a recent study by Washington-based DTB Associates, it said India's minimum support price for wheat increased by 111 per cent between 2005-06 and 2013-14.

India recently notified the WTO of a much lower increase but the study showed that the Indian government used faulty tactics to calculate the number it reported, a number that many other WTO members have questioned, it alleged.

Over the same time, Indian wheat exports increased from 300,000 metric tons (MT) to 6.5 million MT, the release said.

"The study also included evidence that India is offering wheat export subsidies that are also illegal under its WTO commitment," it claimed.

"Yet, claiming it must maintain a large public stockpile of grain to maintain food security as an advanced developing country, India has demanded exemptions to its trade-distorting levels of support," it said.

"We agree with our US agricultural negotiators that we see no possibility of concluding the Doha agreement by pursuing the same approach used over the last decade," said USW vice president of Policy Shannon Schlecht.

"Hopefully the facts in the study will help raise awareness of the current realities of trade-distorting farm subsidies. Without this information it will be impossible for WTO members to achieve a balanced Doha Round conclusion across the domestic support, market access and export competition pillars," Schlecht said.

The study claims that the governments of India, China, Turkey, Brazil and Thailand have dramatically increased trade distorting subsidies for wheat, corn or rice production over the past 10 years to levels that exceed their WTO agreements.

"US wheat farmers strongly support the goals of the WTO and the Doha Round," said USW president Alan Tracy. "We also believe every WTO member must follow the rules. Sadly, the facts we have uncovered show this is not the case."

Member countries are required to report their domestic support levels to WTO regularly, but more than 650 notifications were late as of November 2014, Tracy noted.

China has not reported since 2008 and India just submitted a notification last fall covering seven crop years to make them current through 2010.

However, the study demonstrates that even notifications that have been reported often rely on faulty methodology. PTI LKJ ZH AKJ ZH
 
 
MCFL, 2 others seek subsidy for urea plants beyond Apr 16 
 
New Delhi, Feb 22 (PTI) Vijay Mallya-led MCFL and two other fertiliser firms have demanded that government should continue paying subsidies to their naptha-based urea plants beyond the April 16 deadline as these factories have not yet been connected with gas pipeline.

On January 7 this year, the Centre decided to give subsidy to these three urea plants, which uses naptha as feedstock, for the next 100 days to restart these facilities which were closed since October, 2014.

The government had asked these companies to convert their plants into gas-based, but in absence of gas-connectivity these plants are forced to run on costlier naptha.

"We have requested the government to allow us to operate beyond 100 days as we have not been provided the connectivity to gas pipeline so far," Mangalore Chemicals and Fertilisers Ltd (MCFL) Managing Director Deepak Anand told PTI.

Madras Fertilizers and SPIC have also made similar requests to the fertiliser ministry.

In a letter to Fertiliser Minister Ananth Kumar, SPIC has sought extension of the deadline, saying that this would not result into additional subsidy burden on the exchequer.

"Naphtha based plants would be paid subsidy on the basis average of spot RLNG or Naphtha whichever is lower. Therefore, there is no additional outflow to government on account of these units. If at all the outflow on account of subsidy can only be lower but in no case it can be higher than what is being paid to RLNG based units," SPIC noted.

A senior fertiliser ministry official said production of urea from these three plants are necessary for meeting the demand of key soil nutrients in southern region.

In a statement issued on January 7, Fertiliser Ministry had said "... for three fertiliser plants, viz, Mangalore fertilizers, Madras fertilizers and SPIC Tuticorin plants which were running on naphtha, the Government has decided to give subsidy on naphtha for next 100 days and these 3 plants will soon restart."

The minister had also said that the issue of "Right of Way for laying the gas pipeline from Kochi to Mangaluru has been resolved."

Urea is the controlled commodity as its selling price is fixed at Rs 5,360 per tonne. Difference between the cost of production and selling price is paid as subsidy to manufacturers. PTI JTR MJH NS SA
 
 
Embargo russe: Bruxelles annonce un soutien aux éleveurs de porcs 
22 February 2015
Agence France Presse ECOFI
 
Le commissaire européen à l'Agriculture Phil Hogan a annoncé dimanche à Paris la prochaine mise en place d'une aide au stockage du porc, afin de faire remonter les cours, qui se sont effondrés depuis l'embargo russe décrété en janvier 2014.

Cette proposition devrait être confirmée mardi, lors d'une réunion du Comité de gestion à Bruxelles.

Il s'agit de financer le stockage (coûteux par nature) de produits retirés du marché afin de faire remonter les prix du marché, sous pression en raison de l'afflux de porc refoulé par la Russie.

La mesure doit permettre de "retirer un volume considérable de produit du marché (...) stabilisant la situation financière des agriculteurs" et de "stimuler le fragile rétablissement des prix", a expliqué le commissaire irlandais Phil Hogan, qui a rencontré des éleveurs de porc au Salon de l'agriculture.

La France et plusieurs pays européens avait plaidé en faveur cette mesure, et le président François Hollande avait saisi le président de la Commission européenne de la question, a souligné le ministère de l'Agriculture dans un communiqué.

Moscou a décrété en janvier 2014 un embargo sur le porc européen, officiellement motivé par des cas de fièvre porcine africaine en Lituanie et en Pologne. L'UE a porté plainte contre cet embargo devant l'Organisation mondiale du commerce (OMC).

L'aide au stockage privé a été activée pour le lait en poudre et les fromages, après l'embargo décidé par Moscou, en août 2014 celui-là, en raison de la crise avec l'Ukraine. L'aide au fromage a ensuite été suspendue, à cause de demandes injustifiées de certains producteurs.

M. Hogan a aussi annoncé que Bruxelles acceptait la demande de la France d'une dérogation pour les producteurs de maïs, afin qu'ils puissent bénéficier des aides européennes liées au "verdissement" des cultures.

Les producteurs de maïs pourront toucher ces aides en pratiquant un couvert hivernal sur leurs champs, sans avoir à recourir à la rotation des cultures normalement exigée par Bruxelles.

 
Global dairy crisis simmers as supply overwhelms 
 
* Smaller Chinese farms dumping milk and selling cows
* Russia food embargo diminishes demand for EU cheese
* Currency weakness helps to shield some producers

By Nigel Hunt and Naomi Tajitsu

LONDON/WELLINGTON, Feb 22 (Reuters) - The weak global diary market, hit by oversupply and a tail-off in Chinese demand that has driven international milk prices down by around 50 percent, is unlikely to pick up anytime soon, analysts say.

China was one of the world's fastest-growing dairy markets, but consumption there has dried up after earlier high prices cut domestic demand, leaving excess stocks of imported milk powder.

"It might be another six months before it (the outlook) improves," said Susan Kilsby, dairy analyst at NZX Agri, noting there should be a seasonal rise in milk production in the European Union, the United States and China in the spring.

"I don't think it (the rise in production) is going to be massive because prices are so low there isn't that incentive there but ... there will certainly be enough supply to keep prices low, at least until the middle of the year."

China has also seen heavy investment in higher-yielding modern dairy farms with smaller dairy farmers dumping milk and selling cows as demand from processors slows.

"We don't see China coming back to the global market in a big way until the second half (of 2015)," said Rabobank analyst Sandy Chen.

"Some major players have indicated that they won't go to the international market at all this year. Their large suppliers ie the large farms are still increasing production ... so they will continue to source milk domestically."

The sharp decline in prices coincides with plans by some EU farmers to expand production in the run-up to the abolition of milk quotas in April.

A food embargo by Russia has also cut off the EU's biggest outlet for cheese, worth almost one billion euros in 2013, and accelerated a decline in EU milk prices from a record high at the end of 2013.

"We were very dependent on Russia for cheese exports, hence the current turbulence on the market but you have to separate micro-trends from big, long-term ones," said Pierre Begoc, international director at French consultancy Agritel.

"Northern Europe is the zone with the biggest potential worldwide to raise production," he added, noting New Zealand had less capacity to boost output.

CURRENCY SWINGS HELP SOME

Producers in countries such as the United States where the main focus is to meet domestic demand were initially shielded to some extent from the fall in international prices but the impact is now beginning to be felt, analysts said.

"Global market forces driving the lower milk prices have flowed through to virtually every dairy farmer in the world, whereas six months ago it was only New Zealand farmers who were in that situation," Kilsby said.

Jerry Dryer of U.S.-based Dairy and Food Market Analyst said there had been a sharp drop in U.S. prices from previous record levels but buyers were now beginning to replenish inventories.

This is now providing some support for prices in the U.S. cash market although exports were challenging, he said.

"Our prices have been a little higher than New Zealand recently, which makes it difficult to export," he said.

Weak local currencies have, however, provided some protection for producers in Australia, the world's fourth largest exporter, and in the European Union.

"While the global price of milk is down 50 percent, our price to our consumers is down only 12 percent," said Garry Helou, managing director of Murray Goulburn, Australia's largest dairy producer.

He added strong domestic demand had also allowed processors to switch to producing products such as cheese at the expense of milk powder.

The huge swing in dairy prices during the last 12 months has led to some calls for the development of more futures markets to help farmers cope with volatility.

Exchange operator Euronext said last month it would launch revamped dairy futures and options contracts by the end of March.

And Britain's government is supporting a feasibility study for dairy futures. (Additional reporting by Dominique Patton in Beijing, Colin Packham in Sydney, Gus Trompiz in Paris and Lisa Baertlein in Los Angeles, editing by David Evans) 
END
 
 


  ________________________________  
Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.