India's economy grows 7.4 percent, outperforms China
World Leaders Meet in Paris to Overcome Divisions on Climate Change
COP21 Paris climate talks: World leaders pledge billions
PARIS 2015: Countries call for end to $500 bn/year fossil fuel subsidies
IMF approves inclusion of China's RMB in SDR basket
Russia, Ukraine to look at ways to avoid Russia’s ban on imports of Ukrainian foods
Ukraine, Russia to hold consultations on claim to WTO on Dec 4
EU-Ukraine free trade agreement enters into force in 5 weeks 
India: "WTO threat to agriculture"
Pakistan: Production of strategic cotton crop falling alarmingly
 

India's economy grows 7.4 percent, outperforms China
30 November 2015
Agence France Presse
India's economy grew by 7.4 percent year-on-year in the last quarter, official figures showed Monday, outperforming China and giving Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Narendra Modi a boost following a recent election drubbing.
Growth in the three months to the end of September quickened to 7.4 from 7.0 percent in the previous quarter, according to statistics ministry data, slightly ahead of analysts' expectations.
India has now recorded three straight quarters of growth above seven percent, performing better than its giant neighbour China on each occasion and leading the way for emerging markets with Russia and Brazil flagging.
"China was the leader of economic growth across the globe for two decades or so until 2014 but India will now be the pace-setter for the next two to three years at least," said analyst HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Sujan Hajra.
The figures for the second quarter of the financial year bettered China's 6.9 percent increase in gross domestic product (GDP) recorded for the same three months and reported by Beijing last month.
They were also higher than the median forecast of 7.3 percent in a survey of economists by Bloomberg News.
With fellow BRICS partner Russia contracting 4.1 percent in the same period and Brazil predicted to shrink 4.2 percent, India is a rare bright spot in a struggling world economy.
"India is now a very important backdrop in a slowing global economy," Hajra, chief economist at Anand Rathi Securities, told AFP.
Modi has made boosting economic growth a priority since sweeping to power in a general election in May 2014 and India has posted 7.5 percent, 7.0 percent and 7.4 percent quarterly growth for the calendar year 2015.
But investors have raised concerns about the pace of promised economic reform needed to create jobs for India's tens of millions of young people.
They are hoping Modi's government will be able to reach agreement with opposition parties and push reforms through the current session of parliament, including one that paves the way for a long-awaited national sales tax.
The figures are a timely fillip for the PM and his ruling Bharatiya Janata Party, which suffered a heavy defeat in a key election in the state of Bihar earlier this month.
The positive data also makes it likely that Reserve Bank of India Governor HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Raghuram Rajan will choose to keep interest rates unchanged when the central bank holds its monetary policy review meeting on Tuesday.
Rajan has already lopped 125 basis points off borrowing rates this year, bringing the benchmark repo rate to its lowest level in four years.
Analysts expect Rajan to hold rates at 6.75 percent following the meeting in Mumbai as he targets keeping inflation under control and waits for commercial banks to pass on the cuts.
Monday's numbers were the latest growth data to be released since the government introduced a revised formula for calculating GDP which some analysts have criticised.
They showed manufacturing, financial, insurance, trade and transport grew over 7.0 percent during the quarter, while agriculture lagged at 2.2 percent as did mining at 3.2 percent.
India's government changed the way it calculates GDP in January, saying the new method was closer to international standards.
The main change is that India now measures its economic growth at market prices to incorporate "gross value addition" in goods and services as well as indirect taxes.
The base year to calculate India's GDP has also been advanced to 2011-12 from 2004-05.
But analysts say the new data does not correlate with some other economic indicators, including last year's industrial production figures and corporate profits.
Agence France-Presse
World Leaders Meet in Paris to Overcome Divisions on Climate Change
By William Horobin and William Mauldin
30 November 2015
Dow Jones Institutional News
PARIS--World leaders converged on Paris on Monday for international climate talks amid an unprecedented security lockdown, two weeks after gunmen and suicide bombers killed 130 people in a string of terror attacks.
Heads of state and government from some 150 countries will speak in turn at a highly secure airport complex north of the city over the next two weeks in an effort to reach a global agreement on limiting emissions.
To get a deal by mid-December, negotiators must overcome differences between rich and poor economies, high polluters and countries already suffering from rising temperatures.
"Never, and I say never, have the stakes of an international meeting been so high, since what is at stake is the future of the planet, the future of life," said French President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" François Hollande. "Yet two weeks ago here in Paris, a group of fanatics sowed death in the streets."
One emerging sore spot in the talks is the level of funding that richer countries will provide both to aid the transition of poorer countries to cleaner energy and to finance efforts to stave off the early effects of a changing climate.
Developing countries want their highly industrialized peers that have used large amounts of fossil fuels for a century to mobilize $100 billion a year in climate financing, and some officials have warned they won't support a deal in Paris that doesn't deliver high levels of funding. Any agreement would require the consent of nearly 200 countries.
Shortly ahead of the talks, India slammed an October estimate on how much financing rich countries have provided to poorer economies. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development set out guidelines in the report to measure whether rich nations are on track to deliver $100 billion in promised annual financing by 2020.
India said the Paris-based think tank overestimated the amount of actual flows when it said it reached $61.8 billion in 2014. "Methodologies used were inconsistent with the literature and best practice and even 'bent' in ways to find more flows than reality," the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Indian finance ministry said in a working paper published Friday.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD shot back, saying the report was a genuine attempt to provide a transparent estimate that avoided double counting based on official submissions by rich countries. "The Indian criticisms of the report are misjudged and inaccurate," said Simon Buckle, head of climate change at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD.
As part of the rich countries' attempts to soothe tensions over financing, President Barack Obama and Microsoft co-founder HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Bill Gates unveiled a multibillion-dollar program Monday to boost green-energy research and development.
Messrs. Obama and Gates will join with other heads of state and investors to detail complementary public and private commitments to clean-energy innovation.
"This fund is meant in part to convince developing countries that major nations are serious about clean-energy technology investment in poorer countries, not simply trying to close their coal plants and inhibit economic development," said Paul Bledsoe, a former Clinton White House aide on climate attending the negotiations.
The 20 countries that have signed on to Mission Innovation include leading carbon-dioxide emitters from developed and developing countries, including China, India, Brazil, Indonesia, Saudi Arabia and France. They are pledging to double their investments in clean-energy research and development during the next five years.
The Paris climate talks are taking place on the outskirts of a city still on edge in the wake of the deadly Paris terror attacks.
After arriving in Paris late Sunday night, President Barack Obama visited the Bataclan concert hall to pay tribute to victims of the attacks. At the makeshift shrine outside the theatre where gunmen killed at least 89 people, Mr. Obama stood in silence with Mr. Hollande and the mayor of Paris, Anne Hidalgo. The three leaders each laid a single white rose in front of the building.
France has moved to secure the city, shutting down external access points and some thoroughfares Sunday and Monday. The government cancelled protests that had been planned by climate activists calling for countries to do more to curb emissions and keep climate change at bay. But that didn't stop unofficial gatherings.
On Sunday, riot police fired tear gas as they clashed with demonstrators who refused to disperse from Place de la République, north east of central Paris. Candles and flowers from a memorial to the victims of the Paris attacks were scattered in the confrontation. Police said 174 demonstrators were detained.
"These demonstrations are not authorized," Mr. Hollande said. "It's very regrettable, and even scandalous."
Before the Paris talks began, most of the countries involved submitted their own plans for curbing emissions of greenhouse gases linked to climate change or boosting the share of green energy. An accord clinched in Paris would codify those national plans, part of an original goal to limit global warming to less than 2 degrees Celsius above preindustrial levels.
The current pledges are only likely to limit global warming to about 2.7 degrees, officials say, so the U.S., Europe and other countries want the Paris accord to require countries to renew their emissions targets every five years or so, helping shift the world toward the 2-degree goal over time.
"We are at the foot of a wall built from the sum of our egos, fears and resignation," Mr. Hollande said as he opened the conference. "But this wall is not insurmountable."
Mr. Obama and most other heads of state will leave the talks by Tuesday, but other officials will continue negotiations with the goal of wrapping up an agreement at the ministerial level by the end of next week.
"The aim is to formulate political unity from the start," German Environment Minister Barbara Hendricks said.
Dow Jones & Company, Inc. 
COP21 Paris climate talks: World leaders pledge billions
Anne-Sylvaine Chassany, Michael Stothard and Pilita Clark in Le Bourget
30 November 2015
Financial Times (FT.Com)
The Paris climate change talks opened with a flurry of pledges worth billions of dollars from dozens of heavily guarded world leaders on Monday.
But the outpouring of promises to tackle a problem that US President, Barack Obama, said could “define the contours of this century more dramatically than any other” was tinged by anxiety about whether the two-week meeting would strike a robust deal — the first global climate accord in 18 years
The memory of the attacks that killed 130 people in Paris on November 13 lent a sombre tone to the opening of the talks at the Le Bourget? airfield, north of the city.
In his opening address HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" François Hollande, French president, appealed to world leaders to curb global warming, warning of famine, mass migrations and wars if they fail.
Mr Hollande told more than 20,000 attendees that climate change would bring conflict, “the risk of famine, a massive exodus from rural areas and conflicts over access to water”.
He said any deal needed to be “universal, binding and differentiated”.
Negotiators from nearly 200 countries have converged on Paris to reach an agreement to cut emissions of the greenhouse gases that scientists say are on track to warm the planet to risky levels. Any deal will be based on voluntary action plans that more than 180 nations have tabled pledges since March.
However, scientists fear that these commitments are not sufficient to prevent global temperatures warming more than 2C from pre-industrial levels, a level they deem risky for the planet. With a 1C increase nearly reached, they say evidence of a changing climate is already widespread, ranging from rising sea levels to melting ice caps.
The talks are expected to be complicated by disagreements between rich and poor nations over who should lead the fight against global warming.
Highlighting these divisions, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Narendra Modi, the Indian prime minister, wrote in Monday’s HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Financial Times that advanced countries that “powered their way to prosperity on fossil fuel” must continue to shoulder the greatest burden. “Anything else would be morally wrong,” he says.
That point was echoed by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, who told delegates in Le Bourget that any deal would have to be comprehensive and fair. “By comprehensive?.?.?.?we mean a profound transformation of the way we do business,” she said. “By fair, we mean that industrialised countries will have to take the lead. Emissions of the past have been caused by us.”
However, other wealthy countries say the threat of global warming cannot be addressed solely by the pool of older industrialised countries that account for a dwindling share of global emissions and that big emerging economies such as China and India must play their part.
Mr Hollande said that in order to achieve a deal that would limit the rise in global temperatures to 2C from pre-industrial times, nations would have to agree on a mechanism to review their commitments to reducing greenhouse gases every five years.
He also said that the accord must be implemented by every country and that all parts of civil society must join in.
President Obama addressed delegates, saying: “We are the first generation to feel climate change and the last that can do something about it.”
He backed Mr Hollande’s call for a “revision mechanism” so that pledges made by countries to reduce their carbon emissions could be reviewed and increased in the future. The world needed “not a stopgap solution but a long-term strategy”, he said.
Mr Hollande hinted that one of the roadblocks in the negotiations would be the $100bn in annual financing by 2020 that developed economies had committed to channel to poorer countries to help their transition to a lower carbon development model.
Mr Hollande said delegates had to agree on the rules for the 2020 goal, which was set in Copenhagen in 2009. Nations needed to define the “guarantees” on the “origins and accessibility” of the funds, Mr Hollande said.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD recently reported that at least $62bn was provided in 2014, but India and other countries have questioned that figure and say the Paris accord must require wealthy countries to deliver more than $100bn a year after 2020.
Developed countries have balked at the idea of including a specific figure in the agreement, arguing that today’s governments cannot be responsible for setting budgets so far ahead.
Poorer countries might say they cannot sign up to a global deal requiring five-year review periods and other measures sought by richer nations.
Separately, billionaire philanthropist HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Bill Gates announced he had joined forces with a group of wealthy individuals, including the founders of Amazon and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Facebook, to create a multibillion-dollar coalition to boost clean energy research and development.
Security was tight at Le Bourget, with 6,300 police officers and gendarmes deployed around the site. Several hundred special HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN security forces guarded the so-called HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN “blue zone” where HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN offices are located.
The French authorities had banned protests in Paris as part of a state of emergency following the November 13 terror attacks.
The Financial Times Limited 
PARIS 2015: Countries call for end to $500 bn/year fossil fuel subsidies
30 November 2015
Platts Commodity News
Paris (Platts)--30Nov2015/1156 am EST/1656 GMT
* Almost 40 countries urge halt to subsidies
* Ending fossil subsidies could cut emissions 10%
A group of nearly 40 governments along with hundreds of businesses on Monday called for a phase-out of global subsidies on fossil fuels, which it said would cut emissions by nearly 10% by 2050.
As nations began negotiations in Paris over a new legally binding climate agreement, New Zealand Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" John Key unveiled the Fossil Fuel Subsidy Reform initiative, calling on the international community to remove more than $500 billion a year in support for oil, coal and gas.
"Their elimination would represent one seventh of the effort needed to achieve our target of ensuring global temperatures do not rise by more than 2 degrees C," Key said.
"With oil prices at record lows and the global focus on a low carbon future -- the timing for this reform has never been better," he said.
The communique was endorsed by countries from the US to Samoa, and supported by business groups including the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Business Council for Sustainable Development, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" International Energy Agency and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Bank.
The G20 group of richest countries in 2009 pledged to phase out support for coal, oil and gas, although progress to date has been limited.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" International Monetary Fund published a report in July stating that global subsidies for energy are set to reach $5.3 trillion a year in 2015, or 6.5% of global GDP.
"Most of this arises from countries setting energy taxes below levels that fully reflect the environmental damage associated with energy consumption," the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF said in the report.
Platts, a division of The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc. 
IMF approves inclusion of China's RMB in SDR basket
liujie,gaopan
1 December 2015
Xinhua's China Economic Information Service
WASHINGTON, Nov. 30 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xinhua) -- The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" International Monetary Fund (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF)'s executive board on Monday approved the inclusion of China's currency renminbi (RMB) in its Special Drawing Rights (SDR) basket as an international reserve currency. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF board, which represented the fund's 188 member countries, decided that the RMB "met all existing criteria," the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF said in a statement after completing the regular five-yearly review of the SDR basket here. Effective from Oct. 1, 2016, the RMB will be included in the SDR basket as a fifth currency, along with the U.S. dollar, the euro, the Japanese yen and the British pound, it said. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Christine Lagarde, managing director of the IMF, said, the board's decision is "an important milestone in the integration of the Chinese economy into the global financial system." "It is also a recognition of the progress that the Chinese authorities have made in the past years in reforming China's monetary and financial systems," she said.
"The continuation and deepening of these efforts will bring about a more robust international monetary and financial system, which in turn will support the growth and stability of China and the global economy," she added. The RMB will have a weighting of 10.92 percent in the new SDR basket, while the respective weighting of other currencies in the basket are 41.73 percent for the U.S. dollar, 30.93 percent for euro, 8.33 percent for the Japanese yen and 8.09 percent for the British pound, according to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF. "Launching the new SDR basket on October 1, 2016 will provide sufficient lead time for the Fund, its members and other SDR users to adjust to these changes," the Washington-based international lender said. The SDR is an international reserve asset created by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF in 1969 to supplement its member countries' official reserves. It can be exchanged among governments for freely usable currencies in times of need. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF reviews the currencies in the SDR basket every five years, and whether to add the RMB to the basket is a major issue for this year's assessment. To meet the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF's criteria, Chinese authorities have undertaken a series of reforms in recent months, such as improving its foreign exchange rate formation system, opening up its interbank bond and forex markets, and improving data transparency by subscribing to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF's Special Data Dissemination Standard (SDDS). HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Nicholas Lardy, a senior researcher with the Washington-based Peterson Institute of International Economics, told HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xinhua that "China has taken enormous efforts to address the operational shortcomings and that dramatically increases the probability of yuan's inclusion." Meg Lundsager, a former U.S. Executive Director at the IMF, told HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xinhua that what is important is it shows the evolution of the system is possible, reflecting what China has undertaken over the past years. "China is clearly on the path of reform. It wants to show yuan is widely traded and freely usable by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF definition," said Lundsager, now a senior researcher with the Wilson Center, a Washington-based think tank. At the G20 summit in Antalya of Turkey, Chinese President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xi Jinping said the inclusion of the yuan will help increase the representation and attraction of the SDR, improve the international monetary system, and safeguard global financial stability. Eswar Prasad, the former head of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF's China Division, said HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF wants to avoid another knock on its legitimacy, already tainted by the lack of progress on giving emerging markets their rightful voting shares. "Excluding the yuan from the SDR could crystallize the concerns of policy makers in emerging markets that the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF remains an institution run by and for the benefit of advanced economies," he noted. Being one of global reserve currencies will prompt central banks to increase their holdings of yuan in the reserve currency portfolio. Private sectors will also be encouraged to gradually buy more yuan-denominated assets. However, the global reserve currency status will not automatically turn yuan into a major global reserve currency which is a choice of the market. "So it's very important to keep China on path of reform. It's tough that everything you do is closely scrutinized by the market. But China can't backtrack in a major way. Inclusion will re-enforce the trend," Lundsager said. In an article published in the People's Daily last week, Chinese central bank governor HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Zhou Xiaochuan committed himself to making the RMB fully convertible and freely usable within five years. By then, Zhou said he expected more than a third of the world's international trade to be conducted through the RMB
China Economic Information Service of Xinhua News Agency

Russia, Ukraine to look at ways to avoid Russia’s ban on imports of Ukrainian foods
30 November 2015
ITAR-TASS World Service
MOSCOW, December 1. /TASS/. Russia and Ukraine will make yet another, and probably the last, attempt to avoid a Russian ban on imports of Ukrainian-made goods and the cancellation of the free trade zone at a trilateral ministerial meeting in Brussels on Tuesday.
The parties to the talks will be represented by Russian Minister of Economic Development Alexei Ulyukayev, European Union trade commissioner Cecilia Malmström and Ukrainian Foreign Minister Pavel Klimkin.
The talks are tasked to remove risks for the Russian economy stemming from the implementation of the trade-and-economic section of Ukraine’s association agreement with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union, which was signed in 2014.
The economic section of the agreement provides for the establishment of a free trade zone and regulates such areas as market access, trade in energy sources, cooperation in agriculture, transport, metallurgy, space exploration, research, tourism, business activities, protection of intellectual property, dispute settlement procedures and taxation terms.
The trilateral Russia-Ukraine-EU talks on September 12, 2014 yielded an agreement on postponement of the implementation of the agreement on a comprehensive free trade zone between Ukraine and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union till the end of 2015 and on preserving a free trade regime with Ukraine within the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) for this period. The sides were to use this time to find a compromise on a number of problems of concern for Russia and reach legally binding documents.
Russia is afraid that zero customs tariffs on European imports to Ukraine will be fraught with their uncontrolled movement to Russia, which might pose problems for Russian manufacturers.
Other issues of concern for Russia are linked with technical regulation, veterinary and phytosanitary measures, customs administration and energy, Russian Minister of Economic Development Alexei Ulyukayev said earlier.
Cancelation of Free Trade Zone and Food Embargo
Currently, Ukraine, like other countries of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Commonwealth of Independent States, enjoys a free trade regime with Russia. It means that Ukrainian-made goods are imported in Russia tax free.
If the sides fail to reach a compromise, Russia will impose a ban on foods imports from Ukraine and will replace the free trade zone by a most favored nation regime from January 1, 2016. Hence, Russia’s ban of food imports from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union will be applicable to Ukraine too.
In such a situation impacts on Russian businesses in Ukraine will not be very strong, Russian Deputy Minister of Economic Development Alexei Likhachev said, adding that a limited number of companies would need support. Russian businessmen are aware of possible risks and are getting prepared for the worst possible scenarios. Many are withdrawing their assets from Ukraine.
Russian Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Dmitry Medvedev said possible losses of the Ukrainian economy could be rather big. Despite shrinking trade between the two countries, the sum of losses may amount to hundreds of millions of U.S. dollars, Medvedev said.
Possible Solutions
To resolve the problem, Russia has offered such measures as setting quotas on Ukrainian goods from the so-called ‘risk group’ in case of the implementation of the association agreement between Ukraine and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union. Customs duties will be imposed on goods in excess of these quotas. Such measure does not run counter to the norms of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO), Likhachev said.
Another solution offered by Russia is to use concurrently Russia’s and the Customs Union’s technical regulations currently in force in Ukraine and the new standards of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union for a period till 2025.
Otherwise, re-certification of Russian goods exported to Ukraine will be needed, which is a long and costly procedure, Ulyukayev said. Overhaul of production facilities will require additional funding for laboratory tests and obtaining new certificates of conformity. As a result, in his words, established cooperation ties might be disrupted due to considerable differences in the current technical regulations in Russia and the Customs Union and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU standards.
The Russian minister said Ukraine’s adoption of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU standards is likely to complicate the procedure of customs clearing of goods. "It will be impossible to use the system of mutual recognition of customs control," he stressed, adding that rolling back the most efficient customs cooperation projects will impair mutual understanding and trust between Russia’s and Ukraine’s customs services.
Positive Results but not a Breakthrough
Russian Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Dmitry Medvedev assesses a possibility of an agreement between Moscow and Kiev on the terms of cooperation after Ukraine’s association with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union as extremely improbable.
Trilateral expert-level consultations on these problems were held in Brussels in October and November 2015. At the meeting in October, experts arrived at a conclusion that the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union’s project on risk settlement after Ukraine’s association with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union was unacceptable and decided to look at an option offered by the Russian side, Ulyukayev said. However, the subsequent meeting in November yielded no progress, Likhachev told TASS.
Anticipating the talks on December 1, Ulyukayev said he hoped for positive results. "Our position proceeds from the necessity of preserving trade and economic cooperation to ensure development of trade in the region as an instrument of inclusive economic growth," he said.
Likhachev however told TASS he did not hope for a breakthrough at the talks. "We are waiting for a ministerial meeting. But we have practically no hope that the results of these consultations would be acceptably for all sides. The question is rather will these talks continue after December 1 and could we reach some concrete solutions before January 1, 2016. This date is a kind of point of no return," he said.
Not to Strip Kiev Off Preferences
EU trade commissioner Cecilia Malmstrom said she hopes for a positive outcome of the forthcoming talks. But Russia, in her words, should accept enforcement of the free trade zone agreement between Ukraine and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union and not to strip Kiev off trade preferences.
She said the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Commission had demonstrated openness by turning an ear to Russia’s concerns and could offer assistance to ease some of them, such as customs cooperation and interim periods.
ITAR-TASS Information Telegraph Agency of Russia
Ukraine, Russia to hold consultations on claim to WTO on Dec 4
30 November 2015
Interfax: Ukrainian General Newswire
KYIV. Nov 30 (Interfax-Ukraine) - Ukraine and Russia will hold consultations on the claim filed by Ukraine against Russia to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) regarding restriction of imports of wagons and crossing points on December 4, 2015, Deputy Minister of Economic Development and Trade, Trade Representative of Ukraine Natalia Mykolska has said.
"The date for consultations has been agreed - December 4, 2015," she wrote on her HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Facebook page.
As reported, Ukraine filed the lawsuit on October 21, stating that since 2013 Russia has been groundlessly imposing restrictions on the supply of Ukrainian wagons, and canceling the relevant certificates. Restrictions applied to Kriukov Car Building Works, Dnipropetrovsk crossing points plant, Azovzahalmash and Kharkiv machine building plant FED. In this regard, exports of Ukrainian goods from group 86 fell from $1.7 billion in 2013 to $51 million during the first seven months in 2015.
Interfax Information Services, B.V. 
EU-Ukraine free trade agreement enters into force in 5 weeks
- Lithuania's deputy formin
30 November 2015
Lithuanian News Agency - ELTA
Vilnius, November 30 (ELTA) - In the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU's Foreign Affairs (Trade) Council meeting on 27 November in Brussels, Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs of Lithuania Raimundas Karoblis stressed that all parties were waiting for the EU-Ukraine Association Agreement, including the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area (DCFTA), to provisionally enter into force on 1 January 2016, Lithuania's MFA said.
The EU Trade Commissioner Cecilia Malmstrom presented preparations for her upcoming meeting with the Ukrainian and Russian trade ministers on 1 December. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU has participated in trilateral talks with Ukraine and Russia, which have rendered no concrete results yet.
"We can hardly imagine how we should continue the trilateral talks, if Russia does as it has threatened - terminates the CIS free trade agreement with Ukraine, cancels the CIS free trade preferences and imposes additional ban on food imports," said Lithuania's deputy foreign minister.
The Council reviewed a number of ongoing bilateral free trade negotiations. Lithuania's Karoblis noted that Lithuania supported the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU's ongoing free trade talks with the United States and Japan, actively participated while representing our important interests and expected even greater progress in the coming year.
Karoblis said that negotiations on the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP), which were gaining momentum, could be completed by the end of the next year. However, this will depend on the involvement of the United States in the negotiations and on real progress achieved in terms of content in all the areas of the negotiations.
"Such important HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU interests, as public procurement and removal of regulatory barriers, are complex and it takes a lot of time to achieve ambitious results; therefore, it is necessary to make progress on these issues now," he said.
Karoblis also reminded of the need to include a separate chapter into the TTIP, covering issues of energy trade, which would also send a strong signal on strengthening the EU-US energy cooperation and application of principles of free trade to energy trade, transit and access to infrastructure.
In a discussion on the preparations for the 10th World Trade Organisation's ministerial conference, Lithuania's deputy foreign minister stressed that the rigor of the Doha Round should not be the only criteria for evaluating the organization's significance. "When speaking about the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO we cannot forget that this particular organization effectively monitors the level of compliance with the rules of international trade. Its dispute settlement mechanism helps to address trade conflicts in a civilized manner and to avoid the imposition of new trade restrictions. Multilateral negotiations are the most effective way of creating global trade rules, so we strive to ensure that this legislative process is renewed, and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO remains a viable and relevant centre of the multilateral trading system," said Karoblis.
Lithuanian News Agency - ELTA
India: "WTO threat to agriculture"
Devinder Sharma
1 December 2015
DNA - Daily News & Analysis
India's two major concerns - food security and farm subsidies - must be addressed
While the ruling NDA is still coming to grips over the devastating electoral verdict in Bihar, there is more trouble brewing ahead - this time at the forthcoming 10th Ministerial Conference of the World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) scheduled to be held at Nairobi from December 15-18. Unless India is able to put its act together, the outcome of the Nairobi Ministerial may strike a severe blow to agriculture.
With more than 600 million people engaged in agriculture, this is a risk that the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Narendra Modi government cannot afford to take. The Prime Minister had given a strong indication of India's stand when he told the recently-concluded India Africa Forum Summit in New Delhi: "We should [also] achieve a permanent solution on public stockholding for food security and a special safeguard mechanism in agriculture for developing countries."
But the configurations are fast changing. Not only that the WTO director general HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevedo has been openly batting for the US/EU position of capping the Minimum Support Price (MSP) for Indian farmers as well as the need to limit input subsidies being given for fertilizer, seed, pesticides and irrigation to the present level, he is also literally threatening a "doomsday" scenario if the developing countries fail to accept the demand of the rich industrialised countries.
At the heart of the negotiations are two clauses that will hit India the hardest. The first pertains to public stockholding for food security for which India has managed to get a temporary exemption. The undue haste with which India went backwards to conform to the July 31 2014 deadline that HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO had imposed will continue to haunt New Delhi for many years to come. Instead of standing firm, India had buckled under pressure to accept a newly introduced Trade Facilitation Agreement in lieu of its food security concerns. Under the rules, India can go on maintaining its food buffer stocks till a permanent solution is found but cannot export subsidized food that can distort markets. Subsidised food exports from India therefore can be challenged by any member country.
The developed countries, including US, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU, Canada, and Australia are against giving India any permanent waiver. In reality, what the rich countries are aggressively wanting is to limit the provisions of MSP given to Indian farmers. Treating MSP as an agricultural subsidy, the rich countries have accused India of exceeding the 10 per cent limit - called de-minimis level - that was imposed way back in 1986-88. But at the same time these countries are not willing to re-open the 2008 revised draft modalities achieved at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO that aimed at cutting the massive domestic and export subsidies in the rich countries. According to a study, the average farm subsidy a farmer in India gets is Rs1,000 per month. America on the other hand provides an average monthly farm subsidy of Rs2.5-lakh.
In addition, the US has now demanded the budgetary outlays for product-specific input subsidies for agriculture - like fertilizer, pesticides, seed, irrigation and credit - to be capped at the levels existing at the time of the Nairobi Ministerial. Such an obligation, if accepted, will strike a death-knell for Indian agriculture. What has to be understood is that these subsidies are primarily to keep the cost of production low so as to keep food prices low for consumers. Withdrawing the input subsidies will only increase the cost of cultivation, which means the food prices will skyrocket. The socio-economic as well as the political implications of restricting input subsidies to farmers are too grave to even visualize.
The second contentious issue pertains to special safeguard measures (SSM) that were granted to developing countries so as to minimise the harmful impacts of cheaper imports. The rich countries have already been using Special (Agricultural) Safeguards (SSGs) very effectively to check import surges. For instance Norway has applied SSG 581 times; Switzerland 961 times and US 189 times. Similarly, for the developing countries a SSM is being worked out, which too is being opposed by US, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU, Canada, Japan and Australia. SSM actually means raising tariffs temporarily to deal with a flood of imports and price falls. But this formula has still to be worked out keeping the level of import surges and at what level of imports should the countries be allowed to raise import tariffs.
The dice is therefore heavily loaded against India and China which have a huge food security programme depending upon massive food procurement from small farmers. In other words, procurement of food, which the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO wants to dismantled, ensures livelihood security for millions of small and marginal farmers. India cannot ever think of placing the livelihood security of 600 millions farmers on the chopping block of international trade.
Considering that the demand for winding up the ongoing HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO negotiations at Nairobi are growing, India will have insist on the continuation of the negotiations unless its two major concerns on food security and agriculture are first addressed. It has the support of the powerful G-33 group of developing countries along with the least developing countries. But unfortunately it's the domestic lobbies - including the industry associations and mainline economists - who are likely to make a loud noise saying that getting 'isolated' at Nairobi would mean India be branded as an obstacle to boosting global trade. I hope Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Narendra Modi does not easily succumb to this domestic pressure.
At the same time, India must aggressively bring the rich country agricultural subsidies back on the negotiating table. Agricultural subsidies in the developed countries have increased from US $ 350 billion in 1996 to $ 406 billion in 2011. Lately, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU alone has notified Euro 84.106 billion farm subsidy for 2013. The latest US Farm bill 2014, which makes budgetary provision for farm subsidies for the next ten years, has forecasted a subsidy support of $ 956 billion. Unless these subsidies are cut, and cut drastically, any agreement to close the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO negotiations at the forthcoming Nairobi Ministerial will be a betrayal of the farming communities. It will be like putting a lamb before a dinosaur.
Diligent Media Corporation Ltd. 
Pakistan: Production of strategic cotton crop falling alarmingly
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Jamal Shahid
30 November 2015
Dawn
The genetically modified 'Bt' cotton seed, introduced in Pakistan a decade ago to increase its vital cash crop to over 20 million bales by 2015, has done the opposite.
Agriculture experts and researchers report that this year's production is four million bales short of the targeted 15 million bales. Cotton production has declined continuously since 2005, according to a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Pakistan Agriculture Research Council (PARC) official.
In fact, the shortfall is of nearly 10 million bales against the target of 20.7 million bales, set in the Pakistan government's Cotton Vision 2015 and approved by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization.
Experts agree that the alien seed is not the only reason for this let-down. State-run agriculture research departments not only failed to introduce an improved home variety of the cotton seed but also did not educate cotton farmers about the best modern practices.
Instead, the experts recall, efforts were made to introduce the imported, genetically modified Bt cotton seed.
As some had warned, after two years of trials conducted by the multinational Biotech seed producing company, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Monsanto, in different parts of the country, the imported Bt varieties failed to perform in the local environment.
And the exorbitant and unaffordable royalty demanded by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Monsanto for technology transfer became an extra burden.
GM cotton seed worth $2.4 million was imported from the Beijing Silverland Biotechnology Company in China, and commercially sown in 800 acres.
However, these also failed to deliver. The quality of seed was substandard, the PARC official explained.
Cotton Commissioner in the Ministry of Textile and Industry, Dr Khalid Abdullah, conceded that cotton production has been low but said that this year, climate change-induced, special circumstances dominated in affecting sowing and delaying harvesting.
The areas where cotton is grown has shrunk by four to five per cent because farmers are disheartened by the increased input costs - fertilizers and pesticides- and the low prices the crops fetch and they decided to grow other crops.
This brings down cotton yield to only 11 million bales.
Dr Khalid Abdullah thinks the Cotton Vision failed because its guidelines were not fulfilled.
Unfortunately, there was no proper legislation, the quality of seed could not be improved and research was deficient. And these are just some of many other factors, he said.
But Dr Qadir Baloch, former Agriculture Development Commissioner, Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Livestock, believes that Pakistan is not addressing the real problem.
Pakistan needs to find solutions to the Cotton Leaf Virus, which is the biggest threat to cotton production. Pakistan did not need genetically modified technology since it only killed pests, said the expert.
In his view, Pakistan introduced the GM cotton seed too soon and without conducting trials to determine if imported varieties would perform well in the local conditions.
Another agriculture official blamed the sorry state of affairs on the drastic cut in agriculture budget, from Rs22 billion during the rule of Gen. Pervez Musharraf to just Rs1 billion today. But the military ruler also played a significant role in the decline of cotton production, he said.
Dr Khalid Abdullah sees further decline in cotton production as farmers in Sindh and Punjab switch to more lucrative crops.
Farmers are now growing sugarcane in places best known for cotton production like DI Khan and Mianwali etc, he observed.
Pakistan Herald Publications (Pvt.) Limited
END
 
Josep Bosch, Information Officer
Information and External Relations Division
+41227395681
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.