Sanctions against Moscow violate international law, WTO rules — Russia’s lower house speaker

Russia unable to exempt individual EU states from restrictions due to WTO rules — envoy Chizhov (Part 2)

Russia may cut 3,808 import duties from Sep 1

Brazilian beef exporters weigh WTO case against EU

Ireland warned over packaging and political instability; The Foreign Trade Council president advises Ireland to hold off until the WTO case against Australia is settled

Trade push: SAARC working on quality norms for five sectors

Environmental standards becoming a big non-tariff trade barrier — DTI

Australia scores ‘most favoured nation’ provisions in FTA with China


Indo-US ties not a threat to China: Envoy

US government procurement: Pakistan obtains observer status

EU’s new GMO law leaves questions unanswered

Chinese currency trade settlement gains popularity in Gulf region

 


Sanctions against Moscow violate international law, WTO rules — Russia’s lower house speaker


ITAR-TASS World Service 

12 mars 2015 14:05, 

UKRAINE: SANCTIONS-RUSSIA-WTO 

Sanctions against Moscow violate international law, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO rules — Russia’s lower house speaker 

MOSCOW, March 12. /TASS/. Western sanctions introduced against Russia come in violation of international law and the principles of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO), the speaker of Russia’s lower house of parliament, the State Duma, Sergey Naryshkin said on Thursday. 

The sanctions policy is in fact a price the national business has to pay for “foreign policy mistakes and miscalculations of the Western states’ governments,” Naryshkin said. 

These mistakes and miscalculations include both the dreaming of ones about hegemony and a unipolar world and the inability to resist such dreaming by the others, who forget about national interests of their own business, he explained. 

“I believe that the anti-Russian approach is wrong and it is completely illegal and violates the norms of the international law and the norms of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO,” Naryshkin said. 

The lower house speaker noted that “sanctions have both undermined trust and violated a number of intergovernmental agreements and broken the system of international law as a whole.” 

“They have already inflicted certain damage on both the business and the citizens of our countries,” he added. 

The sanctions, which the Western countries have introduced against Russia in order to punish Moscow for its stance on Ukraine, have only bolstered the so-called party of war in Kiev, he said. 

Russian officials and companies came under the first batch of Western sanctions, including visa bans and asset freezes, after Russia incorporated Crimea in mid-March 2014 after the February 2014 coup. 

The West announced new, sectoral, restrictions against Russia in late July 2014, in particular, for what the West claimed was Moscow’s alleged involvement in protests in Ukraine’s south-east. 

In response, Russia imposed on August 6, 2014 a one-year ban on imports of beef, pork, poultry, fish, cheeses, fruit, vegetables and dairy products from Australia, Canada, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union, the United States and Norway. 

New punitive measures against Russia were imposed in September and then in December, when the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union banned some investment in Crime 


Russia unable to exempt individual EU states from restrictions due to WTO rules — envoy Chizhov (Part 2)


Interfax: Russia & CIS General Newswire 

12 mars 2015 15:48, 

BRUSSELS. March 12 (Interfax) — Individual member countries of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union are exploring the possibility of securing an exemption from Russia’s restrictive measures, primarily a ban on the import of agricultural products to Russia, Russia’s Permanent Representative to the EU, Vladimir Chizhov, told Interfax in Brussels. 

“The Russian side perfectly understands the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO‘s (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization) existing rules, which make it impossible to lift any sanction decisions only in relation to individual countries,” he said. 

However, “there are also other opportunities such as the establishment of joint ventures in Russian territory,” Chizhov said. 

“I will not predict any specific decisions, but, for example, the sides could discuss the possibility of exempting certain products, not countries, [from sanctions] and setting up joint ventures that would use raw materials provided by these countries,” he said. 

 


Russia may cut 3,808 import duties from Sep 1


Prime News 

12 mars 2015 10:50, 

MOSCOW, Mar 12 (PRIME) — The Russian government is preparing to cut import duties for 3,808 goods of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Eurasian Economic Union‘s (EEU) unified customs tariff as part of its HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO) obligations from September 1, the Economic Development Ministry said in a statement published Thursday. 

Import duties will be lowered for the production of agriculture, machine building, light and forest industries, ferrous and non-ferrous metals sectors. The amount of goods accounts for 41% of the total unified customs tariff’s list. 

The government is also considering cutting import duties for titanium wastes and scrap in order to diversify access to sources of raw materials for domestic titanium industry and decrease prices for raw materials, which will improve competition in the sector, the ministry also said. 

The government has also decided to extend a zero import duty for lead ore and concentrates by two years. 

 


Brazilian beef exporters weigh WTO case against EU


Alonso Soto 

Reuters News 

12 mars 2015 15:31, 

BRASILIA, March 12 (Reuters) — Brazilian meat exporters are considering taking the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization to challenge restrictions on their beef shipments to one of the world’s top markets, the head of the country’s beef exporters association told Reuters. 

A new dispute could further harm trade ties frayed by an EU case against Brazil over duties on industrial imports and stalled free-trade talks with the regional trade bloc, Mercosur. 

Fernando Sampaio, the executive director of Brazil’s meat exporters association, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"ABIEC, said “unnecessary” sanitary requirements have reduced Brazil’s beef exports to the EU by three quarters to 100,000 tonnes a year. 

“From the sanitary point of view it makes no sense, they are just creating bureaucratic barriers to leave our producers out of the market,” Sampaio said. “We are studying opening a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO panel against the EU because of all these barriers.” 

The Brazilian government, known for its trade protectionism, is turning the heat up on commercial disputes in a bid to open more markets for its exports after the commodities powerhouse posted its first trade deficit in 14 years in 2014. 

In October, the world’s largest beef exporter launched a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO dispute against Indonesia over barriers to its poultry meat exports. The government is preparing another case against Jakarta over beef exports. 

Brazilian beef exporters need the green light from the government for the country to launch a case against the EU. 

President’s HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Dilma Rousseff administration has not ruled out launching the dispute, but will first exhaust all negotiation options, two government officials familiar with the matter told Reuters. 

“Our main objective is to remove those barriers through bilateral negotiations, but if that fails we do not rule out opening a case,” said one official who asked not to be named to speak freely. 

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Brazil’s Agriculture Ministry declined to comment. The Foreign Affairs Ministry said it has not received a formal request from exporters to open a case. 

Brazilian producers complain the EU refuses to allow beef exports from states that have been free of foot and mouth disease for over a decade. 

Resistance to the entry of Brazilian agricultural products has been one of the main obstacles in regional free trade talks with the EU, which have dragged on for two decades. Brasilia’s refusal to open its industrial market is another impediment. 

The EU opened a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO case in 2013 over Brazilian taxes on imports from cars to computers. (Editing by Bernadette Baum) 


Ireland warned over packaging and political instability; The Foreign Trade Council president advises Ireland to hold off until the WTO case against Australia is settled


By Charlie Taylor, 

The Irish Times 

13 mars 2015, 

Ireland will continue to be a leading beneficiary of US foreign direct investment (FDI) but risks alienating investors by backing plain packaging for cigarettes and through possible political instability. 

That is according to William Reinsch, president of the National Foreign Trade Council and a former undersecretary of commerce for export administration under President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Bill Clinton. 

After addressing a conference in Dublin discussing the strength of the Irish economy, Mr Reinsch said Government backing for plain packaging could be seen in a negative light by companies considering investing here. 

“The Irish Government is capable of either weakening or strengthening its appeal to investors and arguably the plain- packaging issue is something that is an example of it doing the former,” he said. 

“From an American perspective, this is not about health policy but about intellectual property protection. IP is a company’s crown jewels and the feeling is that the plain-packaging issue is not just about cigarettes. Tobacco is seen as the first tranche but there are other tranches planned and so it is seen as something of a slippery slope because, if you’re going to say ‘we believe in IP protection but that there are some instances where we don’t believe in it quite so much’, then that really raises the question of where you draw the line. 

“We’re trying to advise countries around the world to hold off fully implementing a ban on packaging until the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO case against Australia is settled. New Zealand has done that and other countries are also considering it and it would be good if Ireland also waited,” he added. 

Admitting that the body he represented included a tobacco company as members, Mr Reinsch said the issue of plain packaging went beyond those firms who had most to lose from the its introduction. 

“We believe trade rules should trump health and other policies and generally this is the kind of thing that makes people raise an eyebrow and find worrisome.” 

Mr Reinsch said Ireland remained an attractive destination for FDI but that this could be threatened by the decision by individual states in the US to introduce new reforms that penalise companies operating in so-called tax havens. 

“There are many states introducing new legislation that include a list of countries deemed havens and then taxes companies operating in those jurisdictions. 

“So far, Ireland has managed to stay off those lists but it has been proposed a number of times. I believe from discussions with the Minister for Finance that the Government recently persuaded the state of Maine to remove the country from a list on its draft legislation, but it has to continue to keep on top of this,” he said. 

“Ireland has a good argument to say it is not a haven and my sense is the Government is on top of the issue, but there are 50 states [in the US] so it needs to make sure it keeps up to date on new legislation being proposed.” 

Mr Reinsch said investors had been impressed by the consistency shown by successive governments in Ireland but warned that political instability could lead investors to reconsidering investing here. 

“I’m not an expert on Irish politics and it seems to me that there are other countries in which it is more of a pressing issue, but nonetheless, political instability is something that’s off-putting to investors. 

“One of the best things that Ireland has done over the year is to stay the course and be consistent. It has held firm on the issue of its corporate tax rate and has shown a remarkable degree of consistency regardless of election results. 

“I think that even if the election brings about substantial change, investors won’t do anything dramatic because there’s such a good track record but, at the same time, there are lots of places to put capital and you’re only as good as what you said five minutes ago in this game,” he said. 


Trade push: SAARC working on quality norms for five sectors


Amiti Sen 

Business Line (The Hindu) 

13 mars 2015, 

Move aimed at removing technical barriers to trade India and its HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) partners have narrowed down on five sectors for which common quality standards would be evolved to facilitate freer flow of goods in the region. 

“The sectors that have been selected include electric products & electronics, textiles & leather, food and agriculture products, building & construction and chemicals & petrochemicals,” Chandan Bahl from the Bureau of Indian Standards told BusinessLine . 

Bahl said that some sectoral meetings had already taken place over the last few months and technical teams were examining the existing standards in all SAARC countries for harmonisation. 

Quality barriers 

SAARC includes Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka. Difference in quality norms in importing countries have been identified by exporters as a significant non-tariff barrier that restricts free flow of goods in the region. 

The harmonisation of standards is being carried out by the South Asian Regional Standards Organisation (SARSO), a SAARC specialised body, which became operational in Dhaka from April 2014. 

“It often takes time for inspections to take place when goods are being exported from one country to the other. Harmonising standards could take care of the problem to a great extent,” Bahl said. 

Pakistan, for instance, has been complaining about not being able to export cement to India freely as Indian inspectors don’t come to the country to examine their consignments on time. 

“This happens sometimes because we have problems in getting travel approvals from the Ministry of External Affairs,” another official pointed out. 

Cement, which falls under building & construction, is one of the items for which common quality standards are being worked out. 

The five sectors include electric products & electronics, textiles & leather, food and agriculture products, building & construction and chemicals & petrochemicals 

 


Environmental standards becoming a big non-tariff trade barrier — DTI


Manila Bulletin, by HYPERLINK "http://www.mb.com.ph/author/bernie-magkilat/"Bernie Magkilat
March 12, 2015 

Trade and Industry Undersecretary Adrian S. Cristobal Jr. yesterday said that environmental standards could become a huge non-tariff barrier to trade thus the need for domestic industries to level up in adapting standards for green technologies to ensure competitiveness and sustainability. 

“It (environmental standards) could be a big non-tariff trade barrier,” Cristobal told reporters at a forum on “Greening the Philippine Manufacturing Industry Roadmap”, noting that a deal on environment is being pushed already at the World Trade Organization (WTO) although there is no official talk yet.

EU and US and other developed countries are quite advanced in terms of their environmental standards. Trade blocs with high level ambitions like the Trans Pacific Partnership have also included environmental standards in their agreements.

“If we are not going to adapt these environmental standards we will have a hard time exporting some products especially to Europe,” Cristobal said adding there is a bigger need to create awareness about these things.

“It is important we create awareness about these things, education then of course requires resources big upfront investments but in the long term you’ll see the savings in your investment,” he said noting that the global trend is really going towards the implementation of environmental standards.

In the Philippines, the DTI has project called Promotion of Green Economic Development and Development (ProGED) funded by the German Federal Ministry of Economic Cooperation and Development in cooperation with the German Agency for International Cooperation (GIZ), which has initially identified six sectoral roadmaps that are already advanced in the development of distinct green technology and standards.

These sectors are automotive manufacturing and auto parts; pulp and paper; plastic; mass housing; copper; and furniture.

In their own roadmaps, they have already identified for their own advantage to make them competitive especially in the area of exports.

ProGED is being tied up with the development of sectoral roadmaps to promote industries that are driven by green economic development, which is an integral part of a modernization and innovation process of the economy of the country.

Under this project, industry sectors and the respective companies are challenged to elaborate and implement their own strategy to unleash the specific market potential for products and service delivery.

a. 


Australia scores ‘most favoured nation’ provisions in FTA with China


March 13, 2015 — 10:13AM

The Sydney Morning Herald, HYPERLINK "http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/by/John-Garnaut"John Garnaut, Asia Pacific editor for Fairfax Media

Chinese Commerce Minister Gao Hucheng, Chinese President Xi Jinping, Trade Minister Andrew Robb and Prime Minister Tony Abbott at the signing of the Declaration of Intent on Australia’s FTA agreement with China in November.

Australia’s biggest-ever bilateral trade deal is set to grow much bigger, with China agreeing to a special ratchet clause that will ensure that future benefits conferred to other countries will flow automatically to Australia. 

The much-coveted “most favoured nation” provisions in the China-Australia Free Trade Agreement have been kept under wraps at the request of Chinese negotiators, who were pursuing a parallel deal with South Korea.

Trade Minister Andrew Robb confirmed the MFN provisions in an interview with Fairfax Media.

“This is huge, I think,” said Mr Robb.

“It means that we will automatically receive the same treatment provided by China to any other country in the future including the EU and the United States.” 

Australian negotiators, analysts and industry bodies were HYPERLINK "http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/tony-abbott-seals-free-trade-deal-with-beijing-20141116-11nsk9.html"surprised at the range of liberalisation commitments that China committed to during President Xi Jinping’s visit to Canberra in November.

The full text, which will not be released until later this year, will include unprecedented commitments over a range of service sectors, including education and financial services.

Some China analysts speculated that Mr Xi may have been using the Australia trade deal as a lever to liberalise his own economy, which is starting to strain under the weight of bad debts and rash investments. 

The previously unreported MFN mechanisms take the deal to another level.

Australian negotiators are most enthused by potential MFN gains on the investment side. The “prize” will be a special “negative list” feature that China looks set to provide the US under a bilateral investment treaty, which would greatly increase the range of Australian investment opportunities.

Similarly, Australian fund managers could potentially gain majority ownership rights in Chinese counterpart firms, up from a ceiling of 49 per cent in the existing FTA, if the US manages to get what it is seeking. 

“This MFN clause was something we had long sought but didn’t really believe we could get,” said Geoff Raby, the former ambassador to China who had been involved with negotiations for a decade before stepping down to take on corporate directorships and advisory roles. 

“It is a big achievement by Robb and the team to have secured this.”

Mr Robb told Fairfax Media the MFN provisions would apply to investment and services chapters.

He said a separate review mechanism had been built into the “goods” provisions, which would apply three years after the agreement entered into force and then every five years thereafter.

“On most fronts, if not all, those will be protected, locked in, in the future when China make concessions with other countries,” Mr Robb said.

“Overall this means we have substantially [greater] preferential arrangements than any other trading partner.”

Dr Raby, a director of Fortescue, said there had been considerable political resistance on both sides when he first floated the idea of a China trade deal to his ministers in 2003, when the Howard government was concluding a trade deal with the US.

He said Chinese officials had been been anxious that they had paid too high a price for accession to the World Trade Organisation and Australians were unhappy at having to grant China “market economy” status even before negotiations had begun.

“It was the first time a developed country had engaged China on this idea,” he said. 

Dr Raby said the MFN provisions would be particularly important for investors because China was negotiating an ambitious bilateral investment agreement with the US.

“It is extremely valuable as it preserves our position as China negotiates other FTAs so the benefits which we have ‘paid’ for in the negotiations can’t be whittled away,” Dr Raby said.

The chief executive of the Business Council of Australia, Jennifer Westacott, said the MFN deal would keep Australia “on a level playing field with key competitors for valuable trade with what is the growth engine of the world”.

“This opens the door to deep access to Chinese markets and a greater capacity to further diversify the Australian economy,” she said. 

Former Austrade chief economist Tim Harcourt agreed that the China deal had surpassed expectations but also warned that great challenges lay ahead in the implementation.

“At the end of the day it’s the internal decisions you have to deal with in China, where so much is determined by administrative fiat,” said Dr Harcourt, now a lecturer and researcher in the MBA program at the University of NSW.

“FTA or no FTA, you still have to have those connections to get your deal up,” he said. “You’ve got to have the [Chinese Communist Party’s] blessing right down through the ranks.”


Indo-US ties not a threat to China: Envoy


The Telegraph 

12 mars 2015, 

A growing Indian economy and stronger ties between India and the US are in the interest of the world’s future, US ambassador to India Richard Verma said on Wednesday, adding that better Indo-US ties would not be a threat to China or any other country. 

“The US-India relationship can be a powerful force for advancing the well-being of our nations and the world.... If the US and India are the closest of friends and partners, the world will be a safer place,” the envoy said while delivering the keynote address at the Building Pan-Asian Connectivity conference in the city on Wednesday. 

“A strong Indo-US relationship is in the interest of the region and the world and it is not directed to any other country, particularly not directed at China.” 

According to Verma, the US cannot be the sole life-support system for helping the global economy recover and India’s role in this area was vital. “The US can’t be the only engine that pulls the global economy out of the deathbed it has been in over the past 10 years. So, the more the Indian economy does better, the more this region grows, that’s good for the US, Europe and the world.” 

Calling India-China and US-China relations “complicated and comprehensive”, Verma said economic interests of Delhi and Washington did not override security or human rights concerns regarding Beijing. 

“The India and China, and the US and China relations both are very complicated and comprehensive. There are elements of competition and cooperation in our relationships. We have our economic interests, but when we have security concerns or human rights concerns we raise them,” the ambassador said on the sidelines of the programme. 

Hosted by the US consulate general, Calcutta, the Center on American and Global Security (Indiana University) and the Observer Research Foundation, the core objective of the two-day conference was to underscore the importance of intra-regional connectivity for south and southeast Asia. 

He highlighted the agreement being processed between India and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"US Agency for International Development to establish a public-private partnership with key US, Indian and international organisations to create an inclusive digital economy and stressed the need for India to step up. 

The country, he said, ought to rely on its “tradition of peaceful democratic change” and “constructive dissent” to play a leadership role in the region, where “domestic political sensitivities, corruption and bilateral irritants all present roadblocks for better regional connectivity”. 

Mentioning the negligible volume of south Asia’s intra-regional commerce, Verma suggested addressing the “economic anomaly” to create opportunities for the region. 

“By some estimates, south Asia intra-regional commerce comprises only 5 per cent of total global trade. India trades more with Europe, the US, and the Middle East than with its immediate south Asian neighbours. Addressing this economic anomaly will involve overcoming some challenges, but if we do it will also crate enormous opportunities for all involved,” said Verma.


US government procurement: Pakistan obtains observer status
By MUSHTAQ GHUMMAN, 


Business Recorder 

13 mars 2015, 

United States (US) has allowed Pakistani companies to participate in government procurement with the approval of the US President as Pakistan has obtained observer status in government procurement group of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO. This was stated by Commerce Minister, Engineer Khurram Dastgir Khan at a press conference that he addressed along with Secretary Commerce Shahzad Arbab, Additional Secretary, Rubina Athar and Economic Minister to the US. 

According to the Minister when Pakistan raised the issue that as trade concessions are not being extended to Pakistan then how trade relationship between Islamabad and Washington can move forward he was told that Pakistani companies were permitted to bid in HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"US government procurement which is around $1.7 trillion. 

Pakistan was informed that to avail of this facility it must sign the Government Procurement Agreement of the WTO. Subsequently, Pakistan filed an application with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO after which it was accepted as an observer of the government procurement group. This is the first step towards availing of this facility which was achieved with the help of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"US Department of Commerce. 

“Now we enjoy some rights as an observer which is a positive development. We have been given rights to bid in HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"US government‘s procurement. We will educate Pakistani companies on this so that they can participate in HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"US government procurement contracts,” he added. The commerce minister said that there is a vast opportunity for Pakistani companies to supply materials such as textile and shoes to the US. 

Pakistan’s Economic Minister to Washington told media persons that Pakistan cannot participate in regular procurement of the US but the US President has the power to give a waiver in any particular case. The commerce minister explained that working level discussions were held with the US officials on Trade and Investment Framework Agreement (TIFA). He added that the Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT) with the US will be signed only when it is deemed beneficial for Pakistan. 

He further maintained that Pakistan has gone through the standard template of the US on BIT, adding that if Pakistan implements the US template it will have several obligations. The Commerce Minister said that Pakistan is preparing its own template which will be shared with the US once it is readied. Replying to a question, the Commerce Minister said that Pakistan is in GSP with the US for the last 35 years but never filed a petition but the present government is going to file a petition. 

Commerce Secretary Shahzad Arbab confirmed that Tauqeer Shah — former Principal Secretary to Chief Minister Punjab and an accused in the Model Town tragedy — has been granted visa and is leaving for Geneva as ambassador to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO in a couple of days, as permanent representative to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO. In response to a volley of questions on the appointment of Dr Tauqeer Shah to represent Pakistan at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO, the Commerce Minister defended the appointment saying that selection process was transparent. The Commerce Minister revealed that an approval from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO on his appointment has been received. Replying to a question, the Commerce Minister said Pakistan does not foresee any major change in trade trends with the US. 

The US has its own sensitivities on textile sector and keeping in mind that scenario Pakistan will file its petition of new items after GSP, as reauthorized by the Congress after remaining pending for the last 19 months. Pakistan is in the GSP for the last 35 years but it never filed any petition. However, the incumbent government is going to file a petition as GSP is approved by the Congress. There are some textile items which have sensitivity. 

“Presently, there is a flat line in Pakistan’s imports and exports. That’s why we are trying to find new avenues in trade towards value addition,” he added. According to the Minister, as Pakistan is shifting to value addition in textile, footwear etc it will have a positive impact on Pakistan’s exports to the US. 

Pakistan is watching the movement of international market. Commerce Ministry has no control on currency but when it is affected, Pakistan’s exports face negative implications. The commerce minister said Pakistan has not sought investment on its own cost under the BIT. Pakistan wants to integrate itself with international market. In reply to a question, he said, the Commerce Ministry is initiating a process for appointment of new trade officers for different countries, adding that utmost efforts will be made to select trade officers on merit. 

This time the focus will be on people who have ample market aptitude. The commerce minister further stated that some of the concerns raised in the US -Pakistan Business Opportunities Conference deserve consideration, but some others were not justified. In reply to a question, he said that a dispute on Export Development Fund (EDF) with Textile Ministry has been resolved, adding that the fund is for export development and not for export reward. 

panies to excel in the sectors where they are strong. 


EU’s new GMO law leaves questions unanswered \l "


Euobserver, By HYPERLINK "https://euobserver.com/search?q=Eric+Maurice"Eric Maurice

BRUSSELS, 12. Mar, 17:35

A new directive on cultivation of genetically-modified crops (GMOs) in Europe breaks an old deadlock between the European Commission, member states, and producers. But it leaves open political and legal questions.

Under the proposal, EU member states will be able to ban or restrict cultivation of GMOs on their territory, but they will not be able to block the authorisation process at EU-level.

The new rules give member states a two-step possibility for refusing GMO cultivation. 

First, during the EU authorisation process, they will be able to ajust the geographical scope of the cultivation. Second, if a crop is authorised by the commission, they will be able to restrict or prohibit cultivation on their territory.

The directive gives member states the possibility to ban GMO cultivation on environmental grounds, but also for other reasons, such as socio-economic impact or public policy. 

They will no longer need to provide new evidence of risk to health or the environment.

The directive, which was approved on 2 March, rubber-stamps a compromise voted by the European Parliament in January. It was signed into law on Wednesday (11 March) and should be effective in April or May.

It is “a positive step in aligning the legislation with citizens’ expectations while respecting the rights of all parties”, said health commissioner Vytenis Andriukaitis.

“The new rules give member states the freedom of choice”, said Janis Duklavs, the minister of agriculture of Latvia, the country currently holding the EU presidency. 

But NGOs and GMO critics are sceptical about the new law, saying member states opposed to GM crops still don’t have all the guarantees they need.

“This is no ‘carte blanche’ for the European Commission to push through new GM crops at the EU level”, wrote Mute Schimpf, from Friends of the Earth Europe, in an email to this website.

“[But] one major weakness is that it is uncertain whether countries would be able to ban crops due to negative environmental impacts at the regional level. Existing EU policy only assesses potential environmental harm at the level of the EU bloc”.

She also criticised “the notion that sovereign states, acting in their role as risk managers, should ask permission from companies which profit from GM cultivation before restricting the cultivation of GM crops in their territory”.

For Green MEP and anti-GMO activist Jose Bove, the new directive is simply “bad legislation”.

“Instead of EU legislation, we have multi-faceted legislation between states. That can have two consequences: it weakens expertise and it is a legal danger”, Bove told this website.

He pointed at the possibility that GMO-refusing states could be sued by other states at the World Trade Organisation for distortion of competition, or sued by companies in an investor-state dispute mechanism that is likely to be introduced in a future free-trade agreement with the US.

1507 maize

Meanwhile, the first crop to be authorised according to the new rules should be Pioneer’s 1507 maize.

In September 2013, the commission was told by the European Court of Justice not to further delay a decision whether to authorise the product. 

The ruling came after legal action by Dupont Pioneer, the company that makes it.

In February 2014, a large majority of member states voted against giving it a green light, but failed to definitively block the EU-level decision.

Maize 1507 “should [now] be approved for cultivation without further delay”, said DuPont Pioneer in a statement.

“We submitted the cultivation application of our 1507 GM maize product 14 years ago. 1507 meets all EU regulatory requirements, has received seven positive safety opinions published by Efsa [the EU’s food safety agency]”.

So far, only one crop has been authorized for cultivation in Europe, maize MON810, made by another American company, Monsanto.

No rush

Now the legislative deadlock has been broken, the EU commission said it will not rush to take a decision on maize 1507 or the eight other pending requests, which are still in the early stages of the approval process.


An EU official told this website it will first wait for the review of the decision-making process that commission president Jean-Claude Juncker said would be published six months after the beginning of the EU executive’s mandate. 

The report by Vytenis Andriukaitis is expected in April or May, just when the new directive on cultivation will come into force.

“The issue is not to run but to find a sustainable solution”, said the official, who did not say if the new directive could be compromised by the review.

Whereas the commission and Efsa have often been criticised for being too favorable of GMOs, Juncker is considered by some as more suspicious of genetically modified organisms.

The official insisted that the commission will take into account the position of member states, but observed that there is some pressure from the agriculture sector and that the commission wants to avoid the risk of going to court again.

Science and politics

The review should be an opportunity to straighten expertise, said Jose Bove.

“The only expertise we have is done by Efsa on specific scientific aspects”, he said.

“There is no environmental, socio-economic, agronomical aspects. We need a wider expertise”, he added, contesting the commission’s view that science and politics are two separate sides of the issue.


Chinese currency trade settlement gains popularity in Gulf region
By Gerard al-fil, 


Xinhua’s China Economic Information Service 

13 mars 2015 00:46, 

DUBAI, Mar. 12 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Xinhua) — With Chinese currency the yuan, also known as the renminbi, enjoying rising acceptance, banks and enterprises in the Gulf Arab region are seeking ways to catalyze the growing demand for conducting trade with the currency. 

“By the end of 2014, the yuan has become the world’s seventh largest payment currency and the ninth largest trading currency,” Tian Jun, general manager of Abu Dhabi branch of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Bank of China, said at a one-day seminar on Thursday. 

“The yuan gradually becomes a new choice for some countries in reserve diversification,” said the banker. 

China’s yuan, once an almost unknown currency in the daily economic life in the Gulf Arab region, is enjoying rising acceptance across the area. 

The United Arab Emirates (UAE) is the biggest export market for Chinese goods in the region, and the leading local and foreign banks in the oil-rich Gulf state, such as Dubai’s HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Emirates NBD and British lender HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"HSBC, have recently started to expand their product portfolio to provide accounts or trade financing in the Chinese currency. 

Tian quoted a global clients’ survey as saying that over 50 percent of the interviewees believe the cross-border renminbi settlement will account for 20 to 30 percent in the next five years, and 61 percent intend to use the renminbi in cross-border trade or increase the proportion of renminbi settlement. 

Kawal Singh Kohli, manager and board member at Dina Investment in Dubai, said his company plans to use the renminbi accounts within the next three months. 

“We bring exporters in the UAE and importers in China together and organize trade financing. We also use bank services from Chinese banks in Dubai to conduct trade between the UAE firms and their trade partners in other countries in the region,” the manager said. 

Vincent Cheung, head of the global market trading division at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Bank of China in Hong Kong, said the renminbi also receives tailwinds from China’s domestic economy such as the launch of the Shanghai Free Trade Zone in July 2014. 

Cheung said the Belt and Road Initiatives, China’s ambitious trans-Eurasia and across-ocean trade strategy, launched last year, will also push the internationalization of the global renminbi trade. 

He also noted that there was a significant development in market liquidity illustrated by a notable spread compression in the exchange rates between the renminbi and other currencies. 

“The liquidity is comparable to euro to U.S. dollar or Australian dollar to U.S. dollar. The average daily volume of interbank foreign exchange and money market transactions in offshore renminbi transaction equals 35 billion U.S. dollars, which is one of the most active currencies traded in Asian trading hours,” Cheung said. 

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Nasser Saidi, former chief economist of the Dubai International Financial Center, also painted a bright future for the renminbi in an early exclusive interview with HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Xinhua. 

“The growing internationalization of the renminbi, supported by bilateral currency-swap agreements and the recently announced BRICS development bank and contingency fund, is bound to be the forerunner of a new multi-currency world, thereby breaking the hegemony of the U.S. dollar and accentuating the dominance of China in the global landscape,” he said. 

Saidi said there will be a shift in soft power which will start in three main financial developments in the coming decade. “A change in the governance of the international monetary and financial architecture, the growth of ‘renminbisation’ and the emergence of Chinese capital markets to rival London and New York to serve the emerging economies.” 

In 2013, the global payment transaction services institution SWIFT reported the renminbi would overtake the euro to become the second most-used currency in global trade finance, said Cheung. 

The “big four” Chinese bank leaders, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Industrial and Commercial Bank of China, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Agricultural Bank of China, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Bank of China and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"China Construction Bank, have opened branch offices in the Dubai banking freezone DIFC since 2008. 

In November 2014, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Industrial and Commercial Bank of China‘s branches in Doha and Qatar became the first renminbi clearing bank in the Gulf Arab region and the Middle East. 

Several global financial centers, such as Hong Kong, London and Frankfurt, have also established renminbi offshore trading centers in recent years. 

 


  _____  

Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.
