India, Africa Join Hands on WTO 
Prescriptions for Food Security 
Vietnamese firms urged to take up trade defence measures 
Policy to define e-commerce business like Flipkart, Snapdeal likely
Marché commun - De nombreux obstacles demeurent 
 
 
India, Africa Join Hands on WTO 
7 November 2015, Business Today

Between December 15 and 18, World Trade Organisation (WTO) member countries will meet in Nairobi, Kenya, for its 10th ministerial conference. According to Roberto Azevedo, Director-General, WTO, the meeting "will be a milestone" for the future of the organisation for multiple reasons.
There are growing challenges from within WTO, as well as outside, that could undermine the supremacy of the multilateral trade body in negotiating global norms. Tiding over such challenges will thus be of prime importance to member countries, especially India and the African nations, with whom Delhi has just concluded the biggest ever partnership summit.
The major problem plaguing WTO from within is the increasing difficulty in decision-making. The consensus-based decision-making process followed by the organisation necessitates all 161 members - rich, poor and developing nations - to approve a decision. And there is a clear divergence among the developed and developing nations on the current round of negotiations going on since 2001. While developed countries find this round - Doha Development Agenda (DDA) or Doha round - less interesting, third world countries consider this as critical to their growth.
The Doha round was supposed to focus on helping developing countries enter global markets through reduced tariffs and preferential treatment. As part of the initiative, developed countries were supposed to work towards opening up their markets through rationalisation of agricultural subsidies and allow a level-playing marketplace for agricultural products to the poorer nations.
WHY THE DOHA ROUND IS IMPORTANT
Agriculture
OBJECTIVE:Reduce distortions in agricultural trade caused by high tariffs and other trade barriers. Rationalising export subsidies and domestic support
WHY IT MATTERS:India must ensure that rationalisation of domestic support does not hamper its existing public procurement policy for foodgrain to ensure food security, or come in the way of farmers' sustenance
Non-Agricultural Market Access (NAMA)
OBJECTIVE:To cut tariffs, give flexible options to developing countries and special treatment for poor nations on 90 per cent of the world's merchandise exports
WHY IT MATTERS:Unless discussed, NAMA proposals may severely limit domestic industrialisation and job creation prospects in India
Intellectual Property and Biodiversity
OBJECTIVE:Reconcile Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) Agreement with convention on biodiversity
WHY IT MATTERS:It will prevent bio-piracy
The only issue that was of interest to the developed country block led by the US and the European Union was a Trade Facilitation Agreement that called for modernisation of ports and streamlining of customs procedures. This was approved during the last ministerial conference held in Bali, Indonesia, two years ago.
Developed countries were supposed to work towards opening up their markets and allow a level-playing marketplace for agri products from poor nations
On October 21, at a meeting of trade ministers from the African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States in Brussels, Azevedo had made it clear that, as it stands today, "we will not be able to deliver (in Nairobi) on many of the major DDA issues such as agricultural domestic support or on market access". He had also hinted at the possibility of developed countries agreeing to take forward the pending issues in the DDA as and when WTO enters into a new round of negotiations to discuss fresh ideas. "It seems to me that all members had agreed to continue negotiations in the future on all DDA core issues, such as agriculture, market access and services. They would remain on the agenda. I think there is consensus on that. However, there is no agreement on how these negotiations should take place: whether under the present Doha framework or under some new architecture," he says.
Besides, the developed country block wants to push the poorer nations to sign a mega trade pact, the Trans Pacific Partnership, or TPP, involving the US and 11 other countries. However, several issues which are part of the TPP, including one that deals with higher intellectual property rights for medicines, have been opposed by developing countries. Trans-Atlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP), another mega trade pact between the US and European Union, is yet another example of an emerging external threat that can impact the relevance of WTO. Despite the challenges, India will have to be very clear about the position it wants to take in Nairobi.
Dumping the Doha Agenda will not be in India's interest as it has always maintained that addressing all issues in the current round of negotiations, including a permanent solution for public stock holding of grains for food security purposes, is critical not just for India, but for all developing and least developed nations.
Agreeing to more global rules and regulations that bind its trade, industry and services, will also not be in India's interest as it is looking to strengthen manufacturing by leveraging the potential of its domestic market and increased access to emerging markets that continue to grow in the midst of a global economic slowdown.
The joint press conference by African Union representative Mike Bimha (Minister of Industry and Commerce, Zimbabwe) and Commerce Minister Nirmala Sitharaman on October 23, therefore, seemed reassuring. Both sides maintained that India and the African Union are on the same page with regard to their WTO positions. If the bonhomie generated between India and 54 African countries during the summit sustains for a few more weeks, developing countries could be in a position to take a strong position in Nairobi.
The continuation of the Doha round until all core development issues are addressed is in the interest of India as well as Africa.
 
Prescriptions for Food Security 
7 November 2015, Business Today  

Combating Hunger and Achieving Food Security By MS Swaminathan.
 
The timing of this book, Combating Hunger and Achieving Food Security, could not be better. India is facing its second consecutive monsoon deficit year. The country is in the midst of implementing a law on food security, and the National Democratic Alliance ( NDA) government is making noises about the need to change agricultural practices. Master geneticist M.S. Swaminathan - the architect of the green revolution in the country in the mid sixties - beautifully sets the context in his new book, and calls for according priority to combating hunger. He also outlines ways to do so.
Swaminathan starts off by highlighting the factors that led to the success of the green revolution. He gives credit to the synergy between technology, public policy and farmers' efforts. At that time, incentives through subsidies and minimum support price (MSP) were absolutely essential to make farmers produce more. However, nearly five decades later, most states are desperately trying to get out of the cycle set by Swaminathan, even as the World Trade Organisation (WTO) wants India to end the MSP mechanism.
The book brings to life India's journey from the Bengal Famine - which killed roughly three million people between 1942 and 1943 due to hunger-to our present day struggle to become food sufficient. Swaminathan contends that only through homegrown food can this battle be won. For this, India needs to improve farm productivity. At the same time, effective social protection is needed to get small and marginal farmers out of their poverty and hunger traps.
The book's utility stems from the prescriptions that Swaminathan offers to safeguard the stability of agriculture production in India:
*Ensure the soil's health is not only conserved, but improved continuously.
*Ensure irrigation, water security, by integrating resources such as rainwater, rivers and other forms of surface water.
*Technology and inputs need to be tailored according to the agroecological and socio-economic conditions.
*Farmers must have access to appropriate credit and insurance support.
*Assured and remunerative marketing. The MSP mechanism should stay for the sake of improving the lives of smaller farmers.
*Farmers must get power and economy of scale, and to do so must explore co-operative farming.
*All in all, it's a must read book for those who are keen to understand the missing links in India's agriculture story.
 
Vietnamese firms urged to take up trade defence measures 
7 November 2015, Vietnam News Summary

Vietnamese firms have been urged to learn more about trade defence instruments allowed under the WTO and cooperate in the use of trade defence instruments to protect domestic production, a seminar heard on November 6 in HCM City. Nguyen Phuong Nam, Deputy Head of the Vietnam Competition Authority under the Ministry of Industry and Trade, said a series of free trade agreements would offer huge opportunities for Vietnamese firms to boost exports.
On the other hand, under these FTAs', the country will have to open its markets to imports, which can create challenges.
Many countries have applied trade defence instruments, including anti-dumping, anti-subsidy and safeguards against Viet Nam's exports.
Statistics from the VCA show that export products faced 98 lawsuits related to trade defence between 1994 and October this year in foreign markets.
Trade defence lawsuits affect export companies' competitiveness and exports, often causing them to lose markets, according to Pham Huong Giang, Deputy Head of the VCA's Trade Remedies Board.
In addition, companies have to spend huge amounts of money on lawsuits, and can be hit with high import tariffs for five years or more.
Domestic enterprises in many sectors like steel, spinning, paper and plastic face difficulties due to the inflow of imported products, especially from China.
But domestic firms have not paid enough attention to trade defence instruments to protect their sector.
As of October this year, Vietnam has launched only one anti-dumping and three safeguard investigations into imported products.
"The knowledge of Vietnamese firms about trade defence remains limited, making it very difficult to apply or initiate lawsuits against imported products," Giang said.
Giang said limited financial and human resources and a foreign language barrier were among other factors hindering firms from initiating lawsuits related to trade defence.
Vu Van Thanh, Hoa Sen Group's deputy general director of finance, said according to regulations, to file a lawsuit, plaintiffs must account for at least 25 per cent of the market share of an industry.
Companies in the same sector should join in a group as the plaintiff, he said.
However, firms were reluctant to provide figures for the investigation involving trade defence, he said.
In addition, there were few domestic lawyers specialising in this field.
At the seminar, the VCA also spoke about necessary steps in preparing files to submit to the VCA on use of trade defence measures.
Giang said exporters should learn more about issues related to trade defence and use the VCA's Early Warning System on anti-dumping cases, to avoid facing trade defence lawsuits against their exports.
The seminar on effective use of trade defence remedies to protect domestic production was organised by the VCA, the Domestic Market Department and the Viet Nam Association of Women Entrepreneurs. 
 
Policy to define e-commerce business like Flipkart, Snapdeal likely
7 November 2015, The Times of India
 
Are Flipkart and Snapdeal e-commerce portals, platforms or marketplaces? Are they small enterprises or large? The government will soon answer these questions by defining e-commerce units and their operations in a policy.
The department of commerce has asked the nodal electronics and IT department to frame the policy, which will contain the definition of ecommerce units, classify them by size and scale and set norms for the workforce and the procedures to set up shop in other countries.
There is no clear definition of e-commerce as of now, which has led to confusion and allegations that some companies are violating foreign investment rules. The current policy does not allow foreign investment in business-to-consumer e-commerce. Companies such as Flipkart and Snapdeal say they are online marketplaces that bring buyers and sellers together. "Today, there is no definition. Brick-and-mortar units are suffering and e-commerce is growing. Everyone will start buying from the comfort of the mobile phones and you can't stop this," a commerce department official said. Industry experts said such guidelines could help online companies get incentives or easier access to do business here.
"The policy will mention what is an e-commerce unit and what all services they offer. Such definitions help the government offer better incentives to the sector by giving some kind of a revenue cap," said an official from industry body Nasscom. "We want an e-commerce policy that can generate employment in a stable environment. Then is the issue of portals. Where do you set up these portals?
Should there be foreign investment in them and if yes, then how much," the commerce department official added. Drafting a policy for the fastgrowing e-commerce sector, which as per a study by PricewaterhouseCoopers is poised to grow to almost $20 billion by 2020 from $12.6 billion in 2013, has become a mammoth task for the government with no less than six departments engaged in the process.
A policy has also become important because of pressure from India's trading partners to take a stand on e-commerce. "There is a thinking on ecommerce in BRICS and it is coming up in the WTO also. This is inevitable and it is better that we start working on it so as to influence the outcome," the official said. The government is considering accepting the best practices of the e-commerce sector as part of the negotiations on joining the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership even as it is yet to take a call on opening up the sector completely to foreign investors.
 
Marché commun - De nombreux obstacles demeurent 
7 novembre 2015, All Africa

Une réunion des ministres du Commerce des pays de l'UEMOA se déroule en ce moment à Lomé. La création d'un marché commun et les entraves qui empêchent encore sa mise œuvre sont à l'ordre du jour.
Le faible niveau des échanges intracommunautaires qui se situe à environ 11% des échanges commerciaux globaux de l'Union constitue un sérieux handicap à l'intégration, a souligné Bernadette Legzim Balouki, la ministre du Commerce.
L'organisation sous régionale a adopté plusieurs textes parmi lesquels la réduction et l'harmonisation tarifaire, la réforme du cadre légal et réglementaire, la rationalisation des systèmes de paiement, la restructuration des secteurs financiers, cadres communautaires de l'investissement et de la concurrence, le tarif extérieurs communs (TEC). C'est bien, mais pas suffisant. La libre circulation des personnes et des biens, le droit de résidence et le droit d'établissement dans l'Espace ne sont pas appliqués.
'Il faut faire en sorte que le commerce garde sa place. C'est le moteur de l'économie. Sans le commerce, il n'y a pas d'économie viable. Nous voulons créer une classe moyenne dans les Etats et faciliter les échanges.. Notre role est d'avoir une approche commune dans le commerce international', a indiqué Allemand Oumarou, le président du Conseil des ministre et ministre nigérien du Commerce.
Une 'Déclaration de Lomé' doit être adoptée sur cette question en prélude à la 10e Conférence ministérielle de l'Organisation mondiale du commerce (OMC) qui se tiendra en décembre 2015 à Nairobi. 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.