Headlines:
China stock market rout intensifies
China to allow pension fund to invest in stock market for first time
Market turmoil is yet another lesson in need for international policy cooperation
Is the game up for China’s much emulated growth model?
Africa private equity group raises $1.4bn to invest in continent
Moscow, Beijing opposed to unilateral sanctions - Lavrov
Workaholic South Koreans to take more time off
 
Details:
China stock market rout intensifies
Patrick McGee in Hong Kong and Michael Hunter in London 
24 August 2015
Financial Times (FT.Com)
Chinese equities are falling heavily, leading a sell-off across Asia that prompted fresh questions about what policymakers might do to staunch the losses.
The benchmark Shanghai Composite fell up to 8.5 per cent, erasing all of its 2015 gains. It managed to move up off its lows to post losses of 7.3 per cent,
The tech-heavy Shenzhen Composite is down 7.6 per cent. Hong Kong’s Hang Seng index is 4.7 per cent, extending its August decline to nearly 13 per cent.
Many were expecting the People’s Bank of China to cut interest rates or inject liquidity over the weekend, however, no such steps were taken, heightening fears Beijing is no longer staking its credibility on bolstering the market.
Speculation of imminent action has been rife, with Xinhua, an official media outlet, reporting that China’s state pension funds would soon be allowed to invest in the market for the first time.
“As we embark on the final full week of August the prospect of further large scale volatility seems almost inevitable as investors look towards Chinese markets in particular for further clues to market direction,” said Michael Hewson, chief market analyst at CMC.
“Against this backdrop it would take an investor with nerves of steel to contemplate dipping back into the market at this point.”
Chinese authorities’ attempts to defend the 3,500 barrier in the Shanghai Composite look destined to fail with the break below the 200 day MA at the end of last week, likely to put further downward pressure on stocks.
Opening calls for Europe predict deep losses in the region after the Asian rout. The FTSE 100 is expected to fall by 214 points in London, while Frankfurt’s Xetra Dax 30 is on course for a 427-point tumble and the CAC 40 in Paris is called down 171 points, according to IG.
IG’s Evan Lucas said: “Today has all the hallmarks of being one of the worst trading days of the past five years.”
Even before China markets opened the global equity rout of last week accelerated across Asia in a negative feedback loop. Once China joined in on the turmoil the sell-off accelerated and was joined by commodity prices.
Tokyo’s Nikkei 225 is 4.6 per cent lower, falling below 19,000 for the first time since April, while the Topix sank 4.2 per cent. In Sydney, the S&P/ASX 200 is down 4.1 per cent, while Taiwan’s Taiex was down as much as 7.5 per cent — on pace for its biggest daily sell-off since 1990 — before paring the loss to 4.3 per cent.
Turnover in Japan, Australia and Taiwan was 77 per cent, 90 per cent and 113 per cent above the 30-day average, respectively.
Bank and energy stocks led the declines as the slide in the price of commodities such as oil showed no signs of abating.
The Bloomberg Commodity Index, a 22 member gauge that looks at everything from egg futures to natural gas, fell 1.2 per cent to $86.79, its lowest since 1999. Even the price of gold was down 0.4 per cent as investors sold quality assets to raise much-needed cash for margin calls.
The Chinese falls place further pressure on the country’s authorities to act. The Shanghai market fell nearly 12 per cent last week as investors questioned whether Beijing was still propping up equities with an array of policies. A key manufacturing gauge hit a six-year low on Friday, spurring a wave of selling but drawing no real response from authorities.
The losses in Asia followed a widespread equity sell-off late last week as nervousness about the global economy spread from emerging markets to developed ones.
In commodities, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" Brent crude oil fell another 2 per cent on Monday, a fourth straight loss, to $44.55 per barrel, its lowest since March 2009.
S&P 500 futures were down 2.3 per cent, implying the 3.2 per cent loss on Friday — the worst since November 2011 — would be extended in New York on Monday. Nasdaq futures were off 4 per cent.
Currencies across Asia were on the back foot except for the yen, which investors treat as a haven asset. The Japanese currency was up 0.6 per cent to 121.3 per US dollar, its strongest since July 9.
The Malaysian ringgit, already at its lowest level since 1998, fell a further 1.4 per cent to 4.228 per dollar. The Australian and New Zealand dollars weakened 1.2 per cent and 1.4 per cent, respectively, to US$0.7225 and US$0.6593. China is the largest trading partner of all three countries.
The US dollar index, which measures the greenback against a basket of currencies, retreated 0.4 per cent, a fourth straight loss, to 94.618. This suggested that markets were increasingly confident that the Federal Reserve would delay plans to lift US interest rates.
The Financial Times Limited (AAIW/EIW)
China to allow pension fund to invest in stock market for first time
Phillip Inman 
24 August 2015
The Guardian
State news agency reports 30% of net assets will be allowed to be invested in domestically listed shares, which could restore investor confidence
China has cleared the path for local authority pension funds to invest in the stock market for the first time, potentially channelling hundreds of billions of yuan into the country’s struggling Shanghai exchange. After a week of turbulence that sent world stock markets spiralling to their worst weekly loss for the year, Xinhua, the official news agency, reported on Sunday that under the new rules, the fund will be allowed to invest up to 30% of its net assets in domestically listed shares.
The move, which is likely to be seen as a brazen attempt to inject pension cash into the market to shore up prices and restore investor confidence, comes ahead of several reports that are likely to show the world’s major economies struggling to recover as China’s main industries slowdown.
A febrile atmosphere in currency and stock markets is also expected to persist as traders look ahead to gathering this weekend of central bankers in Jackson Hole, Kansas, where the focus will be on the Federal Reserve meeting next month to consider raising US interest rates for the first time since 2006.
Related: HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" China syndrome: how the slowdown could spread to the Brics and beyond
Stock markets dived last week as the prospect of a rate rise combined with figures showing the Chinese economy growing at a slower pace than previously forecast unnerved investors. Fears that the Greek rescue deal would unravel following the resignation of prime minister Alexis Tsipras also weighed on investor sentiment.
Britain’s top 100 companies saw £46bn wiped off their value on Friday, sending the FTSE 100 index down 10% since the beginning of the year. The New York Dow Jones crashed more than 500 points after investors in the Frankfurt Dax and Paris Cac sold heavily as they weighed up the likely negative impact of a shrinking Chinese market for their goods.
Hopes that the Shanghai market will stabilise appear to be largely dependent on the Beijing authorities offsetting a run of weaker economic growth figures with moves to liberalise investment rules on state and private fund managers.
Previously, Chinese pension funds could only invest in bank deposits and treasuries. Together the funds have assets of more than 2tn yuan ($322bn) that can be invested, meaning about 600bn yuan ($97bn) could theoretically go into the stock market, state media has estimated.
According to the new rules, pension funds can also invest in convertible bonds, money-market instruments, asset-backed securities, index futures and bond futures in China, as well as the country’s major infrastructure projects.
Nevertheless, further turbulence is expected this week after a slump in oil prices that signalled a further slowdown in the global economy. World trade has declined in every month this year so far, indicating that businesses and consumers have become increasingly wary of committing themselves to expensive purchases.
Eagerly awaited second-quarter gross domestic product figures for the US, due on Thursday, are expected to give a clue as to the strength of the world’s largest economy.
In the eurozone, investors will also be looking at an German economic sentiment survey due on Tuesday for a better idea of the scope of the bloc’s recovery.
Preliminary August consumer price readings for Germany and Spain on Friday will provide further insight into how effective the European Central Bank’s bond-buying efforts have been at warding off deflation. But the spotlight will mainly fall once again on Greece, where early elections are expected to bring renewed uncertainty to the eurozone.
The latest bout of nervous trading followed a devaluation of the yuan by the Chinese authorities a fortnight ago. An initial 2% cut was followed by further devaluations until figures showing a 8.3% decline in exports were followed by a survey that pointed to a further weakening in manufacturing output growth
Analysts at Investec Economics said: “It will be all eyes on the Chinese authorities for any further policy support steps, alongside the People’s Bank of China yuan fixings and trading swings.”
China is also widely expected to relax reserve requirements ratios for its banks again in the coming months, a measure intended to spur lending by reducing the cash they need to hold. It is trying to keep its economy on course to grow 7% in 2015 – its slowest pace in a quarter of a century.
“We continue to expect a total of 100 basis points of reserve requirement ratio cuts by end-2015, with the first cut likely to take place within the next two weeks,” economists at Standard Chartered said. The cash reserves ratio has already been cut three times this year.
Fed chair Janet Yellen is not expected to attend the Jackson Hole gathering, raising the prospect that other Fed officials may be more tight-lipped about the likelihood of the first rate increase in almost a decade, some analysts said.
The prospect of an increase as soon as September receded this week as the Fed released minutes of July meeting. They gave no clear signals as to the timing of such a move - which would affect markets across the world and could cause more pain for emerging market assets, already being hit by China’s woes.
Fed policymakers are still concerned about the weakness of the global economy, the minutes showed, but they were also more confident about US growth prospects.
Guardian Newspapers Limited
Market turmoil is yet another lesson in need for international policy cooperation
Larry Elliott Economics editor 
24 August 2015
The Guardian
World hasn’t changed much since financial crisis, which showed an economic model based on widening inequality and uncontrolled capital flows is unviable
And so it begins. Shares are falling, currency markets are in turmoil. The price of oil is going through the floor, burning the fingers of speculators who have made the wrong bets on borrowed money. Welcome to the crash of August 2015.
Financial markets being what they are, there is every chance there will be a bounce on Monday. Investors will be sniffing out bargains and be hoping that the scale of last week’s falls will prompt a response from central banks. Even in the most severe bear markets, prices never go down in a straight line. But don’t be fooled. This could get ugly.
Recessions are years, sometimes decades, in the making. But they always have a trigger. In 1973, it was the quadrupling of the oil price by Opec in response to the Yom Kippur war. In 2007, it was the announcement that HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" Banque Paribas was having problems with three of its funds that specialised in US sub-prime debt. If this really is the start of something, it will be easy for historians to name the catalyst: the decision by Beijing to devalue its currency on 11 August.
China’s central bank said the currency move was all part of a long-term liberalisation plan and had nothing to do with the state of the economy. Few believed it. In the past year, Beijing has run down its foreign reserves by more than $300bn in order to maintain the over-valued exchange rate of the yuan – also known as the renminbi – against the dollar. It has now abandoned that policy and said that in future the yuan’s exchange rate would be determined by demand and supply and movements in other major currencies.
Unsurprisingly, that was taken as a strong hint that there would be further falls in the yuan, which when adjusted for inflation has appreciated by 50% against the dollar in the past 10 years. China’s currency no longer looks undervalued; it looks overvalued, making life a lot tougher for Chinese exporters competing with other Asian countries, including Japan, that have seen devaluations.
Related: HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" Stock market correction: is this a new global financial crisis?
There were strong suspicions that China’s growth figures have been doctored to disguise a hard landing; suspicions intensified by last Friday’s worse-than-expected survey of manufacturing.
Fear rippled through financial markets. Two questions were asked. Did the slowdown in China mean that demand for global oil and metals would fall? And was China about to export deflation to the rest of the world through a weaker currency? To which the answers were yes and yes. Capital came flooding out of the emerging market countries seen as particularly vulnerable, and their currencies fell.
Shares in Germany fell because of the economy’s exposure to China. Shares in London fell because the FTSE 100 is stuffed full of mining and commodity companies. Shares on Wall Street fell because they were falling everywhere else and because of concerns that the Federal Reserve is gearing up to raise interest rates next month.
That fear is now almost certainly groundless. The Fed is not going to tighten policy while the global markets are in turmoil. Nor is the Bank of England going to raise interest rates in the UK this year. Falling commodity prices will drive inflation even further below target and the falls in the exchange rates of emerging market countries will result in deflation being exported to the west.
The events of the past couple of weeks should come as no surprise. There have been more than 50 serious financial crises since the breakup of the Bretton Woods system in the early 1970s, and the world was due one. That’s because, as the US economist Thomas Palley has noted, the current economic model is “unchanged and exhausted”.
The reason the global economy hit the wall in 2007 was that it relied on the US as the consumer of last resort. But Americans could not consume more out of wage growth because real income growth was negligible. They borrowed to consume, relying on ever-rising house prices to keep themselves financially afloat. Then the real estate bubble burst and the sky fell in.
Related: HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" China syndrome: how the slowdown could spread to the Brics and beyond
The post-crisis world doesn’t look that much different. Central banks resorted to quantitative easing in order to prevent the money supply shrinking. The Federal Reserve bought $4.5tn (£2.9tn) of assets in three phases of QE and will doubtless announce a fourth if a marked slowdown in activity threatens to intensify deflationary pressure.
Yet even central bankers are starting to doubt whether QE has done much good. Stephen Williamson, vice-president of the Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis, has HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" just issued a study in which he concludes : “There is no work, to my knowledge, that establishes a link from QE to the ultimate goals of the Fed – inflation and real economic activity. Indeed casual evidence suggests that QE has been ineffective in increasing inflation.”
The economic story of the US since the Great Recession ended has been of QE fuelling a six-year bull market in shares at a time when economic growth has been weak and productivity growth even weaker. There has been no trickle-down effect, and no attempt to redress the main structural problem of the past three decades: the severing of the link between productivity and wages. The top 10% of US households took 116% of the income gains when the US economy was recovering between 2009 and 2012. The other 90% of US citizens saw their living standards fall. Inequality has widened.
For a while, it seemed that China would take on the role as the world economy’s consumer of last resort, with its strong growth good news for metals producers in Brazil, oil companies in Angola and manufacturers in Germany. But, as in the US, too much of China’s boom was down to an unsustainable build-up of debt.
So here’s the position. Consumers in the west are being encouraged, in most cases against their better judgment, to take advantage of low interest rates to load up on more debt. But memories of last time are still relatively fresh. China wants better-balanced – and slower – growth. Every country bar none thinks it needs to export more and is prepared to indulge in beggar-my-neighbour tactics to do so. This does not stack up. The model can only be kept going – just about – so long as interest rates remain at historically low levels and asset prices are kept buoyant through a constant drip-feed of QE.
The crisis of 2007-09 was a lesson to policymakers that international policy cooperation was needed to increase global demand. It was a lesson that there needed to be higher investment in infrastructure and skills to raise productivity. It was a lesson that an economic model based on widening inequality was unviable. It was a lesson about the risks of uncontrolled capital flows.
Clearly the lesson wasn’t big enough.
Guardian Newspapers Limited
Is the game up for China’s much emulated growth model?
Jayati Ghosh 
24 August 2015
The Guardian
From Brazil to Thailand, debt-driven development has ended in tears. A more inclusive strategy must emerge
Whatever happened to emerging markets? HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" Brics, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" Mints, whatever global investors call them: For a while it appeared as if countries such as Brazil, India and Turkey had secure and buoyant futures, regardless of the travails of advanced economies. There was much trumpeting of their advantages, such as the demographic bulges producing young populations. Few asked about the nature of the growth, or whether it could last. The euphoria spread, leading to large private-capital inflows that pushed up asset prices in these countries.
That already seems a long time ago, as investor opinion has done yet another volte face. Investors who were slow to read the tea leaves during the boom times have now taken fright. In just 13 months, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" capital outflows from these countries have crossed $1tn. Stock markets have tanked across countries as distant and diverse as Malaysia, India, South Africa and Brazil; currencies have depreciated; and bond issues are slowing down, with fewer takers.
For a change, this is not being driven by policy in the developed world. Unlike the “ HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" taper tantrum ” unleashed in mid-2013 by Ben Bernanke, the then US Federal Reserve chairman – when he simply announced the possibility of reducing the massive liquidity stimulus that was being provided in the US – the current skittishness in emerging markets is the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" fallout of what is happening in China. This is hugely important, not just because of China’s major role in global trade, but because it signifies the end of a particular growth strategy that many other countries were trying to emulate.
The recent travails of China’s economy are well known by now: falling real estate prices put paid to the construction boom, and the subsequent HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" bursting of the stock market bubble was ham-fistedly controlled through official measures. But these current difficulties are the outcome of earlier economic strategies that were widely celebrated, when the going was good.
From the early 1990s China adopted an export-led strategy that delivered continuously increasing shares of the world market, fed by relatively low wages and very high rates of investment, enabling massive increases in infrastructure. It led to big increases in inequality and even bigger environmental problems, but the strategy seemed to work – until 2008-09, when exports were hit by the global financial crisis.
Yet even then, China, India and other large emerging markets continued to grow. The talk at the time was that they were already HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" “decoupled” from the west. In reality, China (and much of developing Asia) had simply shifted to a different engine of growth without abandoning the focus on exports. The Chinese authorities could have generated more domestic demand by stimulating consumption through rising wage shares of national income, but this would have threatened their export-driven model. Instead they put their faith in even more accumulation to keep growth rates buoyant.
So the “recovery package” in China essentially encouraged more investment, which was already nearly half of GDP. Provincial governments and public sector enterprises were encouraged to borrow heavily and invest in infrastructure, construction and more production capacity. To utilise the excess capacity, a real estate and construction boom was instigated, fed by lending from public sector banks as well as “shadow banking” activities winked at by regulators. Total HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" debt in China increased fourfold between 2007 and 2014, and the debt-GDP ratio nearly doubled to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" more than over 280%.
We now know that these debt-driven bubbles end in tears. The property boom began to subside in early 2014, and real estate prices have been stagnant or falling ever since. Chinese investors then shifted to the stock market, which began to sizzle – once again actively encouraged by the Chinese government. The crash that followed has been contained only because the government pulled out all the stops to prevent further falls.
All this comes in the midst of an overall slowdown in China’s economy. Exports fell by around 8% in the year to July. Manufacturing output is falling, and jobs are being shed. Construction activity has almost halted, especially in the proliferating “ghost towns” dotted around the country. Stimulus measures such as interest rate cuts don’t seem to be working. So the recent HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" devaluation of the yuan – which has been dressed up as a “market-friendly” measure – is clearly intended to help revive the economy.
But it will not really help. Demand from the advanced countries – still the driver of Chinese exports and indirectly of exports of other developing countries – will stay sluggish. Meanwhile, China’s slowdown infects other emerging markets across the world as its imports fall even faster than its exports and its currency moves translate into capital outflows in other countries.
The pain is felt by commodity producers and intermediate manufacturers from Brazil to Nigeria and Thailand, with the worst impacts in Asia, where China was the hub of an export-oriented production network. Many of these economies are experiencing collapses of their own property and financial asset bubbles, with negative effects on domestic demand. The febrile behaviour of global finance is making things worse.
This is not the end of the emerging markets, but is – or should be – the end of this growth model. Relying only on exports or debt-driven bubbles to deliver rapid growth cannot work for long. And when the game is finally up, there can be severe political fallout. For developing countries to truly “emerge”, a more inclusive strategy is essential.
Guardian Newspapers Limited
Africa private equity group raises $1.4bn to invest in continent
Joseph Cotterill 
24 August 2015
Financial Times (FT.Com)
Abraaj Group, a Dubai-based company, has amassed the largest pool of private equity capital yet for investments across Africa.
The group, which focuses on private equity in emerging markets “beyond the Brics”, said it had raised $375m for a fund that will focus on North Africa.
Combined with capital raised in April targeted at the sub-Saharan region, the two funds give Abraaj just under $1.4bn to spend in the continent’s markets, a record sum to raise in a single year.
This follows an Africa-wide fund raised earlier this year by Helios Investment Partners, a rival to Abraaj, which was the first dedicated to the region to surpass $1bn.
The dawn of billion-dollar African private equity funds reflects a search by investors for higher returns than are on offer in the saturated buyout markets of the US and Europe, and also represents a bet on the continent’s growing middle class.
International buyout groups including Carlyle and KKR expanded into the region last year, with maiden investments often focused on consumer growth. This is despite concerns that larger funds in Africa could be left to chase relatively few opportunities, given the limited size of its capital markets.
Mustafa Abdel-Wadood, a partner at Abraaj who runs its regional funds, said that splitting the funds’ capital between north and south would give investors a choice over which markets they wanted to invest in.
“If they want to look at Africa as one continent, or they want to see it as separate markets, they can,” he said.
Mr Abdel-Wadood added that the funds would draw from an on-the-ground search for companies, as deals placed in the market are only a “subset” of opportunities. These are businesses we approach proactively,” he said.
Abraaj has already made six investments from the new North Africa fund, including a hospital group which it plans to roll out across the region.
The fund will look for majority or minority stakes in mid-market companies based in Algeria, Egypt, Morocco and Tunisia that Abraaj could help turn into regional market leaders.
Sharp falls in African currencies triggered by collapsing commodity prices have also posed pitfalls for private equity investors in the region.
Currency volatility had become a “big part of the discussion we’re having” over investments in the region, Mr Abdel-Wadood said.
“This is not the first time these markets have faced currency issues,” he added, noting that a drop in exchange rates often occurs in one big step. “Over the lifetime of an investment, this can be absorbed by the underlying growth of the business.”
Abraaj was, however, looking at defensive sectors more. “This is a year where one needs to be cautious,” Mr Abdel-Wadood said.
The Financial Times Limited 
Moscow, Beijing opposed to unilateral sanctions - Lavrov
23 August 2015
Interfax: Russia & CIS General Newswire
MOSCOW. Aug 23 (Interfax) - Russia and China are against forceful pressure on sovereign states and the introduction of unilateral sanctions.
"We are resolute opponents of someone else's will being imposed on sovereign states, including forcefully, unilateral sanctions pressures and the use of double standards in general," Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said in a letter titled "The lessons of history and new frontiers" published in the Rossiyskaya Gazeta and China's Renmin Ribao daily.
"Russia and China overlap or are close in their approach towards the key problems of modernity, by consistently urging the formation of a new polycentric world order based on international law, respect for the originality of peoples, their rights to choose the development path on their own," Lavrov said.
Cooperation between the two countries on global stage "has become an important factor of maintaining international and regional stability," the minister said.
They have efficiently coordinated their efforts on "various multilateral platforms, including the United Nations, G20, as well as BRICS and SCO (Shanghai Cooperation Organization) which held successful summits in Ufa in July," the minister said.
The Russian-Chinese bilateral relationship is based on "the feelings of sincere friendship and sympathy between our people, deep mutual respect and trust and the respect for the key interests of one another, the interest in our countries' prosperity," Lavrov said.
"Effectively, this is a new type of relationship, some sort of a 21st-century cooperation model," the minister said.
Russia intends to "continue doing, hand in hand with our Chinese friends, whatever is necessary to make sure that our cooperation reaches new historical frontiers for the good of our people, in the name of asserting the ideals of justice and equality on global stage," Lavrov said.
"An intense and trusted dialogue at the highest level is an essential component of success," the minister said.
"I am certain that the visit by Russian President Vladimir Putin to China due in September will lend a powerful additional impetus to our broad strategic partnership and foster further discovery of its truly inexhaustible potential," he said.
Interfax Information Services, B.V.
Workaholic South Koreans to take more time off 
Song Jung-a in Seoul, 
Financial Times (FT.Com)
Song Jung-a in Seoul, 
24 August 2015 05:16, 
Park Hee-jung, a 34-year-old pharmaceutical researcher, took an 11-day holiday in May to travel to Croatia and Bosnia with his girlfriend — a relatively long vacation inconceivable for many South Koreans who remain world champion workaholics.
“It was so good to take a long vacation but I am stressed out again because of the mountains of work,” says Mr Park. “The company encourages us to take annual holidays allowed but there are not many people who take them all.”
Mr Park is one of the country’s younger generation seeking a work-life balance but even he usually takes up less than half of his allotted annual holidays. He is not alone.
Workers in South Korea — home to the longest working hours and highest suicide rate in the developed world — took just 8.6 days of holidays last year on average, the lowest among the 24 nations surveyed by online travel agency Expedia, compared with the global average of 20.5 days and the French’s 30.7 days.
Heavy workloads and pressure from superiors have made them reluctant holidaymakers but there are growing signs that this culture may be changing with big Korean companies encouraging staff to take more time off to boost productivity and creativity, prodded by a government campaign to develop tourism in a bid to boost sluggish domestic spending.
Samsung Electronics is one of the latest. The country’s biggest company by sales said last month it would offer a one-year optional sabbatical for those working for more than three years while extending maternity leave from one year to two years.
The move follows some other companies such as Doosan, SK Energy, S-Oil, and Shinhan Bank that have instituted a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" compulsory annual two-week holiday.
Shinhan even uses some strong-arm tactics to keep its workaholic employees out of the office during the holiday by locking them out of the computer system while oil refiner S-Oil helps staff to use up all two weeks of mandatory leave by naming a colleague to take the employee’s place while they are away.
Several shipyards such as Daewoo Shipbuilding & Marine Engineering also close its entire factories and offices for two weeks over the summer holiday.
“In a knowledge-based economy, longer working hours do not necessarily mean higher efficiency,” says Kim Pan-jung, a director at the Korea Employers Federation. “We need innovative ideas to add value, so more companies are encouraging their workers to recharge through longer leave.”
Mr Kim expects such changes to accelerate as companies want to save compensation costs for unused holidays in the slowing economy while the government tries to create jobs and improve living standards by reducing working hours.
South Koreans forged strong work ethics during the country’s rapid industrialisation over the past half a century to transform the war-torn country into the world’s 7th largest trading nation by volume, according to WTO data for 2014. They put in an average of 2,163 work hours in 2013, second only to Mexico among developed countries.
But the OECD says the long hours have not translated into better productivity. In 2012, the latest year for which data have been released, South Korea’s labour productivity per hour worked was just 66 per cent of the OECD average and less than half that of the US.
Under the country’s labour law, South Koreans are entitled to 15-25 days of annual leave but using their full vacation time, especially taking two weeks off at a shot, is not feasible for many of them, especially at small and midsized companies suffering from labour shortages. In the country’s hierarchical Confucian culture, the rank and file will not take holiday unless the boss does too.
Kim Jong-woo, a 42-year-old software developer, is entitled to 17 days of annual leave but he usually takes just four days off in the summer. The only time he took a whole week off was when he got married. “I can’t imagine missing two weeks in a row because I don’t want to upset my boss,” he says. “I rather prefer to work through for compensation pay.”
Experts say it will take a long time to resolve the national vacation deficit, unless the government and companies bring in more radical steps to change the culture. “We should shake off this long-held perception that long hours mean hard work,” says Bae Kyu-shik at the Korea Labour Institute. “The laws and systems are there but changing the public attitudes towards holiday is not easy.”
The omens from the country’s big boss are not good either. Earlier this month, President Park Geun-hye stressed the summer holiday season should be an opportunity to boost domestic spending.
She stayed at the presidential Blue House during her five-day break last month as she did during her holiday last year, keeping an eye on national affairs.
The Financial Times Limited 
END
 
Josep Bosch, Information Officer
Information and External Relations Division
+41227395681
 
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.