Headlines:
Indonesia Govt upbeat about biodiesel settlement at WTO
US Wants Speedy Implementation of Solar Power in India, Says Official
India to take up currency devaluation issue at G20
Japan's Amari: Momentum gathering for TPP ministerial meeting
Auto-Parts Dispute Taps the Brakes on Pacific Trade Deal
New Zealand looks to break down barriers in APEC markets: official
Brics prediction: ugly for Brazil, better for India
Pakistan: Training course on trade laws
 
Details:
Indonesia Govt upbeat about biodiesel settlement at WTO
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Khoirul Amin
3 September 2015
The Jakarta Post
The government is optimistic that a panel recently setup by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) will settle its issue regarding the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union (EU)'s anti-dumping measures on its biodiesel.
The Trade Ministry's trade defense director, Oke Nurwan, said on Wednesday that the government was ready to attend the panel's first hearing.
"We'll ask our representatives to be proactive during the panel meeting," he told The Jakarta Post.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO agreed and setup on Monday a panel to discuss the anti-dumping case involving Indonesia and the EU. It was somewhat a surprising decision as the world trade body had rejected the formation of a panel in July.
A similar panel was set up in April last year and its personnel were appointed two months later for the same case between the EU and Argentina.
Indonesia's efforts to reach a settlement on this issue began on June 10, 2014 when it filed a complaint against the EU's anti-dumping measures on its biodiesel with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's dispute settlement body (DSB).
The EU, which was once the largest importer of Indonesia's biodiesel, has imposed a five-year tax on biodiesel from a number of Indonesian companies, along with those from Argentina, since 2013.
The tax imposed on Indonesia's biodiesel ranges from around ?76.94 (US$86.7) per ton to ?178.85 per ton.
The 28-member bloc took the measure in response to a finding by the European Biodiesel Board stating that the import volume of biodiesel from Indonesia had surged from 157,915 tons in 2008 to 1.09 million tons in 2011, claiming that it was because the biodiesel was priced below the European market's fair value.
The government has stated that Indonesia's cheaper biodiesel price in Europe is due to the lower tax that the government imposes on biodiesel as it is included as a downstream product.
The Indonesian government has reiterated that it imposed different taxes on various products, with higher export taxes imposed on raw materials and lower taxes for processed products in an attempt to boost the local downstream industry.
Mahmud Syaltout, an international trade law and policy expert with the University of Indonesia (UI), argued that the government and concerned industry players had to painstakingly prepare data to support their arguments if they wanted to win the case at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO.
"The decision from the dispute settlement body will be final and binding, so Indonesia has to prepare complete supporting documents and verify them all [...]," he said.
Before coming to a final agreement, both Indonesia and the EU will go through a number of stages during the dispute settlement process, including panel reports to parties and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members, adoption of the reports by the DSB and possible appeals.
The panel on anti-dumping measures on Indonesia's biodiesel will also involve third-party countries, including the US, Japan, Turkey, Singapore, India, China, Canada, Argentina, Australia, Norway and Russia.
The EU's measures on Indonesia's biodiesel, according to the Biofuel Producers Association (Aprobi), has caused biodiesel exports to the European market to decline and forced most of Indonesia's biofuel producers to look at other potential markets. PT Bina Media Tenggara
US Wants Speedy Implementation of Solar Power in India, Says Official
3 September 2015
India Energy News
The US is putting its strong support for the quick implementation of solar power across the globe, including in solar-focused India, and it will continue its effort for availing best products-cum-technology to consumers, news agency PTI reported citing US Trade Representative spokesperson Andrew Bates.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization) has not yet declared the result of the enforcement case, which the US imposed on India on the grounds of discriminatory policies in solar power segment, Bates said.
As per media sources, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO will support the US for protecting its thin-film solar cells and crystalline silicon.
In 2014, the country had taken India to the trade organization against the local content requirements of New Delhi.
Under these requirements, solar developers must use equipment that are made in India not in the US. Such requirements violate the rules of WTA and these are also against the businesses and workers of the North American country, Trade Representative Michael Froman stated. Athena Information Solutions Pvt. Ltd. 
India to take up currency devaluation issue at G20
Tejal Yadav 
4 September 2015
Free Press Journal
New Delhi: Ahead of the meeting of G20 finance ministers and central bank governors in Turkey, India said that competitive devaluation of currency is a major threat to stability in the global economy. "The recent devaluation of major currencies followed by currency depreciations in a large number of Asian emerging markets raises the risk of competitive devaluations. "Competitive currency devaluations, at a time when global demand is sluggish, is a major threat to stability in the global economy," an official release said as Finance Minister Arun Jaitley left for Ankara.
He would participate in a two-day conference of G20 finance ministers and central bank governors, who will take stock of the global economic situation and review the member nations' growth strategies. G20 ministers and governors in Ankara on September 4-5 will exchange views on the recent global economic developments, challenges and collective measures to address them as well. Reserve Bank of India Governor HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Raghuram Rajan will also participate in the meet.
"The attempt in Ankara would be to analyse the situation and consider collaborative measures like developing the global safety nets to protect countries from negative spill-overs arising from domestic actions," the release said. The Finance Minister will also hold meetings with his counterparts from G20 countries on the sidelines of the meet. Other members of the grouping include Argentina, Brazil, China, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Russia, South Africa, Turkey, the UK, the US and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union.
Jaitley will also participate in the joint meeting of G-20 Finance and Labour Ministers as well as in the First Meeting of the Governing Council of BRICS Contingent Reserve Arrangement (CRA). "The main purpose of these meetings is to review ongoing global economic developments, growth prospects, investment and infrastructure, international financial architecture and international tax issues among others," the release said. The recent devaluation of Chinese currency Yuan has triggered a global financial turmoil hurting stock and currency markets worldwide.
The ministers and the governors will also review the progress in monitoring and adjustment of G20 growth strategies and evaluate the way forward for G20 investment strategies. They would also discuss the international financial architecture issues, financial regulation, international tax agenda and climate finance issues. Following the discussions, a communique of the Ankara Meeting will be issued. Ahead of the ministerial meeting, G20 labour ministers are meeting in Ankara today to discuss growth and employment issues. India is represented at that meeting by Labour Minister Bandaru Dattatreya. The meet will discuss strategies to deliver more and better jobs and policies to reduce inequalities to support inclusive growth.
"The joint meeting of G-20 Finance and Labour ministers will address issues of employment and growth, inequalities, declining ratio of labour income in GDP, youth unemployment and skilled labour mobility," the release said. The BRICS Contingent Reserve Arrangement (CRA) has been conceived as an additional safety net by the BRICS nations to meet the short-term liquidity needs that may arise in face of volatile capital flows. The total corpus of CRA is USD 100 bn. Jaitley will also attend the First Meeting of the Governing Council in Turkey.
Indian National Press Bombay Inc. 
Japan's Amari: Momentum gathering for TPP ministerial meeting
4 September 2015
Reuters News
TOKYO, Sept 4 (Reuters) - Japanese Economy Minister Akira Amari said on Friday support was building for a ministerial meeting to be held on on a delayed Pacific Rim trade pact and conclude the deal before a general election in Canada.
"Momentum is gathering (in support of a meeting) gradually including major nations such as Japan and the United States," Amari told a news conference.
Trade ministers from the 12 nations negotiating a Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), which would cover 40 percent of the global economy, failed to reach a deal at talks in Hawaii last month.
Canada will hold the election on October 19, and Amari has expressed concerns that it would be difficult to continue talks after the election campaign started, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Kyodo news agency reported last week. (Reporting by Takashi Umekawa, writing by Kaori Kaneko; Editing by Eric Meijer). Thomson Reuters (Markets) LLC
Auto-Parts Dispute Taps the Brakes on Pacific Trade Deal
By William Mauldin And Dudley Althaus 
3 September 2015
Dow Jones Institutional News
A fight over how cars are assembled is pitting North America's auto industry against Japan's in a dispute now holding up a major trade agreement spanning the Pacific.
The spat over which cars should be eligible for duty-free trade surfaced during high-level talks in late July that failed to wrap up the 12-nation Trans-Pacific Partnership. The auto impasse is the most recent complication to finishing the TPP talks, along with dairy trade and the intellectual-property protections afforded to biologic drugs, as well as the election season in Canada and the approaching campaigns in the U.S. and Japan.
Japanese auto makers rely to a larger degree than their North American peers on components produced in other countries, such as China and Thailand, outside of the proposed TPP bloc. They don't want the agreement to disrupt that supply chain.
The Mexican auto industry is leading a campaign to ensure cars freely traded within the TPP have at least half their components originating in the bloc. American labor groups and some suppliers, worried about more jobs being moved overseas, also favor tighter rules in the TPP.
In the middle of the dispute are U.S. officials, who have been negotiating intensely with Japan for more than a year on auto and other issues but who also don't want to upset American workers or North American neighbors.
The stakes are highest for Mexico, which uses existing free-trade agreements to attract investment and boost production.
"We are very worried about this," said Eduardo Solis, executive director of the Mexican Automotive Industry Association, known as AMIA. As leading suppliers of cars and parts to the giant U.S. market, Mexico and Canada don't want a Pacific deal to shift trade advantages to Japan.
The car and parts dispute highlights how the two-decade-old HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" North American Free Trade Agreement has built an automotive powerhouse within the U.S., Canada and Mexico.
"We're going to lose what we have gained under Nafta," said Oscar Albin, executive director of the National Auto Parts Industry, Mexico's industry association. "We're going to lose production of auto parts and the United States is going to lose the prime materials markets. This is a grave danger."
Mr. Albin and other industry officials are pushing for at least a 50% content rule for auto parts under the TPP. With some 700,000 employees and export sales of $60 billion--mostly to the U.S. and Canada--the auto-parts industry serves as a linchpin of Mexican manufacturing.
U.S. and Japanese officials say the rules are complicated and that percentages in Nafta don't translate easily into the so-called rules of origin under negotiation in the TPP.
"We are working toward a strong rule of origin in TPP that meets our objective of making sure that TPP benefits go to TPP countries and that promotes a vibrant domestic automotive industry and the jobs it supports, " said Matt McAlvanah, a spokesman for the U.S. trade representative's office.
Detroit auto makers in general prefer rules of origin somewhere in the middle, because strict rules could crimp their reliance on global supply chains, while lax rules open Detroit up to increased competition from Asia, said an executive at one U.S. auto maker.
But labor groups that represent a swath of the industry, including auto-parts workers, want tight rules to prevent the bulk of auto components from being produced in countries, including China, that aren't preparing to sign on to the labor and environmental standards of the TPP.
"It will cost jobs," AFL-CIO President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Richard Trumka said Tuesday in Washington. Mr. Trumka said official consideration of reportedly lax rules of origin is "ludicrous," and he sent a letter last month to the U.S. trade representative, Michael Froman, to push for stricter rules.
For Mexico, loose rules of origin in the TPP could undermine its efforts to push into the luxury car business and give Japan's producers a leg up, industry experts say. "We could see very cheap Toyotas or Lexuses arriving in the U.S. with lots of Chinese parts, said HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Sean McAlinden, chief economist at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Center for Automotive Research in Ann Arbor, Mich.
Lax rules of origin would also undermine the Obama administration's argument that the TPP would establish rules of the road that put pressure on China's dominance of the region. "If the aim is to build a trade bloc to counter the Chinese, how do you open up this trade bloc to massive imports from the Chinese?" Mr. McAlinden said.
A spokesman for the Washington office of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Japan Automobile Manufacturers Association declined to comment, citing differing views among its members. A Japanese official said Tokyo backs allowing a greater percentage of parts from outside the bloc in order to defend auto makers' existing supply chains, not to encourage outsourcing to China. Dow Jones Newswires
New Zealand looks to break down barriers in APEC markets: official
John Macdonald 
4 September 2015
Xinhua News Agency
WELLINGTON, Sept. 4 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xinhua) -- New Zealand Commerce and Consumer Affairs Minister Paul Goldsmith will be seeking to break down behind-the-border trade barriers at an Asia- Pacific Economic Cooperation (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" APEC) ministerial meeting on structural reform in the Philippines next week.
"Structural reform looks to open up trade and markets by removing any behind-the-border barriers to doing business. These barriers could be regulations, government policies or institutional frameworks which act as obstacles to trade and investment between members," Goldsmith said in a statement Friday.
New Zealand would be chairing the APEC Economic Committee, which takes a leading role in promoting structural reform within HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" APEC, through to 2016.
"I am looking forward to participating in these meetings where HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" APEC members gain insight on reform progress in each economy and learn from each other on how to overcome obstacles," said Goldsmith.
"By working on behind-the-border impediments to economic growth, we can further the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" APEC goals of sustained growth and better regional economic integration," he said.
"Structural reform within HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" APEC will help New Zealand businesses enter more easily into markets in the region."
Goldsmith would go on to hold a series of meetings with policy experts and ministerial counterparts in Hong Kong.
Meanwhile, a delegation from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" New Zealand Parliament will join representatives from 22 countries to discuss regional issues and promote greater understanding and cooperation, at the 36th ASEAN Inter-parliamentary Assembly (AIPA) in Kuala Lumpur from Sept. 6 to 12.
AIPA is a forum for parliamentarians from the 10 member countries of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), and also 12 observer parliaments, including New Zealand, India, Australia, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Parliament and China. Xinhua News Agency
Brics prediction: ugly for Brazil, better for India
3 September 2015
Financial Times (FT.Com)
A stab at fortune telling on one of the subjects of the moment: the outlook for the Brics.
Economists at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Bank of America Merrill Lynch have laid out their prediction for how the economies of China, Brazil, India and Russia will fare over the next 18 months.
They estimate it will get very painful for Brazil and better for India, where the economy grew 7 per cent last quarter. The Financial Times Limited 
Pakistan: Training course on trade laws
3 September 2015
Dawn
The commerce ministry in Pakistan has developed a course to train around 100 officers in multilateral trading system.
An official said the ministry will enter into an agreement with Geneva-based Advisory Centre on WTO Laws for imparting training to Pakistani officials over a period of three years on fundamentals of international Trade Law/ HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO Laws.
Pakistan's share in trade is expected to rise, the need is being felt for such a training. There is also a move towards export products' destination diversification. Pakistan Herald Publications 
END
 
Josep Bosch, Information Officer
Information and External Relations Division
+41227395681
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.