HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "OMC: l'objectif de conclure Doha en 2015 pas gagné d'avance (Winzap)
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S. Rejects Korea's First WTO Panel Request In OCTG AD Dispute
·         HYPERLINK \l "China Steel Glut Riles U.S., Europe Producers
·         HYPERLINK \l "Amina Asks Japan to Review Rules On Kenya Flowers
·         HYPERLINK \l "Qatar Airways boss accuses Delta of flying 'crap' planes
·         HYPERLINK \l "Obama Task Force Outlines Actions to Combat Illegal Fishing, Seafood Fraud
·         HYPERLINK \l "Asia Pacific Customs Discuss Customs Facilities
·         HYPERLINK \l "Major U.S. allies to join China-backed bank - reports
 
 
OMC: l'objectif de conclure Doha en 2015 pas gagné d'avance (Winzap) 
16 March 2015
AWP Swiss News
 
Genève (awp/ats) - L'objectif de conclure le cycle de Doha à la conférence de Nairobi (Kenya), en décembre, n'est pas gagné d'avance, a affirmé lundi l'ambassadeur de Suisse à l'OMC, Remigi Winzap. Les multiples accords régionaux et bilatéraux contribuent à affaiblir l'OMC.

"De grands efforts sont entrepris pour clore le cycle de Doha, mais un succès ne sera possible que s'il y a une volonté politique, et ce n'est pas encore assuré", a déclaré l'ambassadeur de Suisse au Club suisse de la presse à Genève.

Les 160 pays membres de l'Organisation mondiale du commerce (OMC) doivent se mettre d'accord d'ici au mois de juillet sur un programme détaillé pour conclure le cycle lancé en 2001 dans la capitale du Qatar, sur les trois dossiers de l'agriculture, des produits industriels et des services. Le but est ensuite de conclure les négociations lors de la conférence des ministres à Nairobi, à la mi-décembre.

Président du groupe de travail sur l'accès au marché des produits industriels, Remigi Winzap a précisé que la formule suisse de réduction des droits de douane, base des négociations en 2008, a été abandonnée, car elle est rejetée par certains pays. Les délégations planchent sur des solutions alternatives, tout en préservant le principe du traitement différencié entre pays industrialisés et en développement.

Fragmentation croissante

"L'OMC piétine, mais elle reste pertinente", a déclaré l'ambassadeur. Il constate une "fragmentation croissante du cadre régulateur", alors même que les chaînes globales de production impliquent un besoin de convergence. L'OMC a perdu sa position centrale au profit d'accords régionaux.

"Il devient toujours plus difficile de trouver des solutions multilatérales, car les 160 pays membres ont des intérêts très divers", a expliqué l'ambassadeur Winzap. Il est plus facile de négocier entre pays de même niveau de développement, a-t-il souligné.

La multiplication des négociations commerciales entre acteurs régionaux, par exemple pour un traité de libre-échange entre l'Union européenne et les Etats-Unis ou un accord transpacifique "affaiblit l'OMC, mais ne la rend pas nécessairement insignifiante".

Le représentant de la Suisse a rappelé que l'organisation a pu conclure en 2011 un accord sur les marchés publics et l'an dernier un accord sur la facilitation du commerce.

NÉGOCIATIONS SUR LES SERVICES

Interrogé sur les négociations pour un accord sur le commerce des services (TISA), qui se déroulent entre 50 pays en marge de l'OMC, l'ambassadeur a affirmé qu'elles prendront encore un certain temps. La Suisse n'a pas offert de libéraliser ses services publics, a-t-il assuré, et le Parlement a été informé en temps voulu.

"Les informations qui circulent sur les négociations TISA ne correspondent pas à la réalité", a déclaré l'ambassadeur. Par exemple, il n'est pas question d'ouvrir à la concurrence le secteur de l'éducation, a-t-il dit. Les ONG critiquent régulièrement le secret dans lequel se déroulent ces pourparlers.

 
U.S. Rejects Korea's First WTO Panel Request In OCTG AD Dispute
World Trade Online
Posted: March 16, 2015 
The United States has rejected South Korea's first request for a dispute settlement panel challenging its antidumping (AD) duties on Korean imports of oil country tubular goods (OCTG) with the argument that the duties are consistent with World Trade Organization rules.
 
Korea made its first request, which WTO members are allowed to block, at the March 10 meeting of the Dispute Settlement Body. The next DSB meeting, at which Korea could make a request is on March 25. It requested the panel on Feb. 23 following formal WTO consultations with the U.S. on Jan. 21.
 
At the DSB meeting, Korea reiterated the details of its Feb. 23 panel request, which centers on Commerce's methodology for determining which profit information to use in calculating the fair value of OCTG. However, Korea is also taking issue with other aspects of Commerce's July 2014 final determination.
 
After a preliminary finding of no dumping on Korean OCTG that provoked congressional objections, Commerce changed the profit information it used. That led to dumping margins of 9.89 percent and 15.75 percent for the mandatory respondents, with all other Korean companies getting a rate of 12.82 percent.
 
In the panel request, Korea charged that Commerce's decision violates Article 2.2.2 (iii) of the WTO AD Agreement. That provision requires that the profit margin used by the investigating authority “shall not exceed the profit normally realized by other exporters or producers on sales of products in the same general category in the domestic market of the country of origin.”
 
Sources critical of Commerce's final determination charged that it inappropriately used the profit information of a multinational steel company known as Tenaris to calculate the fair value. Because Tenaris sold OCTGs worldwide, but not in the Korean market, Commerce's decision to use its profit information is in violation of Article 2.2.2(iii) according to those critics.
 
The Tenaris profit data were used after Commerce rejected the use of profit information from third-country sales of the mandatory respondents because they did not amount to 5 percent of what those companies sold in the U.S. market.
 
Korea is charging that the way in which Commerce applied this 5 percent threshold, as well as the threshold itself, violates Article 2.2 of the AD Agreement, which spells out how to determine whether dumping is occurring.
 
A private-sector lawyer acknowledged that a successful as-such challenge of Commerce's threshold here could have systemic implications for the U.S., but he argued that it is not the same scale as prior decisions on such issues as zeroing and targeted dumping.
 
Korea is also alleging a number of procedural violations occurred during the investigation, many of which relate to Commerce's decision to use the Tenaris profit data during the investigation. Korea is also charging that the department incorrectly found that NEXTEEL -- one of the mandatory respondents -- was affiliated with its major input supplier and main customer.
 
The U.S. domestic industry had charged that the Korean respondents' affiliations allowed them to hide the true cost of production of OCTG, effectively hiding any dumping that occurred. But this issue had lessened in importance as this affiliation issue was not a significant factor in setting dumping margins on Korean imports.
 
Separately, Indonesia is seeking WTO consultations with the U.S. on the AD and CVD duties it imposed on coated paper, according to a March 13 WTO announcement. Indonesia is alleging that the U.S. is violating several provisions within the AD Agreement, the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures, and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, according to the announcement.
 
 
China Steel Glut Riles U.S., Europe Producers 
By Biman Mukherji in Hong Kong, John W. Miller in Pittsburgh and Chuin-Wei Yap in Beijing 
17 March 2015
The Wall Street Journal Europe
 
China's massive steel-making engine, determined to keep humming as growth cools at home, is flooding the world with exports, spurring steel producers around the globe to seek government protection from falling prices.

From the European Union to Korea and India, China's excess metal supply is upending trade patterns and heating up turf battles among local steelmakers.

In the U.S., the world's second-biggest steel consumer, a fresh wave of layoffs is fueling appeals for tariffs. U.S. steel producers such as U.S. Steel Corp. and Nucor Corp. are starting to seek political support for trade action.

China's steel exports rose 63% to 9.2 million tons in January from a year earlier, a rise that puts them on pace this year to beat the 82.1 million tons China exported last year. That number increased 59% from 2013 and was the most steel ever exported by any country this century.

China produces as much steel as the rest of the world combined -- more than four times the peak U.S. production in the 1970s. But as China's growth slows, the excess steel that Chinese industry doesn't need is washing up overseas.

Steel use in China grew by just 1% in 2014 and growth will slow further to 0.8% in 2015, according to the World Steel Association, as the country's real-estate sector cools. China's mills have yet to slow in lockstep. Their output is supported by a fall in the price of iron ore, the main ingredient in making steel.

Mills' refusal to cut back despite slower demand growth is what irks steelmakers elsewhere in the world.

The state-backed China Iron and Steel Association has in the past described efforts to roll back Chinese exports as "protectionist." But it has also said that it recognizes the problem and has encouraged Chinese steelmakers to hold down exports.

Chief executives of leading American steel producers said Thursday they would testify later this month at a Congressional Steel Caucus hearing, a move that trade lawyers said is a prelude to launching at least one anti-dumping complaint with the International Trade Commission. "Dumping," or selling abroad below the cost of production to gain market share, is illegal under World Trade Organization law and is punishable with tariffs.

Chinese exports to the U.S., which jumped 40% in January from a year earlier, have further depressed prices already hurt by an oil-drilling slowdown and the resulting slump in demand for steel pipes and tube. The benchmark "hot-rolled coil" index has dropped 18% to $492 a ton just since Jan. 1.

European steel leaders met with European trade commissioner Cecilia Malmstrom last week to make their case for more tariff protection, said Robrecht Himpe, executive vice president at ArcelorMittal Europe and head of the European steel lobbying group Eurofer.

Both the U.S. and the EU already have tariffs in place on a handful of Chinese steel products, but steel companies call them insufficient.

They say what they must do to demonstrate damage from Chinese exports is too difficult. "We have to bleed before we get any relief," said Debbie Shon, U.S. Steel vice president for international trade.

U.S. Steel last week began laying off 614 workers, in a process that will see some of its tubular plant in Lorain, Ohio, temporarily idled. U.S. Steel has idled six plants since 2014, and this year has laid off or issued layoff warnings to around 3,500 workers.

The EU has six investigations that might lead to tariffs, covering various products such as fasteners and steel wire, an EU spokesman said. Steel imports to the EU from China were 5 million tons in 2014, up 49% from 2013.

In December, Korea's Hyundai Steel and Dongkuk Steel filed a proposal for an anti-dumping duty of 18% to 33% on Chinese steel.

Australia's Anti-Dumping Commission is investigating about a dozen cases of alleged dumping of low-priced steel products from Asian countries, including China. Industry minister Ian Macfarlane said the allegation is that steel mills in other countries have been making minor alterations to steel products or routing them through third countries to circumvent Australia's antidumping laws.

U.S. steelmakers allege a similar practice, saying that China often ships steel to South Korea for processing before it gets moved to the U.S.

In India, where imports of some lower-priced Chinese steel products have surged by close to 200% year-on-year between April 2014 and January 2015, some steelmakers are seeking trade measures including higher duties, said Jayant Acharya, commercial director at JSW Steel.

"There is some trade action definitely required," said Mr. Acharya. He said that for certain steel products priced at $550 a ton in October, prices of Chinese imports have fallen by as much as $150 a ton. China's producers doubled their exports to India last year, to 2.8 million tons, according to an ING Bank report.

The global steel industry suffers from overcapacity in part because many countries make it a point of national pride to support a domestic steel industry.

Some producers fear the worst is yet to come. Property and infrastructure construction demand in China is likely to remain under pressure following years of breakneck growth and despite a recent interest rate cut, analysts say. That would mean Chinese domestic demand for steel is unlikely to perk up soon.

Many Chinese steelmakers are government-owned or closely linked to local governments, said Jiming Zou, an analyst at Moody's Investors Service. Given their important role as employers and providers of tax revenue, the mills are unlikely to close or cut production even if running losses, he said.

China's steelmakers benefit from relatively low-cost labor and inputs such as coking coal. While there has been some tightening of new lending to Chinese industries that face overcapacity, Mr. Zou said, major state-owned steel makers continue to have their loans rolled over or refinanced.

Analysts pointed to the Chinese currency, as well. "The weakening renminbi was also a factor in encouraging exports," said Xue Heping, an analyst who advises the China Iron and Steel Association.

Chinese steelmakers could also get a boost from foreign investors. Steel will be among industries opened to foreign ownership, the country's National Development & Reform Commission, said Friday.
 
 
Amina Asks Japan to Review Rules On Kenya Flowers 
by Correspondent 
16 March 2015
All Africa
 
Tokyo, Mar 16, 2015 (Capital FM/All Africa Global Media via COMTEX) -- Foreign Affairs Cabinet Secretary Amina Mohamed has urged Japanese authorities to review the fumigation requirements imposed on flower exports from Kenya.

Under the present arrangement, flowers exported to Japan are required to be inspected and fumigated at the port of entry.

"This requirement has imposed extra costs on exporters which have eroded their benefits," Mohamed said during bilateral talks with Akio Koizumi, Vice-President of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries in Tokyo.

She conveyed the proposal by the Flower Council of Kenya for a review of this requirement to allow for fumigation of flowers in Kenya before exportation.

Acknowledging the challenges this requirement has imposed on exporters, Koizumi called for wider consultations between all stakeholders on the way forward.

"We will consult with authorities responsible for standards and engage with the Kenya Bureau of Standards with a view to working out a way forward," said Koizumi.

In a separate engagement, Mohamed urged Japan to consider assembling motor cycles in Kenya in order to help generate jobs and support growth of the economy.

"This will also enable Japan to meet the East African Community's local content requirements and avoid the tariffs imposed on motor cycles," said the Cabinet Secretary.

Speaking during bilateral talks with Daishio Yamagiwa, Japan's State Minister of Economy, Trade and Industry, the Cabinet Secretary said the continued suspension of tariffs on motor cycles could not be guaranteed.

At the same time, Mohamed encouraged Japanese companies to participate in the development of a free port in Mombasa in order to expedite the process.

The Cabinet secretary expressed appreciation for role JICA is playing in this regard in developing a master plan for the special economic zones in Mombasa.

"Currently, traders in the East and Central Africa region depend on the free port of Dubai for goods. This is expensive considering the distance and the travel and shipping costs involved," said Mohamed.

"A free Port in Mombasa will therefore go a long way in reducing costs and consequently enhance intra-regional trade," added the CS.

The Cabinet Secretary said the involvement of Japanese companies in development of the port will enable them access the huge COMESA market with a population of over 450 million people.

On the World Trade Organization (WTO) Conference to be hosted in Nairobi this year, the Cabinet Secretary reiterated the need for wide consultations in order to thrash out outstanding issues ahead of the conference in December.

"We intend to convene a mini ministerial conference ahead of the main conference to facilitate broad consensus on the deliverables of the MC10 in Nairobi. It is only in this way that we will ensure a successful Conference in December," said Mohamed.

Urging Japan to participate in the mini ministerial, the CS said she was also reaching out to the European Union and USA whose participation is critical in reaching agreements. 
 
 
Qatar Airways boss accuses Delta of flying 'crap' planes 
David Harding 
16 March 2015
Agence France Presse
 
The chief of Qatar Airways on Monday denied his company receives subsidies and accused rivals Delta Air Lines of flying "crap" older planes, escalating hostilities between Gulf and American carriers.

Speaking at an arts conference in Doha, Akbar al-Baker said any money his airline receives from the state is in the form of "legitimate" equity and added his company's fleet of aircraft were much cleaner for the environment in comparison to Delta.

"I think Mr Anderson (CEO of Delta, Richard Anderson) doesn't know the difference between equity and subsidy. We never receive any subsidy," Baker said.

"The state of Qatar is the owner of Qatar Airways and whatever funds are put into the airline is as equity, which is quite legitimate.

"The unfortunate thing is that because they are so inefficient they want to blame us -- whilst we are very efficient -- for their failures and drawbacks.

"The issue is that they cannot stand the progress the Gulf carriers are making."

Baker was responding to claims made earlier this month by three US airlines -- Delta, American and United -- that Qatar, along with Etihad Airways and Emirates, received $42 billion in "unfair" subsidies to wrest business away from competitors.

The US carriers issued a 55-page report claiming this has allowed the Gulf airlines to wrest market share from the American airlines.

These "multi-billion dollar subsidies" had distorted the marketplace, "to the severe detriment of US employment," the American carriers claimed.

They called on Washington to raise the issue with the UAE and Qatari governments and urged changes to bilateral commercial aviation agreements with them.

The UAE, where Etihad and Emirates are based, angrily denied the claims.

UAE Economy Minister Sultan al-Mansouri was quoted as calling them "false and unacceptable" by the Emarat Al-Youm newspaper.

However, European carriers have also joined the argument.

Last week, French and German transport ministers called on the European Commission to tackle the issue of subsidies to Gulf carriers.

The French transport minister, Alain Vidalies, said the Gulf airlines were benefitting from "unfair competitive practices".

Baker's attack on Monday though was not merely limited to discussions over competition.

He also defended Qatar Airway's record when it comes to CO2 emissions and unflatteringly compared Delta's aircraft to those of his company when asked about aviation pollution.

"I am delighted that Richard Anderson of Delta is not here. First of all, we don't fly crap airplanes that are 35 years old. The Qatar Airways average fleet (age) is only fours years and one month," said Baker.

"We have ultra-modern airplanes. We have invested, my country has invested, huge amounts to make sure we are the lowest CO2 contributor in the aviation industry."

And he was also damning of those who criticised the aviation industry's record on environmental pollution.

"People who make lots of noise about CO2, people who make so much noise about greenhouse gases that are emitted from airplane engines, don't realise that they are constantly travelling by airplane, so they should start walking or going on horseback if they really mean what they say."
 
 
Obama Task Force Outlines Actions to Combat Illegal Fishing, Seafood Fraud
By Catherine Boudreau
WTO Reporter, March 17, 2015
 
March 16 — A White House task force outlined what federal agencies will do to combat illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing and seafood fraud throughout the supply chain, including leveraging international trade agreements and enhancing traceability programs.
 
The Presidential Task Force on Illegal, Unreported, and Unregulated Fishing and Seafood Fraud on March 15 released its action plan based on recommendations the group issued in December. The task force is co-chaired by the State and Commerce departments, along with 12 additional federal agencies.
 
“By circumventing conservation and management measures and engaging in fraudulent practices, entities engaging in IUU fishing and seafood fraud undermine the sustainability of U.S. and global fish stocks and negatively impact general ecosystem health,” the report said. “At the same time, IUU and fraudulent seafood products distort legal markets and unfairly compete with the catch and seafood products of law abiding fishers and seafood industries.”
 
Global economic losses due to IUU fishing are estimated at as much as $23.5 billion annually, and roughly one-third of the wild-caught seafood imported to the U.S. is illegally caught, according to an April 2014 study published in the journal Marine Policy. The U.S. imports 90 percent of its seafood.
 
The conservation group Oceana in 2013 found that 33 percent of seafood sold at the retail level in the U.S. was mislabeled. Only seven of the 120 samples of red snapper were actually red snapper, commonly swapped for rockfish and tilapia. Shrimp, the most consumed seafood in the U.S., also is misrepresented 30 percent of the time on grocery store labels and restaurant menus, the group reported in October 2014.
 
International IUU Agreements
 
The task force directed the U.S. trade representative to use the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) negotiations to combat illegal fishing practices, as countries involved in the talks together account for roughly one-quarter of global marine catch and global seafood exports, according to the report.
 
“When complete, TPP will promote long term conservation of marine resources, including sharks and other threatened species,” U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman said in a statement. “Not only will these commitments enhance environmental protections, but they will also help safeguard communities and families whose livelihood is put at risk when illegal fishing and harmful fisheries subsidies deplete environmentally and economically-important fish stocks.”
 
The group also plans to identify at least 14 countries that are supportive of a port-state measures agreement (PSMA) to prevent and eliminate IUU fishing. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and State Department will lead the effort toward ratification, ideally before the end of 2015. Twenty-five countries must ratify the agreement before it enters into force and 11 have so far, including the U.S.
 
Standards in PSMA include designating which ports foreign-flagged vessels may enter, restricting port access to vessels that engaged in IUU fishing, conducting dockside inspections and sharing the results when evidence of IUU fishing is found. Many of these procedures are already employed at U.S. ports, but the goal is to export them worldwide.
 
Boat-to-Plate Traceability
 
An integrated program among federal, state and industry stakeholders also will be developed to facilitate data collection, sharing and analysis to trace seafood and ensure that it is identified correctly.
 
The task force initially will identify at-risk species, or seafood commonly defrauded or subjected to IUU fishing, and collect information such as who harvested or produced the fish, the species and where and when it was harvested and landed. Eventually the group plans to expand the program to all seafood.
 
“The transition from a few high risk species to all needs to be fast,” Beth Lowell, Oceana campaign director, told Bloomberg BNA. “If not, that will just open more holes for illegal seafood to enter the U.S. market. It has to be expanded until we have a full-chain, transparent system from boat to plate.”
 
The task force goal is to knit together information collected by the NOAA and its fishery management partners; the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), which identifies imported seafood products; and Customs and Border Protection, which enforces other U.S. agency requirements for imported seafood.
 
John Connelly, president of the National Fisheries Institute, a trade group, is concerned about overlapping government efforts and funding.
 
“Calls for greater coordination to avoid duplication and waste of government resources should be heeded,” Connelly said in a statement. “For instance, the FDA has already identified commercial species at risk for fraud through its DNA testing program and NOAA has already identified regions, countries and companies at risk for IUU. Leaning on this already completed work will help avoid duplication.”
 
 
Asia Pacific Customs Discuss Customs Facilities 
 
Jakarta, Mar 16 (Antara) - High-level customs officials from Asia-Pacific countries are discussing the preparations for the implementation of customs facilities that can improve international trading values and volume, here, Monday.

Director General of Customs at the Indonesian Ministry of Finance Agung Kuswandono noted that 26 countries in Asia-Pacific have sent their representatives to discuss customs facilities.

The implementation of these facilities can lower international trading costs by 10 to 15 percent.

"We will review the national system and learn good things from other countries regarding the regulations or facilities for trading," Agung remarked.

According to Agung, the customs facilities included in the trade facility agreement that have been agreed within the Bali package resulted from the World Trade Organization (WTO) meeting in December 2014.

Earlier, the trading facilities had emerged in the July package from the WTO meeting in 2004.

The facilities have been discussed with the objective of creating favorable trading conditions and reducing international trading obstacles.

One of the customs facility instruments is the Authorize Economic Operator (AEO), which is being implemented by Indonesia, Agung stated.

"With this system, the exported products from Indonesia will not be checked again in the destination country as long as the items have been certified by the Indonesian authorities," he remarked.

In a short period of time, five companies will obtain AEO certificates.

"The flow of international trade will be remarkably fast as the checking process will be shortened," Agung said.

AEO is one example of customs instruments, which refers to the World Customs Organization (WCO).

The WCO assists its member countries to implement the preparation of the WTO`s trading facilities, one of them through the Mercator Programme module.

If the customs trading facility is fully implemented, it will boost global trade by US$1 trillion, create 21 million new jobs, and reduce international trading costs by up to 15 percent.

 
Major U.S. allies to join China-backed bank - reports 
 
SEOUL, March 17 (Reuters) - A senior U.S. diplomat said it was up to individual countries whether to join a new China-led international development bank as media reports said a growing number of close U.S. allies were ignoring Washington's pressure to stay out of the institution.

France, Germany and Italy have agreed to follow Britain's lead and join the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB), the Financial Times reported, quoting European officials.

The newspaper said the decision by the four countries to become members of the AIIB was a major diplomatic setback for Washington, which has questioned if the new bank will have high standards of governance and environmental and social safeguards.

The bank is also seen as contributing to the spread of China's "soft power" in the region, possibly at the expense of the United States.

EU parliament president Martin Schulz said he welcomed the four European nations joining the AIIB, but added the bank must conform to internationally accepted standards.

"I find it good that they join," he told reporters while on a visit to Beijing. "If more member states would join I would find it even better.

"There is one additional element. Such new organizations must answer to the requirements of international standards. That is quite important."

China's state-owned Xinhua news agency said South Korea, Switzerland and Luxembourg were also considering joining.

On Tuesday, Washington's top diplomat for east Asia signalled that the concerns about the AIIB remained, but the decision on whether to join was up to individual nations.

"Our messaging to the Chinese consistently has been to welcome investment in infrastructure but to seek unmistakable evidence that this bank...takes as its starting point the high watermark of what other multilateral development banks have done in terms of governance," U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs Daniel Russel said in Seoul.

"Every government can make its own decision about whether the way to achieve that goal is by joining before the articles of agreement are clarified or by waiting to see what the evidence looks like as the bank starts to operate," he told reporters.

The AIIB was launched in Beijing last year to spur investment in Asia in transportation, energy, telecommunications and other infrastructure. It was seen as a rival to the Western-dominated World Bank and the Asian Development Bank.

China said earlier this year a total of 26 countries had been included as founder members, mostly from Asia and the Middle East. It plans to finalise the articles of agreement by the end of the year.

Japan, Australia and South Korea remain notable absentees in the region, though Australian Prime Minister Tony Abbott said at the weekend he would make a final decision on AIIB membership soon.

South Korea has said it is still in discussions with China and other countries about its possible participation.

Japan, China's main regional rival, has the biggest shareholding in the Asian Development Bank (ADB) along with the United States and the Manila-based bank is headed by a Japanese, by convention.

Japan is unlikely to join the China-backed bank, but the head of the ADB, Takehiko Nakao, told the Nikkei Asian Review that the two institutions were in discussions and could cooperate.

"We've begun sharing our experience and know-how," Nakao was quoted as saying.

"Once the AIIB has actually been established, it's conceivable that we would cooperate," he said.

China has said nations could join as founder-members of the AIIB until March 31, and that Japan was included in the invitation. (Reporting by Ju-min Park in SEOUL, Michael Martina in BEIJING and Leika Kihara in TOKYO, Writing by Mark Bendeich and Tony Munroe; Editing by Raju Gopalakrishnan)  END
 
 


  ________________________________  
Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.