USTR Froman Says WTO Faces Do or Die Moment During Doha Round Negotiations
Global trade won't return to pre-crisis levels, says Maersk CEO
ECB launches 1 trillion euro rescue plan to revive euro economy
U.S. tax on Chinese PV products violates WTO rules: MOC
China says US tyre duty ruling has 'multiple flaws'
Market status for China is 'political' issue
Modi-picked panel wants India to get nimble on grains exports
India to put restrictions on import of US chicken legs
New study makes case that COOL didn’t hurt cattle imports
Senator preparing new push against currency cheats in trade
U.K. Plans Plain Cigarette Packaging Starting in May 2016
U.S. Pushing For TPP Deal At March Ministerial; Timeline Aligns With TPA
Colombia promueve turismo y exportaciones en Davos, París y Madrid
Indonesia set to promote economic diplomacy
Saudi King Abdullah dies, new ruler is Salman
Former British minister and EU commissioner Leon Brittan dies
Ending Poverty Through Trade
 
USTR Froman Says WTO Faces Do or Die Moment During Doha Round Negotiations
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, January 23, 2015
 
Jan. 22 — U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman urged members of the World Trade Organization to seek an “ambitious outcome” to the Doha Round or risk unraveling the multilateral trade liberalization effort.
 
“Many of the Doha Round's primary goals will remain inconceivable as long as a subgroup of countries are dogmatically opposed to the whole concept of liberalization,” Froman wrote in a recent blog post.
 
“In the absence of further progress on the multilateral front, the trend toward bilateral, regional, and other initiatives will surely intensify,” Froman said.
 
Froman's blunt assessment of the state of the 2001 Doha Round of trade negotiations comes as WTO members consider a way forward against the backdrop of U.S. free trade deal talks in Asia and Europe.
 
July 31 Deadline
 
The U.S. will join delegates from more than 30 WTO members at a “mini-ministerial” meeting on Jan. 24 in Davos, Switzerland, aimed at resolving the remaining elements of the 2013 Bali Ministerial agreement and the Doha Round.
 
In November, WTO members separately agreed to ratify the Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA) and produce a detailed work program for the post-Bali agenda by July 31.
 
Between now and then WTO representatives in Geneva will meet regularly at informal heads of delegation and trade negotiation committee meetings to achieve the July 31 goal.
 
WTO Director-General Roberto Azevedo asked members during a Jan. 21 “Room W” meeting to quickly seek actionable and realistic goals that address issues related to agriculture, non-agricultural market access (NAMA) and services.
 
India and U.S. delegates at the meeting traded barbs about whether members are truly interested in departing from the 2008-era disagreements that hindered progress on the Doha Round negotiations (14 WTO, 1/22/15).
 
Agricultural Subsidies
 
Froman criticized developing nations like China and India for seeking outdated trade goals, particularly with respect to agricultural subsidies, according to his blog post.
 
The 2008 revised draft modalities for agriculture, also known as Rev.4, no longer make sense in a world where India and China have become the top two users of trade-distorting agricultural subsidies, Froman said.
 
“In 2008, the proposed solution was that developed countries would cut their agricultural subsidies while developing countries would not,” Froman said. “But much has changed since that time.”
 
“Trade-distorting subsidies from emerging economies have the same impact on global commodity prices as trade-distorting subsidies from developed countries,” Froman said.
 
“The United States is willing to wade back into the complex thicket of agricultural trade negotiations, but only if the discussion reflects today's reality,” he wrote.
 
Plurilateral Progress
 
If WTO members are unable to advance trade negotiations related to manufactured goods, services and agricultural issues, willing members will seek a “more focused and tailored agenda,” Froman wrote.
 
“While no country should be subject to obligations without its consent, we cannot allow a small group of countries to hold back all those who are prepared to move forward,” he said.
 
Prior to the November TFA agreement, the U.S. and EU had considered adopting trade facilitation rules on a plurilateral basis in line with the terms of the Information Technology Agreement. Froman's comments indicate that members may now consider alternative agriculture, NAMA and service agreements outside of the WTO's multilateral umbrella.
 
The U.S. is negotiating broad free trade agreements like the Trans-Pacific Partnership and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership. The conclusion of these deals may accelerate if the U.S. Congress grants President Barack Obama increased trade promotion authority via legislation.
 
Spokesmen from the Indian, Chinese and Brazilian trade delegation did not respond to Bloomberg BNA's requests for comment.
 
 
Global trade won't return to pre-crisis levels, says Maersk CEO 
By Christian Oliver in Brussels 
22 January 2015
Financial Times (FT.Com)
 
The chief executive of the world's biggest shipping group has warned that global trade will never return to scorching pre-crisis growth rates, in part because western companies are looking to manufacture more goods closer to home.

Nils Andersen of AP Møller-Maersk said that many of the world's most important trade routes were suffering from a crippling over capacity because shipping lines were holding out in vain for the return of a pre-crisis golden era, which had been fuelled by spectacular growth in Asia and Latin America.

"Before, [trade growth] used to be double-digit globally, but we don't see that coming back. Four to 5 per cent is a realistic long-term trend. Provided the capacity is adjusted, this is a nice market to be in," he said in an interview with the Financial Times.

"It's only when shipping companies have been investing, hoping that the good old days will come back, that we have had issues. And the good old days will most likely not come back," he added.

Denmark's Maersk, which carries 15 per cent of seaborne trade, is the most profitable container line and stands out in an industry that has been severely undermined by over capacity during 2013 and 2014. Of the 13 rivals that Maersk tracks, it says 10 were lossmaking in the first half of last year.

Mr Andersen said that shifts in trade patterns from Asia would have a particularly significant impact on container ships, which carry 90 per cent of all trade in goods. Rather than depending on manufacturing in Asia, western European companies were moving production to eastern Europe and US companies were investing either at home or in Mexico. "You already have a lot of rescoring or nearshoring taking place," he said.

He also made the observation that the consumer goods western countries most wanted from Asia - particularly electronics - were rapidly declining in size and required less container space. While trade from Asia to Europe had still grown a "healthy" 6 per cent last year, he cautioned that the industry had to steel itself for continuing falls in freight rates over the coming years.

"We plan on a gradual decline in rates over time and then you make your cost adjustments," he said.

Overall, he predicted that global trade would grow a "rather sluggish" 4 per cent this year, a similar level to 2014. This chimed with the outlook from the World Trade Organisation, which has revised down its growth forecast to 4 per cent from an earlier estimate of 5.2 per cent.

Last week, China announced that its trade with the rest of the world grew only 3.4 per cent over 2014, undershooting a national target of 7.5 per cent for a third consecutive year.

By contrast, between 2005 and 2012, China's exports grew an average of 14 per cent annually, while imports grew 15 per cent, according to the WTO.

Mr Andersen said the worsening crisis over Russia and Ukraine represented the biggest strategic concern for shipping lines. He denied that the conflict was a net gain for the shipping industry, even though Russia was looking further afield to buy commodities after banning EU food imports.

"It may occasionally be quite good for shipping because the further you go away for your supplies, the better for us, but, in general, this is a negative trend. This is a regrettable situation," he said. "We have uncertainties in our relationship with a big supplier of energy to global markets. This is not a good situation."

 
ECB launches 1 trillion euro rescue plan to revive euro economy 
 
* ECB launches bond-buying programme with new money
* Amounts to 60 bln euros a month together with existing schemes
* Programme to run until end-September 2016
* National central banks to shoulder bulk of risk
* Euro tumbles in response
 
By Jonathan Gould and John O'Donnell

FRANKFURT, Jan 22 (Reuters) - The European Central Bank took the ultimate policy leap on Thursday, launching a government bond-buying programme which will pump hundreds of billions in new money into a sagging euro zone economy.

The ECB said it would purchase sovereign debt from this March until the end of September 2016, despite opposition from Germany's Bundesbank and concerns in Berlin that it could allow spendthrift countries to slacken economic reforms.

Together with existing schemes to buy private debt and funnel hundreds of billions of euros in cheap loans to banks, the new quantitative easing programme will release 60 billion euros ($68 billion) a month into the economy, ECB President Mario Draghi said.

By September next year, more than 1 trillion euros will have been created under quantitative easing, the ECB's last remaining major policy option for reviving economic growth and warding off deflation. The flood of money impressed markets: the euro fell more than two U.S. cents to $1.14108 on the announcement, and European shares hit seven-year highs.

"All eyes were on Mario Draghi and he has delivered a bigger bazooka than investors were expecting," said Mauro Vittorangeli, a fixed income specialist at Allianz Global Investors, adding that the news marked "an historic crossroads for European markets".

The ECB and the central banks of euro zone countries will buy up bonds in proportion to its "capital key", meaning more debt will be scooped up from the biggest economies such as Germany than from small member states such as Ireland.

The prospect of dramatic ECB action had already prompted the Swiss central bank to abandon its cap on the franc against the euro. Denmark cut its main policy interest rate on Thursday for the second time this week after the ECB announcement, aiming to defend the Danish crown's peg to the euro.

Draghi has had to balance the need for action to lift the euro zone economy out of its torpor against German concerns about risk-sharing and that it might be left to foot the bill.

WILL IT WORK?

Economists noted that Draghi had said only 20 percent of purchases would be the responsibility of the ECB. This means the bulk of any potential losses, should a euro zone government default on its debt, would fall on national central banks.

Critics say this casts doubt over the unity of the euro zone and its principle of solidarity, and countries with already high debts could find themselves in yet deeper water.

"It is counterproductive to shift the risks of monetary policy to the national central banks," said former ECB policymaker Athanasios Orphanides. "It does not promote a single monetary policy. This path towards Balkanisation of monetary policy would signal that the ECB is preparing for a break-up of the euro."

A German lawyer who has been prominent in attempts to halt euro zone bailouts said he was already preparing a legal complaint against the bond-buying programme.

Draghi said the ECB's Governing Council had been unanimous in agreeing that the step to print money was legally sound. There was a large majority on the need to trigger it now, "so large that we didn't need to take a vote".

"There was a consensus on risk-sharing set at 20 percent and 80 percent on a no-risk-sharing basis," he added.

One euro zone central banking source said five policymakers opposed the expanded asset-purchase plan: the central bank chiefs of Germany, the Netherlands, Austria and Estonia, along with Executive Board member Sabine Lautenschlaeger, a German.

Guntram Wolff, head of the Bruegel think tank, said the plan's size was impressive. "But the ECB has given the signal ... that its monetary policy is not a single one. That's a bad signal to markets and a bad signal to everybody in the euro zone."

The ECB is trying to push euro zone annual inflation back up to its target of just below two percent; consumer prices fell last month, raising fears of a Japanese-style deflationary spiral. But there are doubts, and not only in Germany, over whether printing fresh money will work.

Most euro zone government bond yields are at ultra-low levels and the euro had already dropped sharply against the dollar. Lower borrowing costs and a weaker currency could both help to boost economic growth but there is a question about how much further either can fall.

The ECB could create the basis for growth, Draghi said, but he put the onus on governments to follow. "For growth to pick up ... you need structural reforms," he said. "It's now up to the governments to implement these structural reforms. The more they do, the more effective will be our monetary policy."

Draghi was echoing the view of German Chancellor Angela Merkel, who said: "Regardless of what the ECB does, it should not obscure the fact that the real growth impulses must come from conditions set by the politicians."

The ECB has already cut interest rates to record lows and left its refinancing rate, which determines the cost of euro zone credit, at 0.05 percent.

Greece and Cyprus, which remain under EU/IMF bailout programmes, will be eligible for the ECB programme but subject to stricter conditions.

In practice, Greek debt does not currently qualify as another rule stipulates that a maximum 33 percent of the bonds issued by any country may be bought. The ECB and other euro zone central banks already own more than this, although they may start purchases once enough of their Greek bonds have matured to take the total below the 33 percent threshold.

Greece votes on Sunday in an election where anti-bailout opposition party Syriza is on track to emerge as the biggest party in parliament.

($1 = 0.8752 euros) (Writing by Mike Peacock and Paul Carrel. Additional reporting by Noah Barkin in Davos. Editing by Jeremy Gaunt and David Stamp) 
 
 
U.S. tax on Chinese PV products violates WTO rules: MOC 
 
BEIJING, Jan. 22 (Xinhua) -- The tax levied by the United States on Chinese photovoltaic (PV) products has violated the rules of World Trade Organization (WTO), said China's Ministry of Commerce (MOC) on Thursday.

After a vote, the U.S. International Trade Commission announced that PV products from China's mainland and Taiwan had impaired the U.S. PV industry and it decided to levy a tax on these products.

The MOC said the vote and investigation on Chinese PV products had ignored and disobeyed the WTO rules.

The U.S has abused its power with the Trade Remedy Laws, caused losses for Chinese enterprises and American customers and hindered global cooperation in new energy, the MOC said.

The ministry urged the American side to follow the rules and adopt proper and responsible measures to cope with trade frictions

China is considering safeguarding its rights under the WTO framework and American judicial system, the MOC added.

 
China says US tyre duty ruling has 'multiple flaws' 
23 January 2015
Agence France Presse
 
A US ruling slapping heavy duties on Chinese tyres was flawed, Beijing said, urging Washington to handle the case "prudently".

The US Commerce Department on Wednesday announced a preliminary judgement levying anti-dumping duties of between 19.17 and 87.99 percent on car and light-truck tyres made in China. A final decision is due in June.

Dumping occurs when a product is sold in a foreign market at less than its domestic price or cost of production.

China's commerce ministry responded that the ruling had "multiple flaws" and the government is "seriously concerned".

"Data showed that the US domestic tyre producers have good profits and imported products from China did not cause harm to the US domestic industry," an unnamed ministry official said in a statement late Thursday.

Chinese tyres have previously had punitive tariffs imposed on them by the US, for three years from 2009. The rate started at 35 percent and was reduced by five percentage points each year.

Those duties "caused severe harm to China-US trade relations", the official said in the statement.

"(We) hope the US will draw a lesson from that and handle this case in a prudent way to avoid once again undermining cooperation between the two countries' relevant industries and generating unharmonious elements for China-US trade," said the official.

The US ruling came on the same day a trade panel cleared the way for duties on certain solar cell products made in China and Taiwan allegedly being unfairly subsidised and dumped.
 
 
Market status for China is 'political' issue 
Niu Yue in New York 
23 January 2015
China Daily-US Edition
 
China's market-economy status, which is vital in anti-dumping investigations, is more political than economic, according to an attorney who represents Chinese enterprises and American importers in anti-dumping cases in the United States.

"This is a political decision," William Perry, partner of Dorsey and Whitney LLP, said Wednesday during a seminar on China-US trade disputes at Brooklyn Law School. "Understand that. That's the reality."

Perry has been representing Chinese exporters and manufacturers in anti-dumping cases since 1991 and has worked with the International Trade Commission and the US Department of Commerce (DOC).

The comment comes at a time of heated debate on whether China will be automatically recognized as a market economy.

China agreed that other members of the World Trade Organization (WTO) could regard it as a "non-market economy" for 15 years from Dec 11, 2001, as a condition of joining the WTO in 2001. As the deadline of Dec 11, 2016, draws near, there have been disputes on whether China would be automatically recognized by other WTO members, based on different understandings of China's accession agreement.

China has been negotiating with other WTO members one by one to win market- economy status before 2016. Dozens of countries, including Russia, New Zealand, Australia and Singapore, have granted China that status.

Meanwhile, some of China's major trading partners, including the US and the European Union (EU), have not, saying that China has not met their criteria.

"Some of the bigger problems with China right now [are] the extensive industrial planning in China," said Christopher Cloutier, partner of King & Spalding LLP, which filed and prosecuted the first successful anti-subsidy case against China in 2007.

"There are some elements that are not very market-oriented, for example, preventing foreign ownership," he said, citing an industrial plan to develop China's iron and steel industry.

But Perry insisted the issue is more political, giving Russia and Ukraine as two examples. Russia and Ukraine won US recognition, respectively, in 2002, after the Afghan War, and in 2006 after the Orange Revolution.

If a country regards China as a non-market economy, investigators will not use prices in China to calculate whether Chinese exporters are dumping, as prices in China are considered government-controlled and do not reflect the actual cost of production.

Instead, investigators will turn to a surrogate country with a market-economy status as a reference.

The practice could "provide countless distortions that affect the final dumping margin," wrote K. William Watson, trade analyst with Cato Institute, in a report. It also left Chinese firms unable of knowing what the normal value is until the DOC gets a result through surrogate values, making it difficult to avoid anti-dumping duties, according to the report.

China, if recognized as a market economy, may not see a decline in trade disputes, because "there is no reason to believe people file cases because China is a non-market economy," said Cloutier.

However, he said Chinese companies would be confident of more fairness in trade disputes because China's own data would be used.

"Ultimately, I think China will litigate this, if the US government's practice continues," said Thomas Lee, a law professor with Fordham University. "They will definitely litigate it before the WTO, and the likelihood is that they will probably win before the appellate body."

Perry agreed that China eventually will receive market-economy status from the US.

 
Modi-picked panel wants India to get nimble on grains exports 
By Mayank Bhardwaj and Ratnajyoti Dutta 
 
NEW DELHI, Jan 22 (Reuters) - India needs to become more nimble in allowing wheat and rice exports from overstocked government silos if it wants to cut waste and get the best price for its grains, a panel appointed by Prime Minister Narendra Modi recommended.

Despite stocks that are often more than double the government's target, India exports only about 10 percent of its wheat and rice output of 195 million tonnes.

The Food Corporation of India (FCI), a government behemoth set up 60 years ago after acute food shortages forced India to import, sits on mounds of rice and wheat thanks to bumper harvests since 2007.

"Because of bureaucracy, we take a long time to agree on exports and market dynamics change by then, thwarting our efforts to make the best out of attractive prices abroad," Shanta Kumar, chief of the panel, said after unveiling the report on Thursday.

Currently the government takes a call on exports and local sales after a lengthy consultation process.

The panel would like the FCI to abolish regional offices, focus on key states for procurement, invest in computerisation and bring in technical and managerial expertise from the private sector.

"A nimble-footed FCI will help us earn precious foreign exchange and save a lot of money that is blocked in terms of extra grains stocks that is prone to pest attack and wastage," said Ashok Gulati, a noted economist and a member of the panel.

Modi, who formed the panel in August to suggest an overhaul of India's theft-prone food distribution network, has asked the food ministry to examine the recommendations before acting on the report.

India, the world's biggest rice and wheat producer after China, runs a mammoth $18.64 billion food welfare programme. But nearly half of the ultra-cheap rice and wheat meant for the poor is either wasted or stolen, according to various experts.

The panel also suggested the government scale down its food distribution programme by covering only 40 percent of the population, instead of 67 percent. However, it favoured a higher monthly allocation of 7 kg per person against 5 kg now.

Lowering the number of beneficiaries could save India 330 billion rupees ($5.35 billion) a year in subsidies, said Kumar, a former food minister. But the move could potentially anger millions of voters enjoying cheap grains and would require the approval of India's partisan parliament.

"It's not an easy task to reduce the level of beneficiaries as a host of procedural hurdles will have to be crossed before accepting the latest recommendations," said B.C. Barah, a New Delhi-based agriculture economist. ($1 = 61.6300 Indian rupees) (Editing by Krishna N. Das and Michael Urquhart) 
 
 
India to put restrictions on import of US chicken legs 
Dilasha Seth 
23 January 2015
The Economic Times
 
NEW DELHI: India is set to tighten norms for imports of American chicken legs by proposing to keep out frozen chicken older than six months and those that have consumed hormones or genetically modified feed as the country prepares to contest a WTO order to lift a ban on purchases of US poultry.

The new standards, which may kick in within six months, could offer some protection to the growing domestic poultry industry from competitively priced American chicken legs.

While the Indian industry will also have to meet these food safety norms, being brought in as part of the government’s quality initiative, it has an advantage since it largely consists of fresh poultry and does not rely on GM feed.

The World Trade Organization asked India in October to lift a ban on American chicken, imposed on account of avian influenza in 2007, calling it ‘unscientific’ and non-compliant with the global trade body’s rules.

India will challenge the WTO order in the appellate body in a couple of days, citing domestic food safety concerns.

The new import norms are being prepared by the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India in consultation with the department of commerce and the department of animal husbandry, dairying & fisheries.

“We are working out standards for poultry and are discussing banning the sale of chicken older than six months. Also, poultry must not be fed with genetically modified feed, growth hormones and antibiotics,” a government official said. US frozen chicken legs are stored for about four to five years and its poultry consume growth hormones and GM feed, a significant concern in India.

FSSAI has put out a draft order for meat and poultry products, inviting public comments. It has proposed that poultry birds should not be given feed containing meat, bone and blood. Besides, the use of antibiotics in feed and growth hormones will not be allowed.

It also said that slaughtering or processing of bovine meat will be prohibited where poultry meat is produced for human consumption. “The order will come into effect from July 2015,” FSSAI said in the draft order.

US consumers prefer chicken breasts and the less-favoured legs are frozen for export to other markets at highly competitive prices. Chicken legs, which are popular in India, are priced locally at about Rs 150-170 per kg, while the US sells them at Rs 40-50 per kg.

The FSSAI will work with the department of animal husbandry to modify health certificates for meat and poultry sold to India.

“It will require competent authority of the exporting country to provide certifications to India in compliance with requirements to allow for placing of meat and poultry in Indian market,” it said in the draft order.

More than 20 countries, including members of the EU, South Korea and South Africa, have imposed curbs on poultry from certain US states or the entire country. China halted imports of US poultry and eggs after an avian flu strain was detected in the Pacific Northwest. The EU banned US chicken on account of chlorine treatment.

 
New study makes case that COOL didn’t hurt cattle imports
By Bill Tomson 
POLITICO
1/22/15 6:32 PM EST
Canadian and Mexican claims that the U.S. is importing less cattle from the two countries and U.S. companies are paying less money for the animals because of the USDA’s country-of-origin labeling rule just aren’t true, according to a new study being lauded by COOL proponents.
The National Farmers Union, the U.S. Cattlemen’s Association and other COOL supporters said Thursday they hope U.S. trade officials will be able to use the study by Auburn University professor C. Robert Taylor in an appeal to the latest World Trade Organization decision against COOL. A WTO panel hearing on the appeal is scheduled for Feb. 16-17, though a decision is not expected until fall.
Pressure has been building in Congress and at USDA to tweak its rule for identifying where meat and poultry originates, as mandated by the 2008 Farm Bill, since a WTO panel found, on Nov. 28, in favor of Canadian and Mexican claims that the regulation created an unfair trade environment for their livestock industries.
Intrinsic to the Canadian and Mexican claims are estimates that their ranchers are losing big money because COOL requires that foreign cattle be segregated at feedlots and packing houses in the U.S. Buyers then make up for those added costs by paying less for the foreign animals by as much as $90 per head.
The latest estimate of damages being claimed by Canada is roughly $1.4 billion per year, lawyers involved in the WTO case told POLITICO, but that number also includes damages the country is claiming from losses by Canadian swine exporters.
Live hog exports from Canada have dropped by nearly 50 percent since COOL was first implemented in 2009, according to USDA data. Canada’s hog exports to the U.S. reached a record level of 9.3 million head in 2008, USDA data shows, but by 2013 Canada was shipping only 4.9 million.
But when it comes to the $90-per-head estimates for Canadian losses on cattle, that’s mostly based on research by University of California, Davis, agricultural economist Daniel Sumner. And it’s dead wrong, Taylor said.
Sumner’s numbers are based almost wholly on secretive data collected by the Canadian Cattlemen’s Association and is not publicly available, Taylor said. The Auburn professor said his study, by contrast, is based on an examination of publicly available information collected from the USDA, including massive amounts of data from U.S. packers and feedlots on cattle purchases and prices.
Taylor said his study was partially funded by the NFU but stressed that the group had no control over the results.
While the Canadians and Mexicans argue that the price basis between their cattle and U.S. cattle has widened since COOL began — further pushing up discounts paid for foreign cattle — Taylor said the USDA data he sourced shows the average price basis actually narrowed.
Taylor and others, like NFU President Roger Johnson, don’t deny that Canadian and Mexican cattle exports shrunk when COOL was implemented in 2008, but they stressed that U.S. consumers were eating less beef all around because of a sluggish economy.
“COOL did not cause the declines in livestock exports to the United States, which largely coincided with a substantial global economic downturn that sapped demand for more expensive meat products,” Taylor said.
Johnson said the Taylor study could become very important if the U.S. loses its current WTO appeal and Canada and Mexico move to the next stage of the process, asking for the right to retaliate against the U.S. with tariffs on U.S. exports. In order to get damages, the plaintiffs have to show damages, he said.
“Today’s study casts significant doubt on the likelihood of any tariff penalties, since the COOL labels did not harm Canada or Mexico’s ability to export livestock to the United States,” Food & Water Watch Executive Director Wenonah Hauter said Thursday in a statement.
 
 
Senator preparing new push against currency cheats in trade 
By Krista Hughes 
 
WASHINGTON (Reuters) - U.S. lawmakers are preparing a new push to stop trading partners unfairly manipulating their currencies to gain an export advantage, a senior Democrat said on Thursday.

Michigan Senator Debbie Stabenow said she was working with colleagues from both parties on a possible standalone bill to stop currency cheats and also aimed to ensure that an ambitious Pacific trade pact includes strict currency rules.

"We are talking about the right time to introduce a bill," Stabenow said in an interview with Reuters. "Our message is that we should not agree to any trade agreement that does not have strong currency enforcement."

The planned push is a further complication for U.S. officials already fighting opposition to fast-tracking trade deals through Congress and worries about the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP).

The TPP deal covers 12 countries representing 40 percent of the world economy, including Japan, whose yen currency has weakened due to the country's economic stimulus measures.

Fresh demands from Congress would come at a delicate time for the TPP, which officials hope to wrap up within months after nearly five years of discussions.

But U.S. auto makers fear increased competition from Japan, and the American Automotive Policy Council, which represents Chrysler, Ford and General Motors - all based in Michigan - has said it will oppose a deal without strong currency rules.

Democrat Sherrod Brown, who has introduced similar legislation in the past, is coordinating bipartisan work on a bill in the Senate and House lawmakers have also been consulted.

Brown has championed U.S. steel producers such as Nucor Corporation and AK Steel Corporation in trade cases against China, which companies also accuse of currency manipulation.

Republican Pat Tiberi, who chairs the trade subcommittee of the House Committee on Ways and Means, said the possibility of a separate bill was still under discussion but the issue had traction from both parties.

More than half the lawmakers in the last Congress signed letters calling for tough TPP currency provisions, including 199 current House members and 50 current Senators.

"I think there's bipartisan concern about currency manipulation," Tiberi said, although one had to balance the risk that including such rules would upset TPP partners.

A Mexican official familiar with the negotiations said it looked too late to include a currency measure in the pact.

But another senior TPP country official said a currency clause might be acceptable if it mimicked existing international covenants, like International Monetary Fund rules committing countries to eschew currency manipulation for competitive advantage.

"If it is just going be a copy-paste of something else it's less serious," he said.

Stabenow said lawmakers were still working out how best to push the issue in Congress, including the option of amending planned fast-track legislation, which allows Congress to set negotiating goals in exchange for a yes-or-no vote.

"The push regarding Japan is to make this one of the criteria in the trade agreement and the broader issue is that we would be doing something legislatively that would more broadly impact China and other countries," she said.
 
 
U.K. Plans Plain Cigarette Packaging Starting in May 2016
By Eddie Buckle and Matthew Boyle
WTO Reporter, January 23, 2015
 
Jan. 22 — Cigarettes and hand-rolling tobacco will have to be sold in standardized packs in England starting in May 2015, the U.K. government announced, bringing the country into line with practice in Australia.
 
Parliament will be asked to pass the relevant legislation before May's general election, Public Health Minister Jane Ellison said in a statement Jan. 21.
 
The extension of tobacco plain packaging beyond Australia, where it was implemented in December 2012, threatens a $783 billion industry that's already grappling with declining smoking rates and the introduction of e-cigarettes. The legality of removing brand imagery is still in question, with challenges moving through the World Trade Organization. France, New Zealand and Ireland have said they want similar legislation, yet most countries have held off, awaiting the WTO ruling.
 
The proposed rules in the U.K. specify mandatory colors for packaging—dull brown for the outside, white for the inside—and permit only specified text, such as the brand and type. The packs would continue to carry health warnings.
 
“It's an election year and plain packaging has taken on political football status,” said James Bushnell, an analyst at Exane BNP Paribas in London. “Amid all the rhetoric, plain packaging implementation is yet to reach the acid test. Once the U.K. government passes legislation, it is likely the tobacco companies will sue.”
 
Five countries, including Honduras and Indonesia, have opposed Australia's plain-packaging rules, filing various disputes with WTO committees. The opponents argue that the law imposes restrictions on the use of trademarks, geographic indications and other markings in violation of international trade rules. Australian trade officials said at a Nov. 18 WTO meeting that those challenges “instill a form of regulatory chill, which is a well-known tactic of the tobacco industry to avoid countries implementing tobacco control measures.”
 
‘Justified Response.’
 
The WTO decision isn't expected until the second half of 2016, yet Britain is plowing ahead.
 
“The policy is a proportionate and justified response to the considerable public-health harm from smoking tobacco,” Ellison, the U.K. minister, said in the statement. “Almost 80,000 people in England alone die every year from ill health caused by smoking. It places an enormous strain” on the state-funded National Health Service.
 
Pediatrician Cyril Chantler, who conducted a review of standardized packaging for the U.K. government, said last year it was likely it would lead to “a modest, but important reduction” in the uptake and prevalence of smoking in Britain.
 
The smoking rate in the U.K. has fallen below 20 percent, the lowest in 80 years, scientists at University College London said last year. Across Europe, a third of people smoke.
 
Mixed Results
 
The British government has responsibility for health care only in England, the largest of the four nations making up the U.K., so ministers in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland will be asked to give consent to applying the same regulations. Litigation may delay implementation, Exane's Bushnell said.
 
Since Australia introduced uniform cigarette packaging in 2012, results have been mixed. The 2013 Australia National Drug Strategy Household Survey found that daily smoking among people aged 14 and older declined from 15.1 percent in 2010 to 12.8 percent. Yet 3.4 percent of people aged 12 to 17 said they smoked daily in 2013, up from 2.5 percent in 2010.
 
A study by the Universities of Zurich and Saarland, funded by Philip Morris International Inc. and released last year, found no evidence that plain packaging affected youth smoking prevalence. The academics surveyed 41,438 youths aged 14 to 17 between January 2001 and December 2013. Tobacco companies also say plain packaging leads to an increase in illicit smokes.
 
“The data from Australia do not support plain packaging as a way to reduce smoking prevalence,” said Erik Bloomquist, an analyst at Berenberg, adding that the policy will be challenged in the European Union.
 
His comments were echoed by Imperial Tobacco's Evans. “More than two years into the failed plain packaging experiment in Australia there's simply no reason to think it will work,” Evans said.
 
According to a BAT statement, the move is a “serious error of judgment” given that evidence from Australia shows plain packaging hasn't achieved its public health objectives and has led to an increase in illicit trade.
 
Japan Tobacco Inc., the maker of Camel and Silk Cut in the U.K., said it considers plain packaging would be unlawful.
 
“It would deprive us of assets worth billions of pounds at a time when the U.K. economy appears to be turning the corner,” spokesman Jeremy Blackburn said by e-mail.
 
To contact the reporters on this story: Eddie Buckle in London at ebuckle@bloomberg.net; Matthew Boyle in London at mboyle20@bloomberg.net
 
To contact the editors responsible for this story: Alan Crawford at acrawford6@bloomberg.net; Paul Jarvis, Robert Valpuesta
 
 
U.S. Pushing For TPP Deal At March Ministerial; Timeline Aligns With TPA 
Inside U.S. Trade - 01/23/2015 
Posted: January 22, 2015 
The United States is pushing to conclude the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) talks at a ministerial meeting slated to take place in mid-March, and sees next week's informal negotiating round in New York City as a chance to resolve all but the most politically sensitive issues that will be taken up by ministers, according to informed sources.
 
One source said the majority of TPP countries appear to be on board with that timeline. But some sources expressed doubt that the Jan. 26-Feb. 1 informal round in New York will really be the last meeting involving only technical-level negotiators, noting that this goal has been set for previous rounds and not been met.
 
The TPP ministerial had been previously planned for Feb. 28-March 1 but was subsequently pushed back to mid-March. The timing now roughly aligns with the Obama administration's expectations for congressional consideration of a bill to renew Trade Promotion Authority (TPA), as U.S. officials are indicating they expect movement on TPA legislation in Congress in March, sources said.
 
The administration seems to be banking on the idea that even if a TPA bill is not passed before the ministerial, the fact that there would be momentum in Congress toward passage would be sufficient to convince TPP ministers to conclude the negotiations, according to one informed source.
 
In a related development, Senate Finance Committee Chairman Orrin Hatch (R-UT) this week said he aims to introduce a TPA bill by the end of January and have the committee mark it up by the end of February (see related story). He did so in remarks to reporters after participating in a Finance Committee hearing on the economy.
 
Sen. Charles Grassley (R-IA) said after leaving the hearing that a TPA bill could come to the Senate floor in March, but stressed that this is an ambitious timeline because the Senate will be focused on budget issues during that month.
 
The mid-March target for wrapping up the TPP talks was already suggested by U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman in conversations with senators, according to Sen. John Cornyn (R-TX) (Inside U.S. Trade, Jan. 16).
 
The informal round taking place next week will involve chief negotiators as well as working groups on state-owned enterprises, intellectual property, rules of origin, financial services, legal issues and investment (Inside U.S. Trade, Jan. 9). Negotiators are also likely to meet bilaterally on market access issues, sources said. The round is taking place at the Sheraton Times Square hotel.
 
By some accounts, 15 of the 29 TPP chapters have been closed, according to informed sources.
 
The round comes on the heels of intense bilateral engagement between the United States and several other TPP countries to try to make progress on outstanding issues.
 
For instance, a U.S. negotiating team led by chief TPP negotiator Barbara Weisel traveled to Vietnam earlier this month to discuss outstanding issues, including labor, state-owned enterprises, market access and other issues, according to a USTR spokesman. U.S. teams also traveled to other TPP countries, including Malaysia, Singapore, Japan, Peru, Chile and Mexico, the spokesman said.
 
In addition, Froman met with trade ministers from Peru, Chile and Mexico this month to discuss TPP. Industry sources said they now expect Froman to travel to Vietnam in early February to hold talks on outstanding TPP issues, including textiles and apparel. -- Matthew Schewel
 
 
Colombia promueve turismo y exportaciones en Davos, París y Madrid 
 
Bogotá, 22 Ene (Notimex).- La ministra de Comercio Exterior de Colombia, Cecilia Álvarez-Correa, inició una gira por Europa para promover el turismo y las exportaciones de productos nacionales de los sectores diferentes al minero energético.

Según un comunicado del ministerio de Comercio Exterior, la gira por Europa tiene una “agenda que busca promover el cumplimiento de las metas del sector: alcanzar 30 mil millones de dólares de exportaciones no minero-energéticas; cuatro mil 170 empresas exportadoras y seis mil millones de dólares por concepto de turismo”.

Álvarez-Correa aprovechará los dos últimos días de sesiones del Foro Económico Mundial para sostener en Davos “una intensa agenda de reuniones bilaterales con representantes de gobiernos como el de México y con altos ejecutivos de esa organización”.

En ese marco, representará al gobierno colombiano en la reunión de la Organización Mundial del Comercio (OMC) que se desarrolla en Davos.

Se trata de un evento especial en el que sólo participarán 23 de los 161 países que conforman la OMC. Este es un espacio para discutir los pasos a seguir en la agenda de esa organización y, para Colombia, representa un reconocimiento a sus aportes en las discusiones que en este marco se presentan.

En dicho encuentro, la ministra hará un llamado para concretar el programa de trabajo convenido en la Conferencia Ministerial de Bali (2013) y definir los resultados que se esperan en la Cumbre Ministerial de Nairobi de diciembre próximo.

Luego la ministra viajará a París para acompañar al presidente, Juan Manuel Santos, en una visita de Estado para promover la relación bilateral, que incluye encuentros entre empresarios colombianos y franceses para impulsar la inversión y el comercio entre los países.

En el cierre de su gira por Europa, la ministra participará en Madrid en FITUR, la feria de turismo líder para mercados receptivos y emisores de Iberoamérica y punto de encuentro global de empresarios del sector, con el objetivo de promover la industria de turismo de Colombia en el mundo.
 
 
Indonesia set to promote economic diplomacy 
 
JAKARTA, Jan. 22 (Xinhua) -- Indonesia is urging its diplomats serving in foreign countries to focus on economic diplomacy so as to advance national interests particularly in trade, tourism, investment and development cooperation.

Indonesian Foreign Affairs Ministry has set up Economy Diplomacy Task Force early this year.

The ministry's spokesperson Armanatha Nasir said the task force is now compiling database of policies and trade regulations applied in many countries.

"We will study those regulations whether or not they are in line with regulations applied in World Trade Organization (WTO), or may have potentials to harm our products in the market," Armanatha said in the ministry's premises here on Thursday.

Armanatha said the task force has commenced its activities since early this month.

The task force would coordinate with related ministries and agencies to assure swift implementation of trade and agreements as well as development cooperation with other countries, he added.

Armanatha said that with focus on economic diplomacy, Indonesian diplomats serving in foreign countries would be tasked to promote Indonesia's potentials in trade, tourism, investment and development cooperation and at the same time to research the markets in their respective countries.

He added that such researches were essential for the government to take correct steps in facilitating Indonesian businessmen to enter foreign markets.

 
Saudi King Abdullah dies, new ruler is Salman 
By Angus McDowall 
 
RIYADH, Jan 23 (Reuters) - Saudi Arabia's King Abdullah died early on Friday and his brother Salman became king, the royal court in the world's top oil exporter and birthplace of Islam said in an official statement. 
 
King Salman has named his half-brother Muqrin as his crown prince and heir, rapidly moving to forestall any fears of a succession crisis at a moment when Saudi Arabia faces unprecedented turmoil on its borders. 
 
The rise of Islamic State in war-torn Syria and Iraq has brought to the kingdom's frontiers a militant group that vows to bring down the Al Saud dynasty. 
 
In Yemen, the Iran-allied Shi'ite Houthis have all but seized power and plunged the country to the brink of total chaos, opening space for al Qaeda, which waged an insurgency in Saudi Arabia from 2003-06 and nearly killed a top prince in 2009. 
 
The problems in all those countries are being played out against an overarching backdrop of bitter rivalry between Sunni Muslim Saudi Arabia and its arch regional foe Shi'ite Iran and bumps in Riyadh's key relationship with the United States. 
 
Meanwhile the oil price has more than halved since June, leaving the kingdom likely to face its first budget deficit since 2009 and navigating difficulties with other OPEC members that disagree with its strategy not to defend prices. 
 
"His Highness Salman bin Abdulaziz Al Saud and all members of the family and the nation mourn the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques King Abdullah bin Abdulaziz, who passed away at exactly 1 a.m. this morning," said the statement carried by state television. 
 
Abdullah, said by the Saudi embassy in Washington to have been born in 1924, had ruled Saudi Arabia as king since 2005, but had run the country as de facto regent for a decade before that after his predecessor King Fahd suffered a debilitating stroke. 
 
President Barack Obama expressed condolences and saluted the late king's commitment to close U.S.-Saudi ties. 
 
"As a leader, he was always candid and had the courage of his convictions," Obama said in a statement. "One of those convictions was his steadfast and passionate belief in the importance of the U.S.-Saudi relationship as a force for stability and security in the Middle East and beyond." 
 
President George H. W. Bush who sent an American army to Saudi Arabia to help repel Iraqi forces from Kuwait in 1990-91, described Abdullah as "a wise and reliable ally, helping our nations build on a strategic relationship" in a statement. 
 
In contrast, radical Sunni Islamist militants who want the kingdom's destruction rejoiced on Twitter and on hardline online forums, with some praying that God make the death of a man they see as a "tyrant" the beginning of the end for Saudi Arabia. 
 
Abdullah pushed cautious changes in the conservative Islamic kingdom including increased women's rights and economic deregulation, but made no moves towards democracy. 
 
At stake with the appointment of Salman as king is the future direction of the United States' most important Arab ally and self-appointed champion of Sunni Islam, which has played a pivotal role in the messy aftermath of the Arab spring. 
 
Abdullah played a guiding role in Saudi Arabia's support for Egypt's government after the military intervened in 2012, and drove his country's support for Syria's rebellion against President Bashar al-Assad. 
 
LONG TERM CHALLENGES 
 
King Salman, thought to be 79, has been part of the ruling clique of princes for decades and is thought likely to continue the main thrusts of Saudi strategic policy, including maintaining the alliance with the United States and working towards energy market stability. 
 
During his five decades as Riyadh governor he was reputedly adept at managing the delicate balance of clerical, tribal and princely interests that determine Saudi policy, while maintaining good relations with the West. 
 
"I think he will continue with Abdullah's reforms. He realises the importance of this. He's not conservative in person, but he values the opinion of the conservative constituency of the country," said Jamal Khashoggi, head of a news channel owned by a Saudi prince. 
 
"King Abdullah was willing to challenge the conservatives, but not to crush them. Salman respected the status quo. He wanted reform but was very much connected to the tribal mentality, the conservative nature of his constituency," he added. 
 
Crown Prince Muqrin was placed firmly in the line of succession by Abdullah a year ago after serving as the kingdom's intelligence chief and later an adviser to the king on foreign and security policy. 
 
He promised to continue Abdullah's reforms, but has also demonstrated a populist edge by demanding banks serve the interests of Saudi citizens more fairly. 
 
In the long term Saudi rulers have to manage the needs of a rapidly growing population plagued by structural unemployment, and an economy that remains overly dependent on oil revenue and undermined by lavish subsidies. 
 
Saudi Arabia, which holds more than a fifth of the world's crude oil, also exerts some influence over the world's 1.6 billion Muslims through its guardianship of Mecca and Medina, Islam's holiest sites. 
 
Incoming kings have traditionally chosen to appoint new ministers to head top ministries like oil and finance. 
 
In a country where the big ministries are dominated by royals, successive kings have kept the oil portfolio reserved for commoners and insisted on maintaining substantial spare output capacity to help reduce market volatility.
 
 
Former British minister and EU commissioner Leon Brittan dies
Thu, Jan 22 2015
 
LONDON (Reuters) - Leon Brittan, a former senior minister in the government of Margaret Thatcher as well as vice president of the European commissioner, has died, his family said on Thursday.

Brittan, 75, was home secretary between 1983 and 1985 and was recently in the headlines over his handling then of a child abuse dossier said to implicate public figures.

He was responsible for competition policy and trade during the 1990s at the European Commission in Brussels.

"Leon passed away last night at his home in London after a long battle with cancer," a family statement said.

Brittan was one of a band of bright young men hand-picked for quick promotion by Thatcher after her landslide re-election in 1983. At 43 he became the youngest home secretary in 70 years.

He later became trade secretary but his government career crashed in January 1986 when he was forced to resign amid intense public and political pressure after he became embroiled in the Westland helicopter affair that rocked the Conservative government. 
 
But he hit the front pages once more last year. In July, lawmaker Simon Danczuk queried what Brittan had done with a dossier implicating public figures in child abuse that had been given to him in the early 1980s. 
 
The following day, Brittan issued a statement saying he had dealt with them correctly by passing them on to police and officials for examination.

However the current top civil servant at the home office has revealed that 114 files handed to officials had gone missing, fuelling allegations of a high-level cover-up.

A subsequent review concluded last November that there was nothing to substantiate these claims although the missing dossier could not been found.

The current home secretary, Theresa May, has ordered a wide-ranging inquiry into child abuse, but it has been dogged by problems, with two chairmen being forced to resign before it has even got under way, her second choice quitting because of her links to Brittan
 
 
Ending Poverty Through Trade 
22 January 2015
Dow Jones Institutional News
 
How free trade can bring prosperity to people across the world.

Atlanta, Jan. 22, 2015 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- The following is an article written by David Abney of UPS:

The playwright George Bernard Shaw once wrote that poverty is "the greatest of evils and the worst of crimes." While Shaw penned those poignant words more than a century ago, the reality is that too many people still lead lives filled with hunger and hardship.

Most unjust is the number of children who grow up in poverty. According to UNICEF, more than 160 million malnourished children under the age of five suffer from stunted growth, and 22,000 children die each day from starvation or other health issues caused by poverty. Most die quietly, never able to fight for themselves.

The good news is that gains have been made in reducing poverty. Between 1990 and 2010 - a period when communism fell and markets opened - the percentage of people living in extreme poverty in developing economies dropped by half, to 21 percent.

Still, that still leaves more than 1 billion people surviving on $1.25 or less a day. As Nelson Mandela once said, poverty is not an act of nature - it's a man-made problem that can be overcome and eradicated by the actions of us all.

The World Bank has set an ambitious goal of bringing the last billion people out of extreme poverty by 2030, and it's an endeavor we all should support. It truly will "take a village," because the World Bank can't end poverty solely through its development work.

The question then is what more can be done and, not surprisingly, there are reasonable differences on the other tactics we should employ. For instance, some call for forgiving the debts of poor countries, while others advocate for micro-financing programs that provide loans at the grass roots.

There's another solution that has gotten little attention, yet is sitting right before us: enacting trade reforms that make it easier for every artisan, every entrepreneur, and every peasant farmer to sell their goods freely in other markets.

An Undeniable Impact

At UPS, we've always believed in the enabling power of trade, and I'm heartened this sentiment is gaining currency in development circles. For instance, the World Bank noted in a 2009 report that "sustained long-term poverty reduction depends on stimulating economic growth, which in turn depends on trade policy reform."

History shows that nations that open their economies to trade become more prosperous over time. Liberalizing trade creates the supply and demand that prompts businesses to hire more employees, which in turn enables these workers to feed their families.

Opening economies also forces businesses to become more competitive. The ones that rise to the challenge are often able to then export their goods and services to other countries as well.

But first we must enact the trade initiatives that are currently on the table. These include the Trade in Services Agreement, the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP), the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), and the Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA).

Collectively, these initiatives would further reduce tariff and non-tariff barriers, would liberalize services and public procurement, and promote greater co-operation among regulators. And they would bring jobs - and hope - to regions where these are in short supply.

The Peterson Institute for International Economics estimates that the Trade Facilitation Agreement alone would create 21 million new jobs, with 18 million of those coming in the developing economies.

Too Powerful to Ignore

Of course, these initiatives have encountered their share of political resistance. This resistance was to be expected, because trade pacts have always inflamed passions.

Nearly 200 years ago, British historian Thomas B. Macaulay observed that "free trade - one of the greatest blessings which government can confer on its people - is in almost every country unpopular."

But recent history has shown how trade can lift developing economies and their people. We only have to contrast the China of today - prosperous and globally engaged - with its pre-liberalization days to see the benefits of opening markets that were long walled off.

History has also shown the need to help economies make the transition to an open market. For instance, while the benefits of trade are undeniable, there's a reasonable argument for providing assistance to displaced workers who need time to learn new skills.

These issues aside, all of us have a moral obligation not to waver in our support because the benefits of trade - economic and humanitarian - are too powerful to ignore. But it will take an ongoing commitment by nations and their people, along with the efforts of public and private sectors, to end the injustices that poverty bestows on the least advantaged.

