US: Froman cautious on Doha, TTIP, hopeful on other trade talks
Indian Government t against expanding WTO negotiation agenda
India opposes attempts of rich nations to stall WTO’s Doha Round talks
African Union urges agreement to remove global trade barriers
Canada wants a repeal of US' COOL legislation
Azerbaijan's WTO membership delays
Vietnams economy on track to grow 6.5 percent this year: World Bank
India's $900 Bn Exports Goal Faces Structural Headwinds
China's development offers valuable inspiration for Latin America
EU-US trade deal will unleash oil sands and fatally undermine climate efforts
 
Details:
US: Froman cautious on Doha, TTIP, hopeful on other trade talks
By Doug Palmer 
Washington
U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman today sounded cautious about the World Trade Organization's upcoming meeting in Kenya and ongoing trade talks with the European Union, but was upbeat about other trade negotiations.
Froman and other top trade officials from the WTO's 162 member countries will gather in Nairobi, Dec. 15-18, to once again ponder the Doha round, which was launched in 2001 and never concluded because of differences over how much to cut farm subsidies and tariffs. 
"It's unclear at this point what the outcome of that [Nairobi meeting] is likely to be," Froman told the President's Export Council. "We hope to be able to achieve a consensus there about how to deal with some of the Doha issues to take the organization forward into its next phase." 
Froman said he would be in Europe next week to try to "accelerate" talks on the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, which both sides hope to conclude in 2016. "We need to see more progress at the table and we're encouraging our European partners to engage with that idea in mind," he said. 
The trade representative also said he believed countries were close to a final deal in talks to expand the Information Technology Agreement and said good progress was being made in negotiations on the Trade in Services Agreement and a bilateral investment pact with China. 
Talks on an Environmental Goods Agreement are also "making good and steady progress and we hope to be able to move that closer to closure very soon," he reported. 
Indian Government t against expanding WTO negotiation agenda
4 December 2015
The Times of India - Delhi Edition
The government on Thursday opposed any move to expand the negotiating agenda at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) and instead urged member countries to stick to the issues under the Doha Round at the ministerial meeting in Nairobi later this month. While accusing the developed countries of shying away from Doha Round after pushing the developing world into negotiations 14 years ago in the Qatari capital, commerce secretary Rita Teaotia accused several advanced economies of "stonewalling" the issues which are already on the table and instead introducing new ones. There have been efforts to include issues such as competition policy , labour and environmental standards on the agenda and India believes several of them don't belong to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO. "What we are looking at Nairobi are...the Doha Round must not be abandoned at Nairobi. It's true that we have rough patches, there are difficulties. But, it is inevitable in a body as large as this...
What we would look for is to consolidate what we have achieved so far and then move forward," she said at a conference organized by Ficci. The issue has been a major worry for India as it fears that the current limits are unrealistic and could limit the ability of the government to procure food grains from farmers in the developing world.
Bennett, Coleman & Co., Ltd.

India opposes attempts of rich nations to stall WTO’s Doha Round talks
Arun S
4 December 2015
The Hindu
New Delhi.- Over 100 nations want conclusion of Round only after fulfilment of ‘development’ agenda The government opposed alleged attempts of the developed world to “abandon” the 14-year-old Doha Round talks of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation (WTO) at the coming Nairobi ministerial meeting by citing the slow progress of negotiations to liberalise world trade.
Over 100 member countries including India (out of the total 162 member countries of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) want the Doha Round to be successfully concluded expeditiously, but only after ensuring that the “development’ dimension of the round is fulfilled in all aspects,’’ said Commerce Secretary, Rita Teaotia, speaking at an event organised by the industry body Ficci.
The Nairobi ministerial meeting is slated to be held during December 15-18. The Doha Development Round -- the ongoing negotiation round of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO for a pact to open up world trade by lowering or eliminating barriers -- had begun in 2001.
“Doha Round must not be abandoned at Nairobi. When so many countries are trying to reach an agreement, slow progress is inevitable. But an overwhelming number of members from the developing and the least developed world want the successful conclusion of the round. Therefore, we must consolidate what we have achieved so far and move forward,” the secretary said.
Teaotia said one group of countries, indirectly referring to the rich world, was not only stonewalling the Doha Round talks, but also was making efforts to introduce ‘new issues’ into the round.
These new issues include labour and environmental standards, e-commerce, global value chains and promotion of supply chains, environmental and sustainable goods produced using clean and green energy, transparency in government procurement, state-owned enterprises and designated monopolies, besides competition and investment provisions.
The senior official also opposed efforts from certain quarters, indirectly referring to the developed world, to categorise countries such as India, China and Indonesia as ‘emerging market economies’ (as opposed to them currently being termed as ‘developing countries’) and asking them to undertake greater market opening commitments. “These countries, including India, may be witnessing higher growth, but they still have lots of poor people, and therefore the situation cannot be compared to the developed world,” she said.
Protecting the interests of poor farmers was paramount for India, along with other developing nations, she said. India has been pushing for an effective Special Safeguard Mechanism (SSM) in this regard. SSM is a trade remedy that would allow developing countries to temporarily hike import duties on farm products to counter sudden import surges and price falls.
India also wants the rich countries to drastically reduce their ‘trade distorting’ farm subsidies.
Another item that India desires to be taken up on priority at the Nairobi meeting is that of arriving at a permanent solution to the issue of public food stockholding in developing countries for the purpose of food security, she said.
The secretary said India also wants an effective implementation of a package for least developed countries including duty-free and quota-free market access for them as well as decisions on preferential rules of origin, on the operationalisation of the LDC services waiver and in the area of cotton.
Over 100 nations want the round to end after fulfilment of ‘development’ agenda
Kasturi & Sons Ltd
African Union urges agreement to remove global trade barriers
Ding Xiaoxi
3 December 2015
Xinhua News Agency
PRETORIA, Dec. 3 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xinhua) -- African Union Commission (AUC) Chairperson Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma said Thursday that African countries would be satisfied when an agreement is reached at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) ministerial meeting in Nairobi to remove barriers to global trade.
"We have the unfinished agenda from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO ministerial talks in Bali. We want to secure an agreement on trade facilitation and the removal of barriers that impede trade," Dlamini-Zuma told HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xinhua in an exclusive interview in Pretoria.
Ministers of trade and foreign affairs are gearing up for the ministerial meeting in Nairobi that would determine whether efforts to ease trade barriers progress to a binding agreement. The meeting is scheduled to be held Dec. 15-18.
Ahead of the meeting, China has pledged it would assist African countries to benefit from new financial cooperation by using the Renminbi to promote trade between the two sides.
China has also pledged it would assist Africa in improving in-house industrial capacity by building industrial zones that would help make Africa a new economic power-house.
"We want to secure an agreement on trade facilitation," AUC Deputy Chairperson Erastus Mwencha said in Pretoria, South Africa, which will host the Summit of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation (FOCAC) due to be held Friday and Saturday in Johannesburg.
Without the implementation of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's trade facilitation agreement of 2013, experts fear the progress of implementing the outcome of the Bali Talks, on overcoming trade barriers, would be lost.
A team of diplomats appointed by WTO Director-General HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevêdo, presented last week a draft declaration to all members in order to support them in developing a ministerial declaration at the Nairobi meeting after a 10-year deadlock on global trade talks.


Canada wants a repeal of US' COOL legislation
4 December 2015
Fleischwirtschaft International
Canada’s new agriculture minister said the new liberal government will continue demands for a full repeal of the United States’ country of origin labelling (COOL) rule.
Canadian Agriculture and Agri-Food Minister Lawrence MacAulay said he had discussed COOL with Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack and the US Ambassador to Canada Bruce Hayman. This is grim news for supporters of COOL. Canada and Mexico are seeking more than $3 bn. in tariffs against the US for failing to repeal COOL. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" US House of Representatives voted to repeal it, while Sens. Debbie Stabenow and John Hoeven introduced a bill to replace it with a voluntary system. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization is due to release its ruling on 7 December.
Deutscher Fachverlag GmbH
Azerbaijan's WTO membership delays
3 December 2015
Today.az
By AzerNews/By Aynur Karimova
Azerbaijan's long-awaited membership in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization has been delayed again.
Mahmud Mammadguliyev, Azerbaijan's Deputy Foreign Minister, told journalists that the Azerbaijani side has submitted the necessary documents, but the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO has put forward some conditions and offers.
"However, we are not yet ready for the next phase of negotiations. We will fix the next meeting after the necessary documents are ready. Our goal is to expand economy first, and then resume the negotiations," he noted.
Azerbaijan has had an observer status at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO since 1997. A working group on Azerbaijan was established at the WTO Secretariat on July 16, 1997.
Azerbaijan started negotiations with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO member countries in 2004. Currently, the country is negotiating with 19 countries. Russia, which formally expressed a desire to start negotiations with Azerbaijan, was the last one to join the organization, but no offers have been received from this country yet.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union has already voiced its readiness to take all efforts to help Azerbaijan in completing the country's accession process to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO.
The EU experts believe that to achieve the goal, Azerbaijan needs to implement important reforms in customs and competition rules.
These reforms cover the legal, policy, and institutional framework which bring remaining non-conforming aspects of Azerbaijan's foreign trade regime in line with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO agreements.
In June, Azerbaijan reported on the preparation of new proposals on tariffs for industrial and agricultural products as part of the talks on joining the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO. The objective of the Azerbaijani government during the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO negotiation process is to ensure the maximum protection of national businesses and manufacturers.
According HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO provisions, a country with the status of a developing country can qualify for subsidies at a level of 10 percent of GDP. This figure stands at five percent for developed countries.
For Azerbaijan, the issue of the status of the country is core during the multilateral negotiations. Azerbaijan, claiming the status of a developing country, justifies the fact that despite the rapid development of the economy, the country still has one million refugees and internally displaced persons due to Armenian aggression.
Day.Az Media Company
Vietnams economy on track to grow 6.5 percent this year: World Bank
3 December 2015
Jpost.com (The Jerusalem Post online edition)
Vietnam's economy has weathered the recent turbulence in the external environment fairly well, with growth expected to come in at 6.5 percent this year, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Bank said Wednesday.
The new estimate was up from a forecast of 6.2 percent in the lenders October report and same as the Vietnamese government's projection.
Stronger domestic demand, robust export performance, low inflation and improved confidence have enabled Vietnam to create firmer foundations for mid-term growth, Victoria Kwakwa, the bank's country director in Vietnam, said in a statement.
Better macroeconomic conditions helped maintain stability in the banking system, according to the report.
On the external front, Vietnams export performance remains strong, with total export turnover in the first nine months increasing by 9.2 percent from the same period last year, mostly thanks to high-tech products such as cell phones, electronics and computers.
The report also features a section on the Trans Pacific Partnership Agreement, in which it argues that the deal is expected to generate considerable benefits for Vietnam.
The recently concluded TPP will not only improve market access, but will also serve as a critical anchor for the next phase of structural reforms in Vietnam, Sandeep Mahajan, lead economist for the World Bank Vietnam, said in a statement.
Among the TPP members, Vietnam, as the economy with the lowest per capita GDP, has unique comparative advantages, particularly in labour-intensive manufacturing.
The lender suggests that the TPP could add as much as 8 percent to Vietnams GDP, 17 percent to its real exports and 12 percent to its capital stock over the next 20 years.
The Jerusalem Post

India's $900 Bn Exports Goal Faces Structural Headwinds
By A Business Reporter
4 December 2015
Afternoon Despatch & Courier
Arresting falling competitiveness, addressing infrastructure and labour reforms key, says CRISIL
India has set an ambitious target of doubling exports of goods and services to $900 billion by fiscal 2020 from $470 billion in fiscal 2015. While the current global cyclical slowdown and the new Trans Pacific Partnership are casting a long shadow, the bigger challenge is structural. Falling trade intensity of global growth is the external structural constraint while declining competitiveness, infrastructural bottlenecks and labour market rigidity are domestic.
CRISIL Research said, apart from investing massively in vocational ecosystems that generate a large number of skilled workers, India also needs to quickly develop its infrastructure if it has to attract foreign investment and become a world-class exporting hub.
Says Dharmakirti Joshi, Chief Economist, CRISIL, “Not doing so could upend the governments flagship Make in India programme, which aims to generate large-scale manufacturing employment.” Merchandise exports, which are almost two-thirds of India's total exports, have been declining in the last eleven months. Cumulatively, they have fallen 17.6% in dollar terms in the first seven months of this fiscal, after seeing a 1.5% decline in fiscal 2015. Even real exports of goods and services (adjusted for price changes) shrank by 6.5% in the first quarter of fiscal 2016.
Trade openness, or the proportion of trade to GDP, has shrunk drastically – from a high of 55.6% in fiscal 2013 to 47.1% in fiscal 2015 and further to 42.6% in the first quarter of the current fiscal. Curiously, trade deficit (goods and services) has reduced from 6.5% to 1.4% of GDP in real terms between fiscal 2013 and 2015. And trade balance has improved because, while exports have declined, a sharp fall in international commodity prices, especially oil, and constraints to domestic growth have slowed imports as well.
“But this could prove transient. While global sluggishness will keep exports subdued, especially when there is structural weakness in trade, India's imports would rise as domestic demand and investments pick up and commodity prices stabilise. That would, in turn, bloat India's trade and current account deficit again,” said Joshi.
True, the Indian export destinations are not doing well, prices of many export items have fallen, and the rupee, too, has appreciated in real terms against a basket of 36 currencies. But Crisils analysis shows the decline in exports is more than that warranted by these factors. For instance, while world real GDP growth improved from 3.2% in 2009-2011 to 3.4% in 2012-2014, India's real growth of exports came down from 11.1% to 4.1%.
This suggests the decline isn't merely cyclical -- there are structural elements at play as well. The cyclical component of exports will move up when cyclical factors (world GDP growth, prices) turn favourable, but structural factors, if not addressed, will continue to act as a drag on India's export performance.
Falling competitiveness is another structural factor restricting export growth. For key export items such as gems & jewellery and textiles, India's revealed comparative advantage has come down over the years. Lastly, there is the threat from regional trading agreements of which India is not a part, such as the Trans Pacific Partnership (TPP), forged between 12 countries including the US. TPP countries account for 25% of India's exports. Because of not being a part of TPP, India risks losing out a significant chunk of its export market to rivals.
Arresting falling competitiveness, addressing infrastructure and labour reforms key, says CRISIL
Courier Publications Pvt. Ltd. 
China's development offers valuable inspiration for Latin America
qianyongwen~chuyi
4 December 2015
Xinhua's China Economic Information Service
Roundup: China's development offers valuable inspiration for LatAm to get out of "middle-income trap" by Qian Yongwen, Chu Yi MEXICO CITY, Dec. 3 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xinhua) -- Policy makers in Latin American countries could learn valuable lessons from China in terms of devising proper plans to avoid the middle-income trap, experts said. Most of the region's 33 nations are middle-income countries, with their per capita gross income standing at between 1,045 and 12,736 U.S. dollars. However, they are now at the risk of being trapped in this earnings range, as they face higher labor costs and a lack of skilled workforce at the same time, a magical combination to stunt economic growth. China has been grappling with similar problems.
In the past few years, it has made effective efforts tackling such challenges and its recently unveiled guidelines for the 13th Five-Year Plan also seek to sustain steady economic growth. Jesus Valdes Diaz de Villegas, an economist at Mexico's Iberoamerican University, told HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xinhua that China's planning allows it to achieve significant growth and help millions of people join the middle class. Latin American countries should readjust their economic growth strategies to focus on strengthening their domestic markets, just as China did through structural reforms, said Valdes. To some extent, what's been hindering further growth in these countries is the structural problems within their own economies, said Valdes. "The salaries of the workforce may be rising, but without a corresponding change in technology, competitiveness is falling." The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), a Santiago-based HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN body, also suggested that the region follow the example of China, by devising a development strategy tailored to its needs, instead of pursuing boilerplate policies promoted abroad. "For the last two decades, Latin American countries have mainly followed the free-market policies of the Washington Consensus," said HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" ECLAC, in a report titled "Latin America and the Middle-Income Trap." "China, in contrast, has pursued a strategy of strategic investments in the expansion of domestic knowledge-based assets and of controlled market liberalization, trade and foreign investment." David Lozano, an economy researcher at the Center for Multidisciplinary Analysis at the Autonomous National University of Mexico (UNAM), said Latin America will only escape the middle-income trap through true economic discipline as exemplified by Asian countries like China. Lozano believes structural reforms alone are not enough. What's needed is a true shift in public policy and new economic laws that address the particular needs of each country within a broader international context. Like China, he said, Latin American countries "should maintain a development plan to pursue vigorous and inclusive growth. This will allow them to safeguard the rule of law and social justice." 
SHARED DEVELOPMENT
Investing in education, labor training, high-technology, innovation, and research and development are all key elements to make the leap from being a middle-income country to a high-income one. "A capabilities-focused strategy offers the only promise for shifting production towards more knowledge-intensive activities and avoiding becoming trapped at the middle-income level," the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" ECLAC report said. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD) makes the same argument in its "2015 Latin American Economic Outlook" report. "The main barriers to climbing the economic ladder in Latin America are education, skills and innovation," the report said. Overcoming those barriers, however, is no easy task. The region's infamous inequality and under-funded educational systems require major social and educational reforms, which may take decades to achieve. In the meantime, increased ties with China can play a decisive role, especially as the world's second largest economy looks for more overseas investment opportunities. On Wednesday, Venezuelan President Nicolas Maduro said that cooperation with China could help strengthen the South American country's industrial and technological progress, while attending the inauguration of a joint- venture bus manufacturing plant in western Yaracuy state. Dubbed as the most modern bus plant ever built in Latin America, the Yutong Bus Factory will not only help renovate the country's aging public transit fleet, but more importantly leave a more lasting legacy by boosting Venezuela's automotive industry. Farther south, in Argentina, China is helping with the construction of two nuclear plants, which will bolster the country's scientific, technological and industrial capabilities. 
China Economic Information Service of Xinhua News Agency
EU-US trade deal will unleash oil sands and fatally undermine climate efforts
Mark Dearn
3 December 2015
The Guardian
The Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership aims to pave the way for the exploitation of toxic tar sand crude oil – with potentially devastating results
The prospects for a meaningful agreement at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" UN climate change talks beginning on Monday are bleak. As a result, so too are the prospects for the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" 100 million more people predicted to be living in poverty by 2030 as a result of global warming.
Though framed by record high temperatures and an increasing number of extreme weather events, the Paris talks are already HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" beset by the same problems that repeatedly dog climate change negotiations: the richest countries steadfastly refuse to meet HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" legal commitments and shoulder their HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" share of responsibility, preferring to uphold the desires of all-powerful corporate lobbies. Meanwhile, the poorest countries meet or exceed their responsibilities.
But regardless of commitments made in Paris, any steps to halt runaway climate change will be wholly undermined by the secretly negotiated EU-US trade deal, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP).
Related: HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" Europe's leaders must devise a global trading system that puts the poor first | Ruth Bergan
While touted as a “free trade” deal, in reality TTIP is anything but. The reduction of “tariffs” is a tiny fraction of the deal. The trade deal’s central mission is to remove “non-tariff barriers” – the regulations that often protect our society, health and environment. Fundamentally, it is a struggle between corporate power and the interests of people and the planet, with HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" wide-ranging ramifications for the global south.
Since its 2013 announcement, a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" key aim of TTIP has been to destroy regulations that prevent high-polluting tar sand crude oil from entering Europe. It is a target intimately tied to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU’s anti-Russian HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" geopolitical aims, and the wishes of the powerful oil lobby and its conduits in the American, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" British and Canadian governments. As HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" the Guardian has revealed, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU is colluding with the world’s biggest oil companies to ensure TTIP’s energy chapter is firmly in their interests.
An agenda that promises a high-carbon future unmasks the spin of rich country promises to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" phase out fossil fuels by the end of this century, highlighting the corporate nature of the deal and its devastating consequences for climate change. As the Nasa scientist James Hansen argues, if the tar sands are exploited as projected, it will be “game over for the climate”.
Regulations on both sides of the Atlantic are targeted for removal. On the one hand, there is the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU’s HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" fuel quality directive (FQD), created to reduce emissions from transport fuels to meet climate change commitments. On the other, there is the 40-year US ban on crude oil exports, which Republicans are eager to dismantle HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" against the wishes of the government and Democrats.
Tar sands oil is abundant in Canada, where mining has decimated the rights of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" First Nations communities, destroyed ancient forests, diverted huge amounts of water and led to toxic pollution. Research suggests that tar sands extraction and refining – which HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" takes place in the US – leads to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" 23% higher greenhouse gas emissions than average HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU fossil fuels.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU adopted the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" FQD in 2009. Since then, it has been firmly in the crosshairs of the world’s largest oil companies, which have HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" invested heavily in tar sands.
The oil companies have harnessed support in the office overseeing US trade policy, among US Republicans, in the Canadian and British governments, and in the European commission, which oversees HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU trade policy. The result has been the progressive weakening of the directive, the future of which after 2020 is HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" uncertain.
Michael Froman, the US trade representative, believes the directive is a “HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" discriminatory ” barrier to trade. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" US Chamber of Commerce revelled in having “successfully advocated for a delay in, and possible reconsideration of” the directive, marking it as one of its “HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" policy accomplishments for 2013”. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" British government, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" heavily lobbied by BP and Shell, has been quick to lend its support to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" Canadian efforts to destroy the directive.
Related: HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" Laos counts the cost of climate change: record floods, drought and landslides | John Vidal
But a statement from HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" a group of US members of Congress highlights, the trade agenda is undermining climate change policies. “Pressuring the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU to alter its FQD would be inconsistent with the goals expressed in HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" President Obama’s Climate Action Plan,” says the statement, adding that ”trade and investment rules may be being used to undermine or threaten important climate policies of other nations”.
For its part, the European parliament, which will vote on TTIP’s ratification, is playing both sides. In a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" TTIP resolution passed in July, consecutive paragraphs commit to “abolish any existing restrictions or impediments” on fuel exports and imports, before stating that energy quality standards must be respected, “including those for energy products related to their impact on CO emissions such as the one enshrined in the fuel quality directive”.
Far from being a simple case of European interests versus US interests, the lines of demarcation in TTIP are between the mutually exclusive interests of transnational big business and people and the planet; if the deal passes, the former wins and the latter lose.
Both TTIP and climate change are symptoms of the dominant neoliberal ideology. Regardless of the outcomes of talks in Paris, without a fundamental change to our corporate-led system, we will soon start counting the cost in the millions of lives lost in the global south.
Guardian Newspapers Limited
END
 
Josep Bosch, Information Officer
Information and External Relations Division
+41227395681
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.