WTO members urged to find solutions in farm trade talks
WTO members long way from finalising Doha round work programme
RI may report Turkey to WTO on unfair levies
US says new EU plan for GMO imports is no solution
Unifor denounces $526M loan for Volkswagen 'match-making' process
BIO Biotechnology Industry Organization : Welcomes GM Product Approvals but Opposes EU Move to Undermine International Obligations
Trade deals are too important to 'fast track'

WTO members urged to find solutions in farm trade talks
24 April 2015
Xinhua News Agency
 
GENEVA, April 24 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xinhua) -- HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members Friday were urged to step up efforts in resolving their differences on key issues blocking progress in the Doha Round farm trade talks. 
John Adank, the New Zealand ambassador chairing the negotiations, said there was an "urgent need to move from repeating positions to working for solutions."
Ambassador Adank warned that members were "a long way" from achieving an agreement by July on the agriculture chapter of a work program for concluding the Doha Round talks. 
"This in turn inhibits progress on other issues," he continued. "The intensive process in which we have been engaged has still not seen delegations move from entrenched positions or find acceptable ways around them. Doing so is the urgent challenge that is still ahead of us."
The threshold issues cited by the chairperson include possible spending caps on overall trade-distorting support (OTDS), the coverage and extent of any reductions in existing limits on de minimis support and the overall approach to be taken on tariff reductions. The question of special safeguards also remains a difficult issue to resolve, the chairperson added.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members have set July 2015 as the target for agreeing on a work program for concluding the Doha Round talks. Separately, members have agreed to try and seek a permanent solution on the issue of public stockholding for food security purposes by the end of December 2015.
 
WTO members long way from finalising Doha round work programme
Business Standard
Press Trust of India | Geneva
 
There has been a "sombre" progress by WTO members in finalising a work programme by July for the Doha round of talks and they are "a long way" from reaching an agreement on agriculture.

"I have to be frank with you: my assessment today is a sombre one. We are a long way from where we should be given the July deadline. In key areas we are, as yet, far from convergence on certain threshold issues. This in turn inhibits progress on other issues," said John Adank, the Chairperson of agriculture negotiations in the WTO at an informal meeting on agriculture.

"The intensive process in which we have been engaged has still not seen delegations move from entrenched positions or find acceptable ways around them. Doing so is the urgent challenge that is still ahead of us," said the New Zealand diplomat.

WTO Members have to thrash out a work programme by July 31 to conclude the Doha rounds as mandated by the members last November.

The informal meeting on agriculture had discussions on all three pillars of agriculture-domestic support, market access and export competition.

The "threshold" issues cited by the diplomat included safeguards, de minimis and blue box support, public stockholding for food security purposes, and cotton. Public stockholding discussions, however, also have a separate, dedicated track for discussion.

The so-called Group of 33 (G-33) that includes India wants the issue of safeguards included in the text that would allow them to address concerns of import surges that could threaten the livelihoods of their farmers.

The Indian ambassador to the WTO, Anjali Prasad, said that special safeguard mechanisms that the G33 has proposed are critical to rebalancing elements of existing inequalities.

"Hence we see the special safeguard mechanism and the separate proposal on special products as critical outcomes of the Nairobi ministerial," said the Indian official.

India warned against the dilution of special and differential treatment and said that this is which are central to any outcome.

Indonesia, speaking on behalf of the G-33, reiterated its emphasis on special products, safeguards and food security.

The groups' proposal on public stockholding is a legitimate basis for discussions for a permanent solution.

"This proposal concern hundreds and thousands of farmers across our countries," Indonesia said.

The US Ambassador to the WTO, Michael Punke, said it was not realistic to ask the US and a few other member states to carry the Doha round alone. Emerging economy have to carry their weight commensurate with their role in the world economy, he emphasised.

"I repeat my advice firstly to keep in mind the collective mandate, that is to find a permanent solution, and secondly to move beyond the assertion of well-stated positions," said Adank.

Agriculture has been the most important difficult elements in concluding the Doha Round.
 
RI may report Turkey to WTO on unfair levies
Linda Yulisman, The Jakarta Post, Jakarta | Business | Sat, April 25 2015, 11:48 AM 
 
Indonesia may file a complaint with the World Trade Organization (WTO) over Turkey's antidumping measures on yarn, which have affected a number of Indonesian textile firms, a trade official has said. Turkey's trade authority last week extended higher levies on Indonesian yarn of man-made staple fibers, which are to apply for five years following a recent review.The duties, ranging from 25 cents to 40 cents for each kilogram of yarn, have affected more than 20 local firms, including major textile manufacturers PT Indorama and PT Sri Rejeki Isman (Sritex). The Trade Ministry's trade defense director, Oke Nurwan, said Friday that a complaint might be lodged by local producers, who rejected accusations that they were exporting their products at a lower price than usual. "In addition, our export volume of the concerned product is not significant, so we're not hurting the Turkish industry," he said.Oke further said that he would discuss the planned challenge with a local business group. Indonesia's shipment of that type of yarn to Turkey was valued at US$82.01 million in 2011, representing 11.7 percent of overall imports. The figure rose to $122.94 million in 2013, but its share fell to 10.2 percent.Besides Indonesia, the expanded tariffs, particularly at higher levels, are likely to impact other producers, including China and India.Instead of seeking a dispute settlement from the WTO, domestic producers could choose to propose price undertaking to the Turkish authorities.Indonesian Textile Association (API) chairman Adi Sudrajat confirmed that local business players might bring the case to the Dispute Settlement Body of the WTO, as the duties had effectively curbed their expansion into the market of more than 75 million people."The duties have prevented us from growing our share of the Turkish market. We've lost our competitive edge against our rivals, such as Vietnam and Bangladesh," he said.Ade argued that this condition could not be allowed to continue in the years to come, and that dispute settlement might be the best solution.In terms of trade defense, Turkey has been one of Indonesia's most aggressive trading partners, applying a number of remedy measures over the past few years.The measures comprise antidumping tariffs to counter exported products that are sold at prices lower than those in their home market and safeguard duties, which are used to protect a country's local market whenever there is an irregular surge in imports.As of April, Turkey has imposed antidumping duties on 10 Indonesian products, including polyester synthetic fiber, zippers and air conditioners, and put safeguard tariffs on matches and polyethylene terephtalate.In contrast, Indonesia's only safeguard measure has been an import quota on Turkish wheat flour, imports of which had hurt the domestic industry.Bilateral trade between the two countries amounts to $2.48 billion in the past year, with Indonesia exporting $1.45 billion worth of goods and commodities and importing $1.03 billion.The two countries are assessing the possibility of a preferential trade agreement (PTA) to boost both-way trade by lowering tariffs on selected products. – 
 
 
US says new EU plan for GMO imports is no solution
Bangkok Post
25 April
NEW YORK - The United States criticized Friday the new European Union plan to allow member states to block genetically modified imports, following a new round of talks on the transatlantic free-trade pact.
"It is hard to square this proposal with either EU long-standing internal obligations or their aspiration for a seamless internal market," said Dan Mullaney, the assistant US trade representative for Europe and the Middle East.
"We are still studying the proposal implications but we hope that the EU will move forward in a way that respects our decades-old rules on trade," he added.
Mullaney was speaking at a news conference following the ninth round of US-EU negotiations on the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership held this week in New York.
His remarks echoed US Trade Representative Michael Froman, who said the US was "very disappointed" by Wednesday's EU proposal to allow the 28 member states to individually decide whether to allow the import of genetically modified organisms or food, animal feed and other products made with them.
Under current rules, if a GMO is judged safe for human consumption by the European Food Safety Agency, then the Commission must agree that it can be grown or imported without restriction in the EU. The new proposal would allow individual states to decide to block them using reasoning unrelated to risks to human and animal health and the environment.
On Friday, the Commission cleared 19 new GMO products for use in the EU, 11 of them from US agriculture giant Monsanto, including genetically modified varieties of soybeans, maize, rapeseed and cotton.
"We are pleased that the Commission is acting on long-standing biotech applications, but this does not remedy a proposal to allow EU member states to ban products deemed safe by Europe's own scientists," said Mullaney, the head of the US negotiating team at the TTIP talks.
Speaking at the same news conference, chief EU negotiator Ignacio Garcia Bercero said the opt-out proposal was "consistent" with the rules of the World Trade Organization and "maintains fully the role of science in the authorization process."
"Any measure taken by the member states will have to be on a non-discriminatory base. We feel it's a proposal which is fully compatible with our international obligations and that in no way undermines our negotiations with the United States," Bercero said.
He said the 10th round of TTIP negotiations would be held in the coming months in Brussels and, in the meantime, negotiators would examine the two parties' revised offers.
Among the subjects discussed in the New York meeting were fisheries and illegal fishing, other issues linked to the environment and technical barriers to trade, Mullaney said.
- Opposition on both sides -
If agreed, the TTIP would be the world's biggest trade deal, linking about 60 percent of the world's economic output in a market of 850 million consumers.
"You don't have to sacrifice standards to create opportunity," Mullaney said.
But the proposed deal has raised strong opposition in Europe, as well as in the United States. Last weekend there were demonstrations in several European and US cities opposing the plan.
The opposition is particularly high-pitched in Germany, Europe's economic powerhouse. Of the 1.7 million signatures collected in Europe by the European activist group Stop TTIP, about one million were from Germany -- nearly 10 times more than in France and 50 times more than in Italy.
The US and EU negotiators heard from stakeholders at a public comment forum Thursday.
Jean Halloran, a senior adviser at the nonprofit Consumers Union, suggested a treaty would be the worst of all possible worlds, exposing European consumers to "faulty GM cars" and US children to European toys that do not meet stricter American standards.
"We cannot pursue mutual recognition or equivalence willy-nilly," she said.
 
Unifor denounces $526M loan for Volkswagen 'match-making' process
Export Development Canada says loan is to hook up VW and auto parts suppliers
HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/news/,DanaInfo=.awxyCggiGkj+cbc-news-online-news-staff-list-1.1294364" CBC News

 Autoworkers union Unifor has denounced an Export Development Canada decision to loan Volkswagen $526 million without any guarantee of Canadian jobs, calling it an example of the "incoherence of the federal government's auto industry policy."
Earlier this week, EDC announced it would loan the $526 million to Volkswagen, which has no manufacturing presence in Canada, to help it consider doing business with Canadian parts makers.
But Unifor president Jerry Dias says VW is committed only to a "matchmaking" process and any business for Canadian firms would probably flow to their parts plants in Mexico, where VW has an assembly plant.
Under WTO rules, EDC cannot tie its loans to specific purchases.
"It is absolutely incredible that a Canadian government agency is helping to facilitate and accelerate the migration of the continental auto industry to Mexico, and with no guarantees of any Canadian benefit from the loan whatsoever," Dias said in a statement released Friday.
Loss of Windsor engine plant
Unifor president said EDC loan to Volkswagen makes no sense. (CBC)
He called on Industry Minister James Moore to review EDC's actions, pointing out it gave a similar loan to BMW last year and has also supported Canadian parts makers who want to open new plants in Mexico.
"It is painfully ironic that we recently lost out on a lucrative engine investment in Windsor by Ford, largely because of inadequate government support. Yet we can somehow find $526 million to help a foreign firm invest in Mexico," Dias said.
Ford confirmed earlier this month it would HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/news/canada/windsor/,DanaInfo=.awxyCggiGkj+ford-picks-mexico-over-windsor-for-engine-plant-union-says-1.2811843" build its new engine plant in Mexico, instead of in Windsor, Ont., as many in the auto sector had hoped.
One of the sticking points in the talks was apparently lack of incentives from government.
Carl Burlock, EDC's senior vice-president of financing and investment, said VW's expansion in Mexico and the U.S. presents opportunities for Canadian parts makers. The EDC loan is an opportunity to stretch the supply chain to Canada, he said.
About 70 Canadian parts suppliers already sell to VW.
Dias suggested the EDC would make better use of its resources to attract investment here in Canada.
Canada has been losing out to Mexico in capital investment in the auto sector and now has aHYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/news/business/,DanaInfo=.awxyCggiGkj+canada-falls-to-mexico-in-share-of-north-american-auto-output-1.2951795"  trade deficit with Mexico on auto parts and manufacturing.
Last year Canada sold only $484 million worth of auto parts to Mexico, Unifor claimed, making the EDC loan bigger than Canada's annual exports of parts to Mexico. Meanwhile, Canada imported $4.4 billion of auto parts from Mexico.
"This decision is just the latest evidence of Prime Minister Harper's failure to provide the strategic leadership required to rebuild and maintain Canada's auto sector," Dias said
 
 
BIO Biotechnology Industry Organization : Welcomes GM Product Approvals but Opposes EU Move to Undermine International Obligations
April 24, 2015
4 traders

 The Biotechnology Industry Organization (BIO) welcomes the European Commission's decision to approve seventeen genetically modified (GM) food and feed products that have been long delayed by political interference, some of which received a positive European scientific opinion as far back as November 2013. 
However, news of the approvals is greatly overshadowed by the EU proposal for legislation to break from the single market and its World Trade Organization (WTO) commitments by enabling individual member states to ignore scientific consensus and block the use of imported GM products at the national level. 
Under the proposal, individual member states will have the ability to reject the scientific opinion of the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) and the European Commission's decision to approve imports of GM products creating tremendous uncertainty for U.S.-EU trade in important agricultural commodities. 
"This proposal adds a third layer to the already lengthy and uncertain European approval process," says Jim Greenwood, BIO President and CEO. "This undermines international scientific consensus, Europe's obligations under the WTO and arbitrarily shuts off European consumers from accessing healthy, affordable and quality agricultural commodities from the United States and other major supplying nations. This is a major step backwards in U.S.-EU trade relations and represents a complete lack of transparency." 
BIO also points out that the proposal raises major concerns for GM products currently under EFSA review and for a robust pipeline of innovative products that will be submitted for import approval going forward. 
"As we look to the future, the ability to commercialize new products needed to address both climate change and a growing world population depends on science and risk-based regulation that is both predictable and timely," says Greenwood. "The world cannot afford innovation to be captive to politics." 
BIO is part of the U.S. Biotech Crops Alliance (USBCA), a broad section of the U.S. food and agriculture industry. In a recent letter to Commissioner Vytenis Andriukaitis, EU Directorate General Health and Food Safety, the USBCA asked for the following: 
- A commitment to uphold and not fragment the EU's single-market for imported GM crops. 
- A commitment for respect of existing law while the review is underway. The review must not be used to further delay decisions on products that have completed all risk assessment and administrative procedures and only await final Commission action. 
- A commitment that the result of the review shall not be retroactive and create additional delays for products in the regulatory queue. 
- A commitment to ensure regulations are consistent with the EU's obligations under the WTO SPS agreement, and to meet the timeline of 18 months (from submission to approval) of GM import dossiers provided for in the current approval procedure. 
- A commitment to maintain the role of the EFSA risk assessment process and to provide sufficient resources for EFSA to complete its task in a timely manner, and a commitment to develop a practical and more efficient science-based risk assessment process for stacked biotechnology events. 
- A commitment to complete the review no later than the six-month deadline from installation of the new Commission (30 April 2015). 
- A commitment to full transparency during conduct of the review including regular consultation with stakeholders. 
- A commitment to providing for EU access to the global supply of proven safe crop products enhanced through the use of biotechnology in the interest of EU agriculture and consumers. 
- A commitment to establish a policy covering the low-level presence of biotechnology traits that is commercially feasible and for the Commission to participate formally in the Global Low Level Presence Initiative.
 
Trade deals are too important to 'fast track'
The Seattle Times
Trading away manufacturing jobs for low-paying service-sector jobs hurts this state's workforce and economy.
By HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/,DanaInfo=.asfcugmFu41y53psOs54+search?searchtype=cq&sort=date&from=ST&byline=Richard%20Trumka" Richard Trumka and HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/,DanaInfo=.asfcugmFu41y53psOs54+search?searchtype=cq&sort=date&from=ST&byline=Jeff%20Johnson" Jeff Johnson
Special to The Times 

SINCE the introduction of a trade-promotion-authority bill last week, calls for Congress to reject "fast-track" authority for the Trans-Pacific Partnership are getting louder in Washington state — with good reason.
Working people rallied against it last weekend in Ferndale as part of a "national day of action," the city councils of Seattle and Bellingham have urged opposition, and this week more than 100 labor, environmental, civic and small-business organizations co-signed a letter to the state's congressional delegation urging them to vote no.
Why? Rather than provide rubber-stamp approval for a massive and largely secret trade deal, elected leaders must serve as the voice of the people they represent and preserve political leverage over the content of the trade partnership, and any trade deal that follows. 
The American labor movement is not against trade deals, but we're dead set against bad trade deals. Our trade agreements should advance U.S. interests while also contributing to the overall development of the world's economy and raising living standards. That's why we support trade preferences programs, such as the African Growth and Opportunity Act for developing countries in Africa, and why we oppose trade rules that weaken "buy American" policies.
It cannot be credibly argued that America's trade policies are accomplishing our key national objectives — whether you point to our chronic trade deficits, our unsustainable net international debt or the broader labor market data on wage stagnation and growing inequality. 
In the years since the North American Free Trade Agreement and World Trade Organization agreements took effect, American workers have suffered job losses and wage stagnation resulting from bad trade policies. Washington state has seen a net loss of more than 28,000 manufacturing jobs since 1994, with nearly 5 million manufacturing jobs lost nationwide. More than 72,000 Washington jobs have been displaced due to offshoring or trade deficits. Many workers end up settling into service-sector jobs, which pay less.
Instead of destroying good jobs, trade should create them. To do that, we need to ditch the idea of trade as a corporate entitlement. 
For more than 20 years, America has looked at international trade through a very narrow corporate lens. Instead of promoting America's exports and creating good American jobs, trade agreements made it easier for global corporations to move capital offshore and ship cheap stuff back. The logical outcome was trade deficits and falling wages — and that's what we got.
The Trans-Pacific Partnership involves a dozen countries that touch the Pacific Ocean. It's an enormous agreement, but no one we know has seen the whole deal. What we have seen is not good. The draft trade deal offers corporations a secret tribunal called "investor-state dispute settlement" to allow foreign investors to challenge any law or regulation they consider unfair — like requirements that cigarette packaging include graphic health warnings. 
Gov. Jay Inslee and former Gov. Chris Gregoire have raised concerns about this investor-state dispute mechanism. During trade negotiations in 2005, HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/JointCommittees/Archive/SCTF/Documents/,DanaInfo=.alfiC0fFnw4+GregoireLetterToPortman081905.pdf" Gregoire wrote then-U. S. Trade Representative Rob Portman that this was "deeply troubling." 
Bad provisions like this continue to have life only because they remain largely unknown, hidden in the dark. In the sunlight, they'll vanish.
Without fast-track authority, our whole country could review and help shape the trade agreement. With that opportunity, we would have a fighting chance to remove problematic sections and strengthen others. Secret tribunals would be out; strong, enforceable currency provisions would be in.
But that can't happen with fast-track authority. We should only use a process like that when Congress has complete confidence that federal negotiators are pursuing the right policies. We don't think Congress or the American people have that kind of confidence today. 
Every single line in our trade deals should be openly discussed and subject to public oversight and the full legislative process. There should be no question about that. Fast-track authority is undemocratic. It's a rotten process and it has cost us good jobs and wages.
It's time to reject fast-track authority. And, if we can't fix the Trans-Pacific Partnership, we should scrap that, too.
Richard Trumka is president of the American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO). Jeff Johnson is president of the Washington State Labor Council, AFL-CIO
 