New Zealand envoy appointed to lead WTO agriculture talks 
Destruction of US credibility at WTO 
World Trade agreement is a “huge opportunity”
NAFTA auto parts makers mount drive to sweeten terms of TPP deal
China Export Drop Persists As Demand Weakens 
APEC businesses push service sector agenda 
China prepares to take the wheel at the G20 
Malaysia ramping up efforts in Africa 
Extreme weather and food shocks 
Japan Shares Jump Most in Seven Years; Possibility of more stimulus from Beijing boosts sentiment 
 
New Zealand envoy appointed to lead WTO agriculture talks 
Last Updated: 2015-09-09 | Xinhua 
The New Zealand government Wednesday welcomed the appointment of its World Trade Organization (WTO) ambassador to lead progress in the long stalled Doha Round agriculture negotiations. Members of the WTO had formally appointed New Zealand Ambassador Vangelis Vitalis as the new chair of the negotiations at a meeting of the Special Session of the Committee on Agriculture held in Geneva, Trade Minister Tim Groser said in a statement. "The Doha negotiations are facing grave challenges" as 14 years of effort have not been able to bridge differences," said Groser. "The appointment of Ambassador Vitalis highlights that WTO members recognize that New Zealand can continue to make a constructive contribution in this area," said Groser. Vitalis, who will replace outgoing Ambassador John Adank, is the fifth successive New Zealander to chair the agriculture negotiations. A WTO ministerial conference will be held in Nairobi, Kenya, in December when the WTO membership will have to determine the best way to push the Doha Round talks forward.
 
Destruction of US credibility at WTO 
By Timothy A. Wise, Biraj Patnaik, Mint, New Delhi, Sept. 8 -- The tenth ministerial conference of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO), to be held in Nairobi on 15-18 December, is already mired in discord, with negotiators unable to agree on a mandated post-Bali work programme. At issue are US and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union (EU) proposals to scrap the texts agreed to thus far in this interminable round of trade negotiations. Yet again, the developed world led by the US and the EU are pitched against developing countries led by India, China and Indonesia, who have over the past two years tried unsuccessfully to move towards the promise-made at the ninth ministerial conference in Bali in 2013-of a permanent solution to the public stock-holding issue in food security, while advancing the stalled Doha development round. The irony that a country such as India, which witnessed more than a quarter of a million farm suicides between 1996 and 2014, has to fight to retain its farm subsidies, which are a fraction of what the US and the EU provide their farmers, is not lost on most observers. Nor is US intransigence in refusing to consider a proposal from the group of 33 countries (G-33) to resolve the stockholding issue simply by bringing the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO agreement into line with 21st century prices. The 2014 US farm bill is one of the main reasons the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" US government is walking away from the post-Bali agriculture negotiations. Studies show that the US is likely to exceed the subsidy limits agreed in Doha negotiations in 2008, and it will probably exceed even current HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO limits.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" US Congress thumbs its nose at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO
The 2014 farm bill, which takes effect this crop year and will be in effect for five years, is decidedly more trade-distorting than its predecessor. It eliminates direct payments to producers, which were considered less trade-distorting than price or production-based programmes. It replaces them with production and price-based programmes that offer producers of supported commodities a choice between payments to compensate for low prices (price loss coverage or PLC) or payments to compensate for revenues lower than the recent five-year revenue average (agricultural risk coverage or ARC). On top of that, producers get subsidized crop insurance from the federal government, and special or different programmes support dairy, cotton and other crops. How do these programmes work? Producers opt in to one of the programmes for each crop for the five-year terms of the farm bill. The price-based coverage is much like the US's previous countercyclical payments (CCP), setting a price trigger and compensating producers when prices fall below that level, up to a fairly high limit. Wheat producers, for example, would be covered for prices below the PLC price of $202 per tonne. The revenue-based programme, ARC, pays producers if their crop revenues fall below historic averages for their area based on yields and prices. The programme uses the previous five years as the baseline, years in which prices and yields have been unusually high. That makes producers eligible for an almost absurdly high level of support, levels that will, however, evaporate if there is a long run of low prices. In the early years of this farm bill, though, ARC coverage is high, particularly for corn and soybean, with effective support prices of $179 per tonne and $388 per tonne compared with PLC support prices in 2014 of $146 per tonne and $309 per tonne. Not surprisingly, most corn and soybean farmers opted for ARC over PLC. Why does the 2014 farm bill limit the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" US government's negotiating room in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO? According to projections from researchers at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" University of Missouri, farm supports are likely to remain at or above current levels, leaving the US little room to agree to proposed cuts. Projected outlays for 2014 crops are around $12 billion. More important, virtually none of the US support under these new programmes would fall in the Green Box, exempted from limits based on the assumption that they are minimally trade distorting. Both programmes are, indeed, tied to specific crops, prices, or levels of production, so they will be disciplined as Amber Box support subject to reductions under the current HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO agreement. Under the proposed Doha agreement, based on the texts agreed in 2008, the new programmes will likely fall in the Blue Box, which will be subject to new caps. The US limit will be $4.7 billion. They will also contribute to the new limits on overall trade distorting support (OTDS), which for the US will be $14.5 billion. And with the so-called de minimis exemption reduced from 5% to 2.5% of the value of each crop, more of that trade-distorting support will count against the US limits. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" University of Missouri researchers ran a series of 500 simulations for the next 10 years comparing the results to the proposed Doha limits as if the agreement were in effect as of 2014. They found that in 34% of those simulations, the US exceeds its reduced Amber Box allowance in at least one year. Worse, nearly 99% of the simulations showed Blue Box caps being surpassed in at least one year. OTDS limits were nearly 100% likely to be breached in at least one year, with a 40% probability that they would be exceeded in any given year.
In other words, if the US agrees to the 2008 Doha text on agriculture, it is virtually assured to be in violation of its commitments because of the 2014 farm bill.
US loses credibility in Doha negotiations
US intransigence in following through on the commitment in Bali to negotiate a permanent outcome on India's programme of administered prices and stockholding for food security looks all the more hypocritical in light of the 2014 farm bill. University of California professor Colin A. Carter wrote in a 2014 commentary, "The provisions of the 2014 Farm Bill... may well have cost the United States any credibility in future agricultural trade negotiations in the Doha round." The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" US government was already hypocritical in calling out India for a programme that uses all the same policy measures the US used in its earlier history. It was hypocrisy as well to call for close disciplines on payments to some of the poorest farmers in the world in order to feed some of the hungriest people in the world when US farmers are far better off and recipients of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" US government food assistance get four times the amount of food. And it was further hypocrisy to call India's programme highly trade-distorting when very little of the procured food finds its way into export markets while, by contrast, the US exports a significant portion of nearly every supported crop. But the 2014 farm bill adds a new layer of hypocrisy to US claims. Consider that the new legislation increases support prices by one-third or more. And consider what that means for US maize. The support price under the PLC programme is up 41% and at $146 per tonne is now higher than the current market price for maize by $2 per tonne. That would trigger payments if applied to 2014 prices and production. But most maize farmers opted for revenue insurance, which has a 2014 supported price of $179 a tonne, a $35 per tonne subsidy. Projections suggest that payments to maize farmers for the 2014-15 crop year will be more than $6 billion. Now, imagine if payments to US maize farmers were subject to the same archaic HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO discipline the US is insisting on for India, calculating the supposed subsidy not on the basis of current market prices but compared with the stipulated 1986-88 reference price, with no adjustment for inflation. That already high US subsidy, when compared to the reference price of $92 per tonne, would appear to be $87 a tonne and a ridiculous $32 billion, just for the US maize crop. Of course, the US subsidy is not that large. Neither is India's for rice or wheat. But the US hypocritically holds India to that archaic calculation of its subsidies while not having to do the same for its far larger and more trade-distorting farm supports.
Will the Doha round survive Nairobi?
The Barack Obama administration is relentlessly pursuing two large trade agreements-the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP). These allow for far greater trade liberalization in market access and investment rules than what the Doha round offers while excluding US agricultural subsidies from the discussion. The US is simultaneously pushing the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO to move beyond the Doha round to the so-called Singapore issues of government procurement, trade and competition and trade and investment. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Narendra Modi government successfully called the bluff of the developed world after Bali by threatening not to ratify the trade facilitation agreement unless the "constructive ambiguity" of the peace clause, which left India and other developing countries vulnerable to being dragged to the dispute settlement mechanism at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO, was clarified. India rightly recognizes the temporary gains from the Bali agreement and is clear-eyed that the DDA can only be concluded by addressing all issues of the 2008 Doha Framework. Since Bali, India has gained strong allies, with backing from China and Indonesia. Brazil, too, is insisting on respect for the 2008 negotiated texts. Despite the unity of the developing world, the road to Nairobi remains uphill. Kenya, which is projecting the Nairobi ministerial conference as the first African one, wants to make it successful, and that could mean settling on a less ambitious outcome. Even though many African countries are united behind the G-33 proposal, it is possible that the US and EU may (again) drive a wedge, like they did by pushing a minimalist package for least developed countries (LDC) at Bali, unless India and China step up the diplomatic effort. The India-Africa summit in New Delhi in October may offer India another chance at making a decisive push to get African countries to close ranks at Nairobi. In the meantime, India must not succumb to US pressure to reduce domestic support to farmers or replace the public distribution system with cash transfers in order to be WTO-compliant. India's national food security law promotes security not only by providing subsidized food to the poor but by supporting poor farmers with stable and profitable prices, just as the US did in its early farm programmes when it had a large and poor farm population. The developed world certainly dominates the global market for hypocrisy, and the US Farm Bill, passed by a Congress unconcerned with the rest of the world, is a case in point. Hopefully, the developing world can hold firm to join India in defending public stockholding programs for food security and in reviving the promise of development embodied in the Doha development round.
Published by HT Syndication with permission from MINT.
 
World Trade agreement is a “huge opportunity”
Posted on September 8, 2015 by HYPERLINK "http://www.securitynewsdesk.com/author/secnewsdesk/" SecurityNewsDesk, World Trade agreement is a “huge opportunity” as it removes long standing barriers to lucrative government contracts
The New Zealand Government’s signing of the World Trade Organisation’s (WTO) Government Procurement Agreement (GPA) has presented a huge opportunity. Sir William Gallagher, CEO and Chairman of the Gallagher Group is overjoyed at the potential this agreement presents for his global security business.  “As with all New Zealand companies, we’ve long faced challenges in competing for Government business offshore. This agreement gives us the opportunity to simply and directly present our highly innovative government security solutions to the world,” said Sir William. The Government Procurement Agreement opens up trade opportunities for Gallagher in 43 WTO member countries, including the US, Canada, Japan, and 28 countries in the European Union. According to New Zealand Economic Development Minister, Steven Joyce, the agreement provides New Zealand companies with guaranteed access to bid for an estimated USD1.7 trillion in annual overseas government contracts. As one of New Zealand’s shining business examples for innovation and technology, Gallagher has developed Government specific security solutions for countries throughout the world. “We’ve been working in the Government space for quite some time. For us, this agreement means a smoother road for international business and the opportunity to solidify opportunities with foreign governments. It’s an exciting prospect for us,” commented Sir William. Gallagher’s security business has offices across 5 continents and is a significant player in the design and manufacture of security technology. Specializing in hardware and software for access control and perimeter security, Gallagher’s state-of-the-art products are employed across a vast range of industries, including: mining, utilities, oil and gas, transport and logistics, education, healthcare, and more. HYPERLINK "https://www.gallagher.com/about-us/business-units/security/" Gallagher Security has developed innovative perimeter security systems which, along with the access control and intruder alarm systems, form the backbone of Gallagher’s global security offering.
 
NAFTA auto parts makers mount drive to sweeten terms of TPP deal
Auto industries in Canada, the U.S. and Mexico want governments to fight for a domestic content rule of 50 per cent in negotiations with Japan 
Steven Chase, The Globe and Mail (Breaking News), 9 September 2015, OTTAWA --The North American auto industry is increasing the pressure on Canada, the U.S. and Mexico to extract a better deal for HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" NAFTA car makers from a proposed Pacific Rim trade pact as negotiators sit down to meetings with Japan this week concerning the issue. For the first time, auto parts makers in all three countries are speaking publicly with a united voice on the matter – with industry leaders urging Ottawa, Washington and Mexico City to resist Japan’s efforts to water down domestic content rules for car manufacturing in North America. Negotiations to create the Trans-Pacific Partnership – a massive free-trade zone covering 12 countries from Chile to Japan – hit a wall in Hawaii in late July over a deal Washington quietly struck with Tokyo that could hit the North American auto sector hard. Ottawa and Mexico City, which had been left out of the loop, balked at an arrangement the United States had assured Japan it could sell to its HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" NAFTA partners. Under the Japan-U.S. agreement, cars could be sold duty free in TPP member countries with only 45 per cent domestic content and auto parts would be allowed to enter duty free as long as they had just 30 per cent domestic content. Now, six weeks later, as TPP countries launch a push to wrap up a deal, American, Canadian and Mexican auto parts makers have penned a Sept. 8 letter to Canadian Trade Minister Ed Fast, U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman and Mexico’s Minister of Economy Ildefonso Guajardo Villarreal, urging their governments to fight for a domestic content rule of 50 per cent, both for vehicles themselves and for auto parts. At stake are three million jobs in the North American auto-parts manufacturing sector, they warn. Auto parts makers fear their sector would suffer serious damage if Ottawa and Mexico City fail to obtain a better deal in a TPP accord. “An inadequate content rule for parts will dramatically impact our domestic parts manufacturing industry and the jobs that come with it,” wrote Flavio Volpe, president of Canada’s HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Automotive Parts Manufacturers’ Association; Steve Handschuh, president of the U.S. Motor & Equipment Manufacturers Association; and Oscar Albin, executive president of Mexico’s Industria Nacional de Autopartes, in the letter. “[This] industry today accounts for 20 per cent of all trade across the three HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" NAFTA markets.” Under North American free-trade agreement rules today, more than 60 per cent of a light-duty vehicle and a similar portion of parts must be made in Canada, Mexico or the United States for them to enter these markets free of tariff. On Wednesday, Takeo Mori, Japan’s negotiator for auto trade, will meet with Wendy Cutler, deputy U.S. trade representative, in Washington to resume talks on vehicles and auto parts. Mr. Mori will talk with Canada and Mexico on Thursday and Friday. Canada’s chief TPP negotiator Kirsten Hillman is heading to Washington to join the discussion. The erosion of manufacturing jobs in Canada is a major federal election campaign issue. NDP Leader Thomas Mulcair will visit an auto-parts company in Niagara Falls, Ont., Wednesday, to unveil his party’s auto policy. In a controversial move, the Conservative government has chosen to continue Trans-Pacific negotiations during the election campaign when Ottawa is supposed to be run in “caretaker” mode. The Privy Council Office, the bureaucratic support arm of the Prime Minister’s Office, released guidelines at the campaign outset that justified the move, saying “the failure to participate in ongoing negotiations during the caretaker period could negatively impact Canada’s interests.” The Department of Foreign Affairs, however, is assuring Canadians it won’t negotiate away industrial benefits. “As with any issue under negotiation, Canada’s objective is to secure an outcome that enables Canadian producers to remain competitive,” Foreign Affairs spokeswoman Diana Khaddaj said Tuesday.
 
China Export Drop Persists As Demand Weakens 
Mark Magnier, The Wall Street Journal Europe, 9 September 2015, 
BEIJING -- Weaker demand for Chinese goods in most global markets led to a drop in exports for the second consecutive month, as the economy continued its struggle to regain momentum.
China's exports fell 5.5% in August from a year earlier in dollar terms, after a drop of 8.3% in July, data from the General Administration of Customs showed Tuesday. Customs said China's exports will continue to face "relatively big pressure" in the fourth quarter. Export weakness last month was broad-based, ANZ economist Li-Gang Liu said, with shipments to the U.S., HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union, Japan and Southeast Asia all down. Earlier this year, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization lowered its 2015 forecast for growth in global trade to 3.3% from 4%. Imports in August fell 13.8% in dollar terms from a year earlier, compared with an 8.1% decrease in July, fueling another significant trade gap, Customs said. China's trade surplus widened in August to $60.2 billion from $43.03 billion in July. The weak trade data mark the latest soft readout from the Chinese economy. Indicators of industrial production, financial services and factory and real-estate investment point to slowing growth in the second half of the year, raising questions about China's ability to meet its annual growth target of about 7% and denting investor confidence world-wide. Beijing last month devalued its currency in a surprise move that experts said was aimed at helping its struggling exporters. 
 
APEC businesses push service sector agenda 
Mikhail Franz E. Flores, BusinessWorld, 9 September 2015, CEBU CITY - Business groups in the Asia-Pacific region have agreed to form a regional coalition to advance the services sector's interests and boost trade and investment across economies. A total of 14 business groups - mostly services coalitions - from members of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) on Monday signed a memorandum of understanding to form the Asia Pacific Services Coalition. "Recognizing the central role that the services sector now plays in our region in generating economic growth, employment, improved competitiveness and regional economic integration, we have agreed to enter into a memorandum of understanding to develop closer cooperation and dialogue among the major business organizations focused on services in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" APEC region," the document stated.
"Our collective goal is to work with business and government to foster growth and efficiency in the services sectors through increased trade and investment, greater innovation and skills development, and pro-growth regulation in all HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" APEC economies," it added. The new coalition will also serve as a venue to share best practices. Among those who signed are services coalitions, industry groups and business organizations from Australia, Brunei, Canada, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Lima, Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan and the United States. An industry association from Colombia, a non-APEC economy, also signed up. "It's an important step for furthering the services liberalization facilitation in the region," Anthony Nightingale of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" APEC Business Advisory Council (ABAC) in Hong Kong said in a briefing on Monday night.
Jane Drake-Brockman, Senior Services Advisor of the International Trade Centre, said in the same briefing that the creation of the coalition highlights the importance of boosting services competitiveness to help drive economic growth across the region. "We really believe the services sector hold big prospects for growth in this part of the world," Ms. Brockman said. "This new business organization now exists. It's very large. It's probably now the world's largest coalition of services champions. It will be feeling its way towards engaging in HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" APEC processes," she added.
The newly formed coalition will reconvene in China in May next year, Ms. Brockman said. 
 
China prepares to take the wheel at the G20 
ByEAST ASIA FORUM
 Adam Triggs, TODAY (Singapore), 9 September 2015, The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Group of 20 economies (G20) is often referred to as the world’s “steering committee”, and in less than five months China will be firmly behind the wheel. At recent G20 summits and meetings in Beijing and Shanghai, government officials, academics and business representatives were asking two questions: What should China do with its G20 presidency, and what sort of leader will it be? China’s G20 presidency has been long awaited. China sees the G20 as the world’s “foremost international economic cooperative mechanism”, unique for giving developing countries an equal voice at the table. Now is China’s time to step up to the plate. One thing was clear from the G20 meetings in Beijing and Shanghai: There is no shortage of ideas and risks for China’s upcoming presidency. These tend to fall into three categories: Growth, governance and leadership. On growth, there is an increasing concern that the G20 will fail to deliver on its promise to lift the group’s gross domestic product by 2 per cent by 2018, with forecasts downgraded five times since the October 2013 baseline. Many countries are also struggling to implement key reforms that underpin the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" International Monetary Fund (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF) and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD) growth modelling, including a large increase in public investment in Germany and immigration reform in the United States. New reforms will be required to fill these gaps, but they might be harder to come by in 2016. China will inherit a much less accommodating political environment than when the growth goal was announced during Australia’s presidency. Back then, a string of elections, stimulus programmes and reform priorities at the domestic level all fed directly into the G20 process. By contrast, the US presidential election might mean a lame-duck US at the summit next year. China’s leadership, too, could be delayed until after it agrees on its next five-year plan by mid next year, its ambition possibly reduced by recent turmoil in Chinese stock markets. Officials and academics are also wary of macroeconomic risks in Europe and the impacts of higher interest rates in the US. To achieve the 2 per cent goal, China will need to better tailor the G20’s agenda to the global growth challenge. For infrastructure, this means focusing less on just public investment and more on leveraging private-sector investment. For employment, this means focusing less on small-scale employment programmes and more on lifting workforce participation, particularly among women. For competition reforms, it means a greater focus on liberalising product markets, which so far represent the bulk of the 2 per cent growth goal but only 16 per cent of commitments. And for trade, it means a stronger focus on “behind the border” (non-tariff barriers) reforms to better integrate global value chains.
Macroeconomic coordination
Events in Europe and the United States will put macroeconomic coordination back on the G20 agenda. Discussions in Beijing suggest the focus will be on tasking the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD to produce analysis to better understand spillovers from monetary and fiscal policies and the costs and benefits of different coordination options. But this will need to be combined with reforms to G20 mechanisms, which have thus far failed to deliver on the G20’s rhetoric of “strong, sustainable and balanced growth”. The G20 relies almost solely on peer pressure to secure ambitious commitments. But the G20’s peer review process of each member’s commitments is largely isolated from finance deputies, sherpas, ministers and leaders — the very people who are best placed to negotiate more ambitious commitments. Better integrating this process and having greater engagement with external experts and the public will be critical to delivering ambitious structural reforms. On governance, China’s G20 presidency will present an awkward contradiction: The country chairing the world’s steering committee and driving global growth remains grossly under-represented in key global institutions. Hopefully this contradiction can be leveraged to achieve more progress on global governance reform. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF reform will be a key issue for China’s presidency, particularly having the yuan included in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF’s Special Drawing Rights basket, and progressing HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF quota reform given that, as highlighted by Mr Tristram Sainsbury from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Lowy Institute, US$369 billion (S$525 billion) of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF’s funding will expire in 2016 and 2017.
Reforms Beyond HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF
But discussions on global governance have moved well beyond just the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF. There is a strong focus on reforming global energy institutions, notably the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" International Energy Agency, to better include major energy consumers such as China so as to boost funding and bolster energy security. The G20’s agreed “principles on energy governance collaboration” provide the starting point, which are being built upon by Turkey in 2015. G20 governance itself has also been the source of attention, particularly the “zombie-like” idea of a secretariat, which, no matter how many times it is killed off, seems to keep getting back up.
The question hanging over all these discussions is what sort of G20 leader China will be. Much of the public discussion has thus far focused on Chinese or regional initiatives such as the One Belt One Road initiative, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) and the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP). There is much that can be done with these initiatives. The AIIB, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Bank’s Global Infrastructure Facility and the G20’s Global Infrastructure Initiative could all be better integrated around a list of bankable projects for leveraging private investment in infrastructure. And the RCEP could be used to help better regionalise Asia’s global production networks and reduce the complex overlap among Asian free-trade agreements. But if China uses its G20 presidency to strategically position itself and regional institutions over others, then they will quickly exhaust their political capital and irreparably damage their presidency. Instead, the focus must be on working collaboratively on issues that are not only key to the global economy but also things on which China can demonstrate strong leadership. Undertaking bold structural reforms to boost growth and modernising global governance ticks both these boxes. They are areas of focus that will deliver a successful G20 presidency for China. But regardless of its final agenda, China’s presidency is already one of the most hotly anticipated G20 presidencies in some time.
Adam Triggs is a graduate scholar at the Crawford School of Public Policy at The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Australian National University. 
 
Malaysia ramping up efforts in Africa 
New Straits Times, 9 September 2015 --  A HEAD of the Bandung Asian-African Summit in Indonesia last April, statements from Prime Minister Datuk Seri Najib Razak's office suggested a long-range view for enhancing relationships on the continent. Driven by "commitment to strengthening cooperation" and achieving "prosperity through South-South cooperation", Malaysia is expressing great enthusiasm and commitment to exploring opportunities in Africa. Indeed, the continent could find itself playing a central role as part of Malaysia's effort to develop a latticework of political and trade relationships with developing nations. Since the 1990s, Singapore's northern neighbour has undertaken a sustained effort to build partnerships across the developing world as part of its vision to achieve greater resiliency on the global stage through political and economic diversification. In the wake of the recent financial crisis, this aspiration has all but certainly been renewed. Taking note of Africa's burgeoning investment opportunities, Malaysia has responded with ever larger amounts of foreign direct investment that have blazed a trajectory of consistent 20 per cent plus year-on-year growth over the past decade. These FDI flows culminated at a whopping USD19.3 billion in 2011, eclipsing those of China and India on the continent, and following behind only the United States and France as the third largest international investor that year. Malaysian firms can now be found operating in a wide range of sectors across the continent, from resource extraction, hotel and leisure, shopping, and financial services. The diversity of undertakings reflect Malaysia's recent transformation into a more multi-sectored and dynamic economy and indicate the private sector's appetite to establish meaningful in-roads into frontier markets well beyond the Asean region. Malaysian company Probase Manufacturing Sdn Bhd, for example, completed its first road development project in Kenya in June, which leveraged new soil technology to cut the expected price tag of such a project by more than half, while in the process piquing the interest of Rwanda and Swaziland to undertake similar pilot projects worth USD3 million each in their countries. Other companies, like Pacific Inter-Link, are long established in the continent with regional offices in Ethiopia, Nigeria and Ghana that are engaged in manufacturing and commodities trading. While Africa may not be reciprocating in terms of FDI, the relationship is nonetheless a two-way street of growing awareness and integration. Preceding the 2011 investment surge, 2010 was marked by an equally rapid increase in the number of African students enrolling into Malaysian universities. According to United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation figures, Malaysia welcomed 120 per cent more African student enrolments in 2010, reaching 11,825 from 5,373 in the year before. Political engagement has also been two way, with the Malaysian agenda driven by a robust network of diplomatic missions on the continent that is comparatively larger than many of its Asean counterparts. This rhythm of engagement is priming the Malaysia-Africa corridor to take advantage of the next wave of opportunity. According to the Malaysia International Islamic Financial Centre, there are increasingly attractive and feasible possibilities for linking Kuala Lumpur's bustling Islamic finance community to address substantial investment needs for critical African infrastructure projects. Several African nations have turned to the global sukuk market for funding and when considering the on-going USD31 billion per year funding gap for infrastructure on the continent, Malaysian underwriting could play a relevant role in advancing the continent's broader economic development agenda. With Africa accounting for less than three per cent of global Islamic banking assets, this is the next frontier for Islamic finance. Similarly, the halal industry presents Malaysia with excellent opportunities for joint-entries into Africa with Asean regional partners in Singapore and Indonesia. Halal players in food, travel and lifestyle products should begin incorporating Africa into their global expansion strategy, if they have not already, with a view to tap into the fastest growing middle class in the world, dense urban centres and a nearly 30 per cent Muslim population. As the largest exporter of halal goods in the world already, with exports reaching to around USD11 billion in 2013, Malaysia is well positioned to lead such a charge into Africa. The global halal market is rapidly expanding beyond the traditional confines of the food and beverage space, to include products such as cosmetics, tourism and health products, becoming a more holistic concept. Although Africa represents only 15 per cent of this global market, the continent's population is expected to double to about 1.9 billion by 2050, with the Muslim population growing at a rate of 170 per cent, both highly favourable growth drivers ahead for halal. While the Asean-Africa nexus is in a nascent stage, Malaysia is standing out as a trail-blazer for new markets and industries. Africa is rising and its nations are turning to Asia for partners in development. With Malaysia on track to achieve first-world status by 2020, it is a development showcase for what this once mislabelled "hopeless" continent is set out to achieve in its own right in the coming decades. The writer is an adjunct researcher at the NTU-SBF Centre for African Studies and vice-president at Reciprocus International, a global M&A advisory boutique headquartered in Singapore 
 
Extreme weather and food shocks 
By TIM BENTON and ROB BAILEY, International New York Times -- is the academic director of the Global Security Program and a professor of population ecology at the University of Leeds. is the research director for Energy, Environment and Resources at Chatham House. , 9 September 2015- Recent events highlight concerns about the risks to global food security posed by changing patterns of extreme weather affecting the world’s ‘‘breadbasket’’ regions such as the American Midwest, South America’s southern cone, the Black Sea and the Yangtze River valley. In 2012, the worst drought to hit the U.S. Midwest in half a century sent international maize and soybean prices to record levels. In 2011, wheat prices nearly doubled after an unprecedented heat wave devastated the Russian harvest. The global food price crisis of 2007-8 had its roots in a run of poor harvests in previous years.Global food security largely depends on the production of a few ‘‘mega-crops’’ in the breadbasket regions: maize, wheat, rice and soybeans. On the whole, the system works well. International trade provides a global market for these specialized production centers, reducing the cost of food for billions of people by allowing agriculture to flourish where it can be most efficient. Trade also allows countries to meet unforeseen production shortfalls through imports, as Britain did in the summer of 2013 after floods spoiled the winter wheat harvest. But when extreme weather ruins the harvest in a breadbasket region, that’s not just a problem in the country affected, it’s a problem for all importing countries. Of course the risk to the world’s food security doesn’t arise simply from bouts of bad weather. Weather’s impact can be compounded by the actions of governments and markets. Governments can make things much worse when, for example, they try to shore up domestic food supplies by banning or limiting agricultural exports, further pushing up international prices. The 2007-8 crisis saw over 30 governments impose export restrictions in a spiral of rising prices and collapsing market confidence; the 2011 wheat spike was amplified when Russia turned off exports. Likewise it is becoming clear that severe weather shocks rippling through the food system can ignite wider instability. During the 2007-8 crisis, protests erupted in 61 countries and turned violent in 23. In the wake of the Russian heat wave, the price of bread was one of several grievances behind the Arab Spring. Once shocks to the food system spill over into other areas, they can cascade through economic and political systems with sometimes devastating consequences. Amid these pressures, the global food system is coming under increasing strain, as highlighted in a recent report that we wrote in conjunction with other British and American experts for the U.K.-led Global Food Security program. Rising incomes and changing dietary preferences mean demand for food is growing faster than cereal yields. Water scarcity and soil depletion present challenges for agriculture, which faces sharper competition for resources from urbanization and energy production. A precarious supply-and-demand balance means the system is easily unbalanced. The stability of the global food system faces risks from the increasingly frequent extreme weather that is being driven by climate change. For example, in the United States there were more than four times more weather events causing damage in excess of $1 billion (in 2011 prices) in 2007-11 than in 1980-85. Drought is a particularly powerful driver of global food shocks. Two episodes stand out: in 1988-9, when maize and soybean were seriously affected in the U.S. Midwest, and in 2002-3, when rice and wheat were hit in Eastern Europe and Western Asia. Were these two events to happen in the same year — a multiple breadbasket failure — it would result in the loss of between 5 and 10 percent of the production of these major crops, more than enough to supply the basic calorie needs of the United States for a year. Until recently, such a calamity would have been expected every 100 to 200 years, but this number is shrinking rapidly due to climate change. An initial analysis of recent data suggests that the risk of a 1-in-100-year event during the second half of the last century is likely to increase to 1-in-30 years by 2040 — and perhaps even 1-in-15 years in the decades after 2050. A multiple failure in the world’s breadbaskets in the same year is, in our view, a plausible worst-case scenario for today. In fact, by the end of the century such an event may occur every few years unless we reduce emissions overall, and we change what we grow, and how we grow it, to adapt to the changing climate. Such a crisis would almost certainly be compounded by export restrictions, panic buying and hoarding, driving food prices to new heights. This would be particularly serious for the food-importing countries of the developing world, especially in Sub-Saharan Africa. The shock would come at the economic level, in the form of inflation, balance-of-payment difficulties and budgetary pressures, and it would strike at the human level in increasing poverty; in the developed economies, consumers would feel the pinch as grocery prices climbed. Of even more concern, however, would be the spread of the crisis from food markets to political systems in the world’s geopolitical hotspots; fragile countries could be destabilized, especially the major grain importers of the Middle East and North Africa.
Given these predictions and warnings, what needs to be done?
Agriculture must of course be adapted to a dramatically changing climate: We need to reverse declines in yield growth. This requires significantly more research and development investment to increase maximum attainable yields and to expand agricultural extension services. Additional investment is needed to reduce the environmental impact of farming and to bolster its ability to withstand climate change. In addition, vulnerable countries can shore up their food security through policy measures to insulate their populations from market shocks. Such efforts include holding strategic stocks, raising national production to reduce import dependency and improve self-sufficiency, and ‘‘buying forward’’ to lock in future import prices. The greatest challenge will be to make the global food system far more resilient. Rules limiting the use of export barriers will become vital if a functional trading system is to be maintained. Biofuel policies will also need to be reformed by making mandates flexible, so that biofuel use falls when food prices rise, or by limiting the use of staple food crops in biofuel production when food demand outstrips supply. Recent multilateral efforts to improve the quality and availability of key market data, such as food stock levels, can help governments anticipate crises and avoid panic. But improved climate and economic modeling is needed to understand the risks and assess how best to manage them. Armed with this knowledge, governments, international organizations and businesses could engage in contingency planning, set up early-warning systems, and coordinate the management of strategic stocks. International food shocks exacerbated by extreme weather events can affect millions of people in countries around the world. Taking smart and practical steps to ease the impact of our changing climate on our food supplies is vital if we are to ride out the droughts and storms that will impact our food prices. 
 
Japan Shares Jump Most in Seven Years; Possibility of more stimulus from Beijing boosts sentiment 
Chao Dengm The Wall Street Journal Online, 9 September 2015 -- Stocks in Japan jumped the most in more than seven years on Wednesday, shaking off unease about slowing growth in China amid a tentative rebound in Chinese stocks. The Nikkei Stock Average jumped 7.7%, or 1343.43, to 18770.51, marking the benchmark's biggest daily percentage gain since October 2008. In point terms, it was the biggest gain since January 1994.
A broad rally for shares and currencies comes after markets in the region fell Tuesday on HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" weak Chinese trade data that had stoked concerns about a further slowdown in the world's second-largest economy. Japanese stocks hit a seven-month low Tuesday. But on Wednesday, investor sentiment toward China took a positive turn. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" China's finance ministry said Tuesday evening that the country would roll out a “more forceful" fiscal policy to stimulate economic growth, which it said faced downward pressure. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Ministry of Finance said in a statement that it would allocate more funds to support some infrastructure projects and implement tax cuts for small businesses. It also said it would accelerate the approval process for duty-free stores to boost construction. “Authorities [have] released a slew of policies aimed at rebuilding investor confidence by introducing mid-to-long term market-regulating measures," said Jacky Zhang, an analyst at BOC International. Optimism that China was taking steps to help its economy gave the Shanghai Composite Index a 1.7% boost and sent the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Hang Seng Index 3% higher. “Any signal that [China's] government is going to do more to support growth is going to help sentiment," especially measures on top of monetary easing, added Bernard Aw, market analyst at IG. Beijing has approved nearly 200 billion yuan of infrastructure projects since July, according to an article by state-owned Securities Daily Wednesday.
Japan shares swung back to positive territory for the year after falling to a year-to-date loss Tuesday, and investors “are in the state of risk-on," said HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Marito Ueda, director of FX Prime by GMO.
Investors were scooping up stocks in Japan, citing their cheaper valuations. At Tuesday's close, the Nikkei was down as much as 16% from its late June peak. Japanese companies were trading at 14.9 times their earnings, compared with 17.9 times in the U.S. and 15 times in Germany, according to data provider Quick. The Japanese yen, a safe haven during market routs, weakened amid the Nikkei's rally. The U.S. dollar rose to ¥120.25 from ¥119.81 late Tuesday in New York. Among leaders in their sectors, electronics-parts maker HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Murata Manufacturing Co. was up 9.1%, medical and health care business HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Terumo Corp. gained 11.6% and auto-parts maker HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Denso Corp. was up 10%. South Korea's Kospi was up 2.4% and Australia's S&P/ASX 200 gained 1.7%. Analysts said a late-day rally in China Tuesday lifted global shares, and created buying momentum that carried into Asia when markets opened Wednesday morning. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" U.S. stocks rallied overnight for their biggest one-day gain in two weeks, after Shanghai stocks surged Tuesday. Analysts speculated Shanghai's 2.9% jump yesterday was led by government buying. “It has been difficult to enter [the Japan market] because the [China] market kept falling," said Naoki Fujiwara, fund manager at Shinkin Asset Management. But he said that the stabilization in Shanghai and the gains in markets abroad helped. “That created a good timing to buy." Nevertheless, many investors and analysts are bracing for further volatility. They remain anxious about the health of China and the global economy and are on alert ahead of next week's meeting of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" U.S. Federal Reserve, when the central bank could HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" raise short-term interest rates for the first time in nearly a decade.
“The market focus isn't [on Japan]. It's on China and the U.S.," said Hideyuki Ishiguro, senior strategist at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Okasan Securities. “The Federal Open Market Committee meeting isn't over yet." Data Tuesday showed China's exports fell 5.5% in August from a year earlier in dollar terms, according to the General Administration of Customs, while imports dropped 13.8%. While analysts said the data weren't surprising, the figures underscore how China's economic slowdown is affecting trade, particularly for countries that focus their exports on Chinese demand. In currencies, the Malaysian ringgit strengthened by 0.7% to trade at 4.0356 against the U.S. dollar, after having hit a string of 17-year lows recently. It traded as weak as 4.3695 against the U.S. dollar Tuesday. The Australian dollar strengthened by 0.3% to trade at $0.7043, its highest in days.
In Hong Kong, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Power Assets Holdings Ltd. led gains after the company announced a planned merger with HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Cheung Kong Infrastructure Holdings Ltd. Shares of the two firms gained 6.2% and 4.4%, respectively.
Pei Li, Gregor Stuart Hunter and Kosaku Narioka contributed to this article.
 
END


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.