Headlines:
Chennai protests against Doha WTO deal
Revenues surge as global tax crackdown gathers pace
Weak yen putting BOJ on collision course with Abe government
Financial crisis recovery: Fed rate hike won't derail economy, ex-US treasury secretary
Pacific Trade: The U.S. should protect biologic patents in the negotiating end game.
Peru: TPP no incrementará el periodo de 20 años de protección a las patentes
 
Details:
Chennai protests against Doha WTO deal
10 August 2015
Deccan Chronicle
Chennai: As India and other members will finalize the Doha round of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO agreement in December at Nairobi which many feel will result in commercialisation of higher education, members of the All India Forum for Right to Education (AIFRTE), students welfare organisations and educational activists from the city conducted a rally protesting government’s move on Sunday.
Nearly 300 students, intellectuals and educational activists gathered in front of the Rajarathinam stadium from where they marched till the new Secretariat. Students from several schools carried placards which read, ‘HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO! Quit our education’, ‘Govt of India, withdraw offer given to GATS’ and ‘Don’t provide market access in education’.
P.B. Prince Gajendra Babu, general secretary of the state platform for the Common School System who led the rally said, “Government will change all laws so to implement the provisions of the GATS agreement. We urge government to withdraw this, otherwise higher education will no longer be in the reach of ordinary people.” He also added that native languages and knowledge would perish.
Speaking on the occasion, Dr S.S. Rajagopalan said that the main objective of education is to solve the problems of society. The present educational system is yet unable to do so. If foreign players come to India, they will focus on the education needed by their country and not on the problems faced by India. Therefore poverty will grow and unemployment will increase. It is another form of imperialism practiced by developed countries, he said. Many other educational activists cited the exorbitant fees charged by schools and the introduction of play schools and said that education has already been commercialised. Deccan Chronicle Holdings Limited
Revenues surge as global tax crackdown gathers pace
By Vanessa Houlder in London 
10 August 2015
Financial Times
Hundreds of millions of tax dollars are flooding into exchequers across the world, as governments offer evaders a last chance to own up to undeclared accounts.
Taxpayers with funds stashed offshore are coming forward voluntarily in their tens of thousands, ahead of new transparency rules that will allow tax authorities to open secret foreign accounts.
The Paris-based HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD said last week that many transgressors were facing "the last window of opportunity" to disclose such information. Dozens of countries will begin to exchange tax files in 2017 as part of a co-ordinated global crackdown on evasion, exposing non-compliant taxpayers to an unprecedented risk of prosecution.
Pressure has mounted since several countries announced that partial amnesty programmes offering reduced penalties for evaders who come clean are being tightened up or are closing early.
South Africa is set to close its "voluntary disclosure facility" on Wednesday after announcing last month that it planned to send out audit letters to clients of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" HSBC in Switzerland, which was at the centre of a political storm over tax evasion in February. The UK will close its schemes by the start of next year.
The new transparency rules were triggered by evasion scandals in the US, which prompted Washington to force overseas banks to hand over information on possible offenders under the 2010 Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act. As governments across the world responded to public anger over evasion in their own jurisdictions, they pressed for similar measures, and last year 93 countries signed a deal to share details on individuals' bank accounts.
Ahead of receiving the bank data, many governments have been successfully pressing citizens to repatriate offshore funds. Among the most recent moves is a law passed in June by the Russian Duma for a voluntary disclosure programme for all Russian citizens, irrespective of their tax residency.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" French finance ministry in March said it expected its crackdown on offshore income to raise €2bn. Germany's voluntary disclosure programme was used by almost 40,000 taxpayers in 2014, raising an additional tax revenue of €1.3bn. Belgium levied €1.9bn from 22,000 people in 2013.
A UK scheme had raised just under £1.1bn from 5,819 disclosures by the end of March, while in the five years since 2009 US authorities collected about $6.5bn from 45,000 voluntary disclosures.
But despite the large sums collected - which totalled €37bn in the five years to 2014 , according to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD estimates - some critics argue that the amounts have not justified the costs of implementing the new rules.
Mark Matthews of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Caplin & Drysdale, a law firm, who is a former deputy commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service in the US, was sceptical about the returns. "You would think there's a pot of gold and everyone's budget would be balanced if we just went after global tax cheats. I don't think there's a pot of gold," he said.
Achim Pross of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD said it advised countries not to take an approach that would expose taxpayers who came forward to the threat of going to prison. The club of rich nations also discouraged action that would result in individuals being liable for tax bills in excess of the total value of assets they disclosed. "By taking a more pragmatic approach, countries can build bridges back into compliance," he added.
Campaign groups have supported the new rules but noted some potential loopholes, such as the exclusion of safe deposit boxes, and raised fears that developing countries would not be able to participate because of the cost of implementing the regime.
However, the crackdown on evasion has not stopped the growth of private wealth booked in offshore centres, which grew by 7 per cent in 2014 to reach some $10tn, according to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Boston Consulting Group . But the growth, fuelled in part by a search for security in regions gripped by political and economic tensions, was slower than the expansion in overall private wealth.
The Financial Times Limited
Weak yen putting BOJ on collision course with Abe government
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Anthony Rowley
10 August 2015
Business Times Singapore
The currency is down 40% at a near 8-year low
JAPAN may be headed towards a new kind of currency crisis in which the yen becomes "too weak" against the US dollar and other currencies - rather than too strong, as in the past. And what could trigger the crisis this time may be political stresses rather than economic problems, according to some analysts.
The yen recently slid below what they claim is a critical level of 125 to the dollar, marking a plunge of 40 per cent to a near eight-year low.
Meanwhile, charges (strenuously denied by the authorities) that Japan is "targeting" a weak yen threaten to sour relations with competitor countries.
Pressure to halt the unrelentless fall in the yen's value since Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Shinzo Abe's government came to power at the end of 2012 may come not from angry trading partners, however, but from within the Abe administration, which is becoming increasingly worried about the political fallout, some say.
"We do not believe Bank of Japan governor HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Haruhiko Kuroda draws the line at a certain (dollar-yen) level but we think the Japanese government may want to draw a line to prevent further decline," said former BOJ foreign exchange specialist Tohru Sasaki.
"We believe the government is concerned about further yen weakness," added Mr Sasaki, now chief foreign exchange strategist at investment bank HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" JP Morgan. "Mr Abe and his two key economic advisers, (Etsuro) Honda and (Koichi) Hamada, have been expressing concern at the yen weakness."
The situation could pose a dilemma for the BOJ as Mr Kuroda's "missionary zeal" in pursuing a 2 per cent annual consumer price inflation target may require further yen-depreciating monetary easing, putting the central bank on a collision course with the government.
The yen's plunge (some 25 per cent since 2012 against a basket of leading currencies) is seen as being directly linked to the BOJ's massive monetary easing programme, and analysts say that further yen weakness is probable.
A growing view that the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" US Federal Reserve could begin raising interest rates from next month is likely to sustain upward pressure on the dollar while the fact that the BOJ's inflation target keeps slipping out of reach is seen by markets as likely to provoke further monetary easing in Japan by October.
Mr Kuroda has said repeatedly that he does not rule out further easing if inflation expectations do not respond to BOJ policies, and one source close to the central bank told The Business Times that the BOJ does not feel "constrained" by growing political concerns over yen weakness.
However, Mr Kuroda acknowledged last Friday in remarks after the regular monthly meeting of the central bank's policy board that while "the weak yen is positive for exports and companies operating globally, on the other hand, it hurts households and small firms via rising import costs".
Not just consumers "but also small and medium- sized corporates suffer from a weak yen", noted HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" JP Morgan's Mr Sasaki. Smaller firms employ an estimated 85 per cent of the nation's total workforce.
"Mr Abe may not want (such) factors to damage his popularity among voters all over Japan after seeing a sharp decline in the approval rate of his cabinet ahead of the (2016 parliamentary upper house) elections," he said.
Market intervention strategy in Japan is dictated by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Ministry of Finance rather than the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Bank of Japan and as a former vice-finance minister for international affairs, Mr Kuroda probably feels pulled in opposing directions, some economists say.
The central banker in him is committed to achieving the inflation target on which he has staked his reputation while the former finance ministry official in him is aware of the political risks in pursuing a target which some economists have labelled as "mission impossible".
A weak yen "is good for the Japanese economy, but probably not for Mr Abe's election prospects in 2016", said Mr Sasaki. "The number of voters who suffer from a weaker yen is probably much larger than those who benefit from it."
If the yen weakens further, "some industry groups in other partner countries may start criticising Japan", according to Mr Sasaki, and this could damage Japan's negotiating position in the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) talks.
"Because of these political reasons in domestic and international settings, we think there are relatively large risks that government officials will try to talk down the dollar-yen rate if it continues to appreciate", Mr Sasaki said.
Mr Kuroda sparked a sharp reaction in foreign exchange markets recently when he noted in parliament that the real effective exchange rate of the yen (adjusted for inflation and other factors) has now fallen back to 1985 levels
Markets took this as a signal that the BOJ felt that the yen had now fallen far enough, forcing the BOJ governor to insist that his comment was not a reference to the yen's current nominal exchange rate.
"As agreed among HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" G-7 nations, exchange rates should move in a way reflecting economic fundamentals," Mr Kuroda said last week after the BOJ policy board met. "If (rates) are moving so, it should be positive for the economy."
But, he added, "my remarks in parliament never talked about specific dollar/yen levels".
Singapore Press Holdings Limited
Financial crisis recovery: Fed rate hike won't derail economy, ex-US treasury secretary
9 August 2015
Nikkei Report
WASHINGTON -- Nearly seven years have passed since the collapse of investment bank HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Lehman Brothers in September 2008 triggered the global banking crisis. Although the U.S. was the epicenter of the debacle, its economy has been recovering steadily and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Federal Reserve is considering when to raise interest rates above zero. With the sudden drop in the Chinese stock market and the debt crisis in Greece clouding the outlook for the global economy, the timing of a rate increase is tricky.
It is still not clear whether the U.S. economy will regain its former vigor, or where the global economy is heading. The Nikkei asked HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Timothy Geithner, the former president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and U.S. treasury secretary who played a central role in dealing with the banking crisis, to shed light on these questions.
Q: Will the U.S. economy improve over the next year?
A: I'm worried about the many challenges we face. Americans still feel the scars of the [financial] crisis. But I'm actually an optimist about the U.S. I think the U.S. is a more stable economy than it was before the crisis, and our financial system is much stronger than it was. The U.S. economy is resilient and dynamic. I think there's a reasonable chance that the U.S. continues to grow at a relatively moderate pace for the next few years or so. The economists believe that the potential growth of the U.S. is somewhere close to 2%. We should be able to grow modestly above that for a period of time.
Q: When will the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Federal Reserve start raising interest rates?
A: HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" The Fed will begin to tighten when they think it makes sense. That's their judgment. I don't get to make those judgments. And their view is likely to change over time, just because the future is somewhat uncertain.
Q: How do you assess overseas risks, such as the slowdown of the Chinese economy and the Greek crisis?
A: Outside the U.S., growth is more uneven and many countries outside the U.S. are still in a much earlier stage of recovery, or they're slowing. So I agree generally that the growth from outside the U.S. is not going to be a major source of strength, and it could be a source of weakness.
China is going through this very difficult transition as they rebalance, and that has to involve a period of slower growth. And I think the reforms they're doing in China seem very-well designed to try to improve the longer-term growth prospects.
China has to go through a set of broader reforms to create a more mature market for capital. The ability to raise capital in the form of equity and bonds is an important source of strength for an economy. You have to create a framework for the capital markets that have the right level of disclosure, so that people can evaluate companies, and have a set of protections for the individual investor.
And I think the drama of the last few months just reinforces the importance of those reforms, and hopefully will help strengthen the momentum for those kinds of reforms.
In Europe, a lot of challenges remain, but I think they're in stronger shape than a few years ago, despite Greece.
Q: The spill over from higher interest rates is a serious problem for the world economy and the financial markets, isn't it?
A: It doesn't have to be that damaging to the world economy, although there's always this risk. Most countries have the independence to set monetary policy. That makes them less affected by the U.S. Fed than when most economies tied their currencies to the dollar. And the global financial system is stronger than it was. That's true in emerging economies, too, which have much higher reserve levels and better balance sheets. I think probably that the world could absorb the effects of whenever the Fed decides to move without that much damage.
Q: What kind of measures are needed to re-energize the U.S. economy?
A: What people have been talking about in Washington for years is a mix of public investments in infrastructure, education, etc., reforms to improve incentives for investment, combined with long-term fiscal reforms. We need to work to address huge disparities in access to quality education and income. The Obama administration has improved the safety net in the U.S. with reforms to health care and we are in the process of promising reforms to public education systems. That's a very good [start].
Q: Can the U.S. recapture the economic growth it had before the crisis?
A: We're in a period where people are pessimistic about growth around the world, but a lot of that pessimism is just rooted in the aftereffects of the crisis. It's a consequence of the process you have to go through to bring down debt to income, and take leverage out of the financial system, and adjust to a period of overinvestment in housing. They're good for the long run, but they tend to slow the economy in the short term. I think that a lot of the disappointments we saw were the result of those transitional headwinds. I don't think there's evidence, somehow, to support the conclusion that the U.S. has to be resigned to a longer period of much weaker growth.
Even though we're a younger country [than Japan], we also have demographic changes. Lower productivity growth has lowered estimates of our potential growth rate. Whether you are an optimist or a pessimist about the growth outlook, you should still be in favor of public investments in infrastructure, improving education and other reforms to improve growth.
Q: Another problem for the U.S. is the political gridlock. How can it cope?
A: The U.S. is a very pragmatic country, and I'm sure we'll rediscover the capacity for pragmatism political compromise again. Even in a period when people have been so concerned about the divisiveness in the political system, there's been a tremendous amount of reform through legislation, not just in the last few months on things like TPA (trade-promotion authority), but before that, on financial reform and health care reform.
Q: You published a memoir last year that explained why HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Lehman Brothers was allowed to collapse. Can you talk about that?
A: Fundamentally, our challenge is that we went into this crisis with very limited authority. The only authority that existed in September of 2008 that allowed the government of the United States to provide assistance to a nonbank was the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Federal Reserve, and its authority was very limited.
We thought the only option we had, given the financial conditions of Lehman, was to try to arrange a buyer and help facilitate an acquisition. We ran an auction, but there were very few willing buyers, in fact, only one potential [buyer] at the end, and the British authorities were unwilling to let HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Barclays buy Lehman.
Q: Did the bailout of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Bear Stearns affect the discussion?
A: The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Bear Stearns case was similar in some respects to Lehman. We chose to run an auction to find a willing buyer. The world was very fragile then, but nothing like the fragility of September 2008. So there was more willingness at that point for people to take risks. We could help facilitate the acquisition by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" JPMorgan.
The mood of the country then was against any further interventions because they did not understand how bad the crisis was at that point. It's a good lesson, because it's very dangerous to let large institutions fail in the midst of a panic.
Q: The most important thesis in your memoir is that the "moral hazard fundamentalists and Old Testament populists" were wrong to oppose the bailout. How can we ensure that financial authorities are able to take the steps needed in a crisis?
A: The instinct to let financial institutions bear the consequences of taking on too much risk is the right instinct and the right policy in a typical moderate crisis, but in times of exceptional crisis to do so is like pouring oil on a fire. You have to give the financial authorities the ability to take unpopular action to protect the nation. We had to undertake TARP (Troubled Asset Relief Program).
Before the crisis, we certainly did allow [financial institutions to accumulate] too much risk. There was a boom going on in nonbank institutions, such as securities firms and government home-loan entities, which were outside the supervisory scope of the financial regulators. There was probably too much trust mistakenly placed in the U.S. financial system because it had been relatively stable for so long. And as a result, regulations for nonbank institutions had not been strengthened.
Q: Another lesson is the need to prevent the formation and collapse of bubbles and the expansion of international imbalances, right?
A: It's important to recognize that you can't eliminate the inherent vulnerability of markets ... to financial crises. You can do a lot of things that can reduce your vulnerability to crisis and reduce the intensity of crises. You can reduce the build-up of leverage in the financial system and the risk that investments are financed in very dangerous ways. We have transformed the nature of those limitations on risk in the United States, both through the stress tests in the crisis and the subsequent reforms to capital requirements.
Ultimately, however, you can't eliminate the vulnerability [to] crises. If you want to protect the economy from crises, you still have to have the emergency authority.
Q: How do you answer critics who say the unconventional policies taken during the crisis damaged the U.S. economy and financial markets?
A: No one wanted to do them but they were vastly better than the alternative. And they made the economy much stronger. And they were effective in preventing economic collapse.
At the time, and even today, some people think that the result of those policies is going to be hyperinflation, or the end of the dollar's role in the global financial system, or the U.S. is becoming a kind of Greek economy. I think this reflects a misdiagnosis of the scale of the challenge -- and also a misunderstanding about the effect of what we did. The policies we adopted made the economy stronger, not weaker, and we allowed the weakest parts of the system and the economy to be washed away in the crisis.
The size of the financial shock to the American wealth in the fall of 2008 was about five times greater than what began the Great Depression. In this crisis, because we were much more aggressive in acting, the crisis was terribly damaging but much less damaging than it could have been and much less damaging than the Great Depression. We were worried about all the risks in what we were doing, but we tried to choose the most effective outcome to protect the economy.
Q: So you support almost every action taken during the crisis, such as the Troubled Asset Relief Program and quantitative easing?
A: Absolutely. I am very confident and fully support the decisions we made at the time.
Interviewed by Nikkei Washington Bureau Chief Hiroyuki Kotake
Nikkei Digital Media Inc.
Pacific Trade: The U.S. should protect biologic patents in the negotiating end game.
10 August 2015
The Wall Street Journal Online
The Pacific trade talks adjourned recently without a deal, but reports of their death are premature. The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), which would spur growth across 40% of the global economy, can be concluded with enough of the right compromises.
Most of the remaining disputes stem from classic protectionist special pleading. Canada, the third-largest economy in the 12-nation talks, wants to keep dairy farmers shielded from competition with measures like 241% tariffs on milk imports. U.S. dairy farmers want similar protections if they can't sell into Canada. This mercantilist domino effect, as economist Richard Katz puts it, could be a deal breaker for New Zealand, the world's largest dairy exporter, which co-founded the TPP largely to secure new markets for milk, cheese and eggs.
A big part of the problem is that Canadian leader HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Stephen Harper faces a tough re-election in October and is trying to limit his conservative party's losses in the populous dairy-producing provinces of Quebec and Ontario. A Harper loss would complicate TPP ratification in Canada's Parliament, but holding fast to dairy protectionism could scuttle the deal earlier.
Some Canadians want to delay finishing TPP until after their election, yet that hardly guarantees success. Better to make reasonable concessions on dairy imports now, then force future Ottawa leaders to weigh the burden of undoing a historic 12-nation pact for narrow domestic reasons.
Also short-sighted: The U.S. still wants to protect domestic sugar growers from Australian competition, while Mexico wants to shield auto manufacturers from Japanese competition on grounds that Japanese firms source too heavily from non-TPP countries such as Thailand. Given TPP's stakes, officials should be able to cut deals on both issues.
A more consequential trouble spot is patent protection for “biologic" pharmaceuticals—in other words, for the innovation crucial to U.S. prosperity. The U.S. wants biologic protections to last a dozen years, after which foreign firms could make generic copies.
We're told all TPP countries save Japan have joined to demand five to seven years, including Canada (where domestic law grants eight years) and Australia (five years). Well, of course they are.
Of the some 5,600 drugs in the pipeline among TPP nations, some 3,400 are being developed by U.S. companies. The other countries are ganging up in the name of cheaper drugs while undermining the incentives to make risky investments in the country where they matter. The result would be fewer cures for the world market and less U.S. growth.
The 12-year patent life written into U.S. law enjoys broad bipartisan support, and Sen. Orrin Hatch (R., Utah) and others are right to push U.S. negotiators to insist on a strong standard. There are compromises to be made, such as jiggering with a technical standard called “data exclusivity."
But the danger is that other countries are driving a hard biologics bargain to take advantage of the Obama Administration's desire for a deal before it leaves office. The biologics standard in TPP will be the template for future trade deals, and the U.S. should not casually erode American law in an industry so crucial to future growth and public health. Better to make concessions on sugar or another industry where the U.S. is protectionist rather than to capitulate on scientific discovery.
The biologics issue highlights why TPP is essential for global growth: It would be the first major trade deal to liberalize trade in services and include protections against commercial intellectual-property theft and official expropriation of assets. Such protections are essential to modern industries, from biotech and software to movies and music, that are particular strengths of America's innovative, knowledge-based economy.
TPP promises to boost global output by an estimated $285 billion over the next decade, while opening Japan's sclerotic farm and services markets, liberalizing Vietnam's growing economy and generally expanding commercial ties cross the Pacific. U.S. prices will be lower and U.S. partnerships in Asia will be strengthened. China will face pressure to liberalize its markets and improve its treatment of foreign companies if it ever wants to join TPP.
The U.S. political calendar to approve the deal is shortening as an election year approaches, but it's important to get the deal right. If a Pacific pact is going to be worth the effort, it has to protect the fruits of innovation in the information economy.
Dow Jones & Company, Inc.
Peru: TPP no incrementará el periodo de 20 años de protección a las patentes
9 August 2015
Gestión Online
El viceministro de Comercio Exterior, Edgar Vásquez, aclaró que el Perú no está negociando en el TPP ninguna ampliación del periodo de protección de las patentes.
El Ministerio de Comercio Exterior y Turismo (Mincetur) informó hoy que el Acuerdo de Asociación Transpacífico (TPP) no aumentará el periodo de 20 años de protección de patentes, que se refiere no solo para los productos farmacéuticos, sino para todo producto que sea patentable.
El viceministro de Comercio Exterior, Edgar Vásquez, indicó que el Perú tiene una regulación sobre protección de patentes que data de 1993, es decir, que es previa a su participación en la HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Organización Mundial de Comercio (OMC) y en el Tratado de Libre Comercio (TLC) con Estados Unidos.
“Consecuentemente, el TPP no tiene nada que ver con la imposición del período de patente que actualmente el Perú protege. Estos 20 años con el TPP no van a ser afectados”, declaró en RPP Noticias.
Vásquez también enfatizó que no se está negociando ninguna ampliación del período de 20 años.
“Se está señalando erróneamente que el Perú va a proteger 32 años las patentes y eso es algo que no es correcto y que ni siquiera se está planteando en el proceso de negociación”, añadió.
El viceministro agregó que similares preocupaciones e interrogantes se presentaron durante las negociaciones del TLC entre Perú y Estados Unidos.
“Exactamente los mismos asuntos que se levantaron en aquella oportunidad, que el Perú iba a sufrir desabastecimiento de medicinas y que los precios de las medicinas iban a subir hasta la estratósfera, ahora los están volviendo a repetir, con los mismos mensajes pero sin ninguna información concreta”, anotó.
Explicó que desde que entró en vigencia el TLC con Estados Unidos, entre el 2010 y el 2014, según datos del INEI, el índice de precios de productos farmacéuticos en el Perú se elevó 2.8% como promedio anual, cifra menor a la inflación registrada en dicho periodo, que fue 3.3% anual.
“Además, el mercado farmacéutico en el sector retail creció 35%, y las importaciones se incrementaron en 40%. Es decir, hay cada vez mayor posibilidad de abastecerse de medicamentos y creo que eso es evidente en la expansión de las cadenas de farmacias, cosa que no se veía 10 años atrás”, aseveró.
Vásquez aseguró también que dentro “del ordenamiento multilateral de la OMC y sus acuerdos asociados, en particular el acuerdo sobre Aspectos de los Derechos de Propiedad Intelectual Relacionados al Comercio (ADPIC), existen flexibilidades en relación a los derechos de propiedad intelectual, como las licencias obligatorias, que en casos de interés nacional, urgencia o seguridad nacional pueden utilizarse para permitir el ingreso de mayor competencia en el mercado”.
“Ni el TLC con Estados Unidos ni el TPP, ni ningún otro acuerdo comercial del Perú, que esté vigente o en negociación, tiene una sola línea que afecte el derecho soberano del Perú de utilizar estos mecanismos. Por supuesto, en caso de extrema urgencia y de una manera sustentada”, concluyó.
Prensa Popular S.A.C
END
 
Josep Bosch, Information Officer
Information and External Relations Division
+41227395681
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.