Australia, India move closer to FTA deal
China pushing limit with coal quality tests
India on brink of "quantum leap", Modi tells investors
Paper industry asks govt to help domestic cos
Chinese ministry to help dairy farmers amid milk dumping, cow killing
South American nations struggle to find new economic model
 
Australia, India move closer to FTA deal 
 
CANBERRA, Jan. 12 (Xinhua) -- Australia and India are edging ever closer to a historic free trade agreement, according to Australian trade and investment minister Andrew Robb.

A delegation of around 400 Australians recently accompanied Robb to Gujarat, the home state of Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi, where Robb told News Ltd. the "first round of substantive discussions towards a free trade agreement with India" was held.

Robb was involved in short, but positive talks with Modi, before revealing to The Australian on Monday that the Indian leader "was adamant that the deal is achievable this year".

The news came less than two months after Modi visited Australia for the G20 summit in Brisbane, where both he and Australian Prime Minister Tony Abbott sought to agree on a free trade deal by the end of 2015.

Such agreements would involve strengthening ties relating to mining investment, clean coal technology, counter terrorism, extending defence cooperation and important extensions to strong education links.

Australia has already invested close to 5.7 billion U.S. dollars in India, who in turn has invested nearly 9 billion dollars back into the Australian economy.

Those figures include 7.7 million dollars worth of Australian goods purchased by India in 2013 alone, with a further 1 billion dollars spent on education in Australia.

Furthermore, according to Robb,"it was obvious at the talks that Modi deeply values the Australian relationship".

A free trade agreement with India will represent another signification coup for the Australian government, following deals with China, Japan and South Korea throughout 2014.

 
China pushing limit with coal quality tests 
Amanda Saunders 
12 January 2015
The Australian Financial Review
 
Australian coal miners are concerned China could be misusing new import quality restrictions that came into effect this month to favour its struggling local coal industry. If China is taking extra licence with testing of its new import quality thresholds, it will affect Australian producers' ability to sell coal into the world's largest market.

Minerals Council of Australia chief executive Brendan Pearson said there appeared to be game playing at Chinese ports over the new rules.

Industry sources said Australian coal is being tested for elements outside of the sulphur and ash content thresholds announced, and Chinese customs officers are threatening to slap penalties on shipments.

"We would be very concerned if the new standards were used as a mechanism for favouring domestic producers, because that would breach China's commitments under the World Trade Organisation," Mr Pearson said.

"It could be just be teething issues – but if it turns out there are blatant breaches, it is very important that any of these practices are stamped out right at the beginning."

The new ban covers imports of coal with more than 16 per cent ash and 3 per cent sulphur to two of China's most polluted regions – the Yangtze River Delta, near Shanghai and the Pearl River Delta, near Hong Kong. The restrictions already apply in the Beijing-Tianjin region. Improving air quality is part of the rationale for the change, but some Australian miners suspect the main game might be propping up China's struggling domestic coal industry.

When the new standards were unveiled in September, Australian miners thought they could work in its favour by edging out poorer-quality competition.

Australian coal is generally of higher quality than its main export competitors – Indonesia and South Africa, and most domestic Chinese producers.

But industry sources said the tests being applied since the new rules came into effect on January 1 appeared to go beyond the original ban.

If shipments are hit with penalties for falling foul of testing, the MCA said it would be akin to a tariff. "We would be very concerned if the penalty became a de facto tariff charge," Mr Pearson said.

Queensland Resources Council chief executive Michael Roche said that perhaps there were "not as clear-cut benefits to Australian producers after all".

The new restrictions were being tested randomly, making Australian exporters nervous, he said.

"The coal-quality testing process in China is arbitrary and seemingly being used to favour local producers," Mr Roche said. "This is making Australian producers nervous. The process at the Chinese end is creating uncertainty for everyone trying to export thermal coal into China."Raising problem with Abbott government

The MCA, which is the country's top mining body, is planning to take the issue to key Abbott government ministers, some of whom are already aware of the shaky start to the roll-out.

"We are very confident that the Australian government will remind China of its obligations under the WTO ," Mr Pearson said.

The fresh uncertainty comes as industry bodies said some Indonesian exporters have turned down coal orders from China to avoid falling foul of the new guidelines on poorer-quality coal. Indonesia is the world's biggest thermal coal exporter, followed by Australia. Less than two weeks into the new thresholds coming into effect, several shipments in Indonesia have been held back, Mr Roche said.

Indonesia can compete on costs with Australian coal – quality is the key differentiator.

He said Indonesian suppliers have turned down orders from China, rather than send their coal cargoes to fail the quality test when they arrive at port in China. "It is creating a bit of mischief with the Indonesian market," Mr Roche said. "It is in line with our prediction on the impacts of new Chinese quality control – that if they were going to hit anyone, it would be the Indonesians."

But the erratic start to the enforcement of the new rules has taken the Australian industry by surprise. Local coal miners are already reeling from a prolonged period of depressed prices and high costs. Thermal coal has crashed to about $US62 a tonne from $US135 a tonne three years ago.

Australia exports about 48 million tonnes of thermal coal to China each year, which is about a quarter of the 200 million tonnes of thermal coal it ships annually. When China unveiled its new quality thresholds, Australia's Bureau of Resource Economics said they could affect up to 25 million tonnes of coal sold each year.

The level of ash can be reduced through washing or blending the coal, but it could cost up to an additional $US4 a tonne at a time when the industry is immersed in a sea of red ink.

Industry observers say China is unlikely to wear the extra cost of getting sub-quality coal up to the required standard. Thermal coal is used mostly to generate electricity, and is China's chief source of energy.
 
 
India on brink of "quantum leap", Modi tells investors 
By Rupam Jain Nair and Aman Shah

GANDHINAGAR, India, Jan 11 (Reuters) - Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi promised on Sunday to pursue predictable policies and ensure stable taxes, in a speech that sought to address concerns for foreign investors in Asia's third-largest economy.

U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry led a roll call of leaders, including U.N. Secretary General Ban Ki-moon and World Bank head Jim Yong Kim, converging on Modi's home town of Gandhinagar for the Vibrant Gujarat business summit.

U.S. President Barack Obama visits India later this month.

Eight months into Modi's rule, his failure to lift the economy from its longest growth slowdown in a generation has raised questions about how much substance there is behind his promise of "red carpet, not red tape".

"We're trying to complete the circle of economic reforms speedily," Modi told the event that he founded when he was chief minister of the industrial state.

"We are also keen to see that our policies are predictable. We're clear that our tax regime should be stable," Modi said, speaking in English but making the occasional aside in Hindi.

Along with speakers from Japan, Canada and Singapore, Kerry praised his host and avoided direct criticism. But he hinted at the need to cut back India's stifling bureaucracy.

"We no longer live in a world where a country is going to be competitive if its bureaucracy sends people from door to door and window to window and meeting to meeting," he said.

PROMISED DEALS

Modi spoke on Sunday of the achievements he hopes will help lift hundreds of millions of Indians out of poverty, including the opening of more than 100 million bank accounts, a 'Make in India' campaign to promote manufacturing, and plans to expand the rail, road, energy and digital networks.

"We are planning to take a quantum leap," the 64-year-old leader said.

Among the deals announced was a $4 billion agreement between U.S.-based solar power firm SunEdison and Indian conglomerate Adani Enterprises, to build one of India's largest solar panel makers.

Vibrant Gujarat, held every two years, has yielded billions of dollars in investment promises, though only a fraction of the deals announced have come to fruition.

Modi aims to lift stagnant capital investment that has held back India's growth to 5.3 percent. That is expected to accelerate this year to 6.4 percent, said the World Bank's Kim, who called India a "bright spot" in a mediocre global landscape.

Mukesh Ambani, India's richest man with a fortune estimated at $19.7 billion, said his Reliance Industries conglomerate would invest 1 trillion rupees ($16 billion) in Gujarat over the next year to 18 months.

Sam Walsh, CEO of global mining giant Rio Tinto, flagged two potential projects including a $2 bln iron ore project in Odisha state. Woodside Petroleum <WPL.AX > CEO Peter Coleman, whose firm signed an agreement with Adani to explore sourcing and marketing of liquefied natural gas, said there were fiscal improvements to be made, though also potential.

"Is India open for business? We believe it is," he said.

Modi has made headway on making it easier for outsiders to invest more in real estate, insurance and defence, but a rigid labour market and rotten infrastructure are huge deterrents.

India slipped to 142nd out of 189 in the World Bank's latest Doing Business Index. Modi wants India in the top 50.

"Investors want credibility, stability and at the same time flexibility. Right now, India is a bit of an inflexible market," said Kilbinder Dosanjh, a director for Asia at Eurasia Group, a geopolitical risk consultancy. ($1 = 62.3450 Indian rupees) (Additional reporting by Arshad Mohammed; Writing by Douglas Busvine and Clara Ferreira Marques,; Editing by Angus MacSwan) 
 
 
Paper industry asks govt to help domestic cos 
 
New Delhi, Jan 9 (PTI) Measures like putting in place a safeguard mechanism against rising cheap imports would help the Indian paper industry to grow at a much faster pace, industry body IPMA said today.

Indian Paper Manufacturers Association (IPMA) outgoing President Yogesh Agarwal also said the industry has the potential to contribute significantly to the 'Make in India' campaign.

It asked the "government to put in place safeguards against rising import of cheaply priced paper".

Under the India-ASEAN free trade agreement, import duties paper and paperboards have being progressively reduced and the basic customs duty has come down to nil which has led to a surge in imports, it added.

Shortage of raw material and higher costs are also impacting the profitability of domestic industry, it added.

"In the given measure of global competitiveness, the domestic paper industry is at a significant disadvantage since it has no access to captive plantation in India to manage raw material availability and cost, while global players have in-built advantage of conducive plantation policies and ability to procure wood at favourable cost," IPMA said in a statement.

Domestic consumption of paper in the country currently is 13.10 million tons per annum (TPA). Per capita consumption is around 11 kg, while the global average is 56 kg.

"By 2024-25, under the baseline scenario, domestic paper consumption is projected to rise to 23.50 million TPA," it said, adding about one million TPA of integrated pulp, paper and paperboards capacity is required to get created in India on an annual basis to meet the growing demand.

"However with cheap imports impacting the market, it is feared that most of the demand will be met by imports," it said.

The annual turnover of the industry in India is estimated to be Rs 50,000 crore. It provides direct employment to 0.5 million people and indirectly to around 1.5 million. PTI RR KSR
 
 
Chinese ministry to help dairy farmers amid milk dumping, cow killing 
 
BEIJING, Jan. 11 (Xinhua) -- The Ministry of Agriculture (MOA) said Sunday that it would help dairy farmers in northern China who have resorted to throwing out milk and killing their cows through lack of sales avenues.

The ministry encourages dairy firms to increase purchasing, starts dairy production monitoring on a weekly basis, and strengthens policy support for the dairy industry, the ministry said in a statement.

The ministry said it had talked to major dairy firms including Inner Mongolia Yili Industrial Group and Mengniu Dairy Group, and urged them to purchase more milk, stabilize prices and safeguard interest of dairy farmers.

The ministry will work together with other central government departments including the Ministry of Finance to map out more supportive policies to help dairy farmers to overcome their plight, it said.

"A tonne of milk has to be discarded each day," dairy farmer Pei Shuke in east China's Shandong Province said. "This desperate thing rarely happened before."

Similar cases have spread to other major milk-producing areas in China, including Hebei and Inner Mongolia. Slumping milk prices since the second half of 2014 have pushed many dairy farmers to desperation.

Milk prices fell for ten consecutive months starting in February 2014. In the first three quarters of last year, they dived to 3.84 yuan per kg from 4.26 yuan per kg, and the trend showed no signs of stopping in the last three months of 2014.

The dairy sector downturn has come as a surprise to many. In late 2013, China's dairy products saw a price hike following a production decrease caused by disease and farmers leaving the industry. Milk prices jumped to more than 5 yuan (0.8 U.S. dollars) per kilogram in December 2013 from 3.4 yuan per kg a year earlier.

The dairy boom sent ripples of excitement through the sector, with farmers purchasing large numbers of dairy cows at high prices to boost production.

But the boom proved to be a flash in the pan. In March 2014, foreign milk prices began to fall drastically due to overproduction. Many dairy companies resorted to cheap overseas sources and limited purchases from domestic suppliers, causing dairy prices to dip to new lows.

 
South American nations struggle to find new economic model
John Paul Rathbone in London and Joe Leahy in São Paulo
 
Four years ago, when the China-driven commodity price boom was in full swing and south-south ties were all the rage, Dilma Rousseff began her first term as Brazil’s president with a symbolic gesture — jetting off to Beijing.

Now, as commodity prices collapse alongside China’s slowing economy, Ms Rousseff has begun her second presidential term by saying she wants to rebuild relations with Washington. She has barely mentioned Beijing.

The shift reflects broader changes in South America’s commodity-dependent economies, where the abrupt collapse in energy, food and metals prices has opened up dangerous trade and financing gaps that could force deep economic and political change.

In Colombia and Peru, where commodities account for two-thirds of exports, current account deficits are forecast to reach 5 per cent of gross domestic product this year — a level not seen since the 1990s when the region was associated with default.

Soya-rich Argentina and oil-producing Venezuela are suffering from dwindling foreign reserves. As for Brazil, where commodities account for 60 per cent of exports, its trade deficit last year widened to $4bn — the same as in 1999, when Brazil was sucked into a global emerging-markets crisis.

“I am very worried. In fact I have been worried for years,” said José Antonio Ocampo, a professor at Columbia University in New York and a former Colombian finance minister. “Commodity prices?.?.?.?were bound to fall, sooner or later.”

Even in 2008, when commodity prices peaked, South America ran a combined current account deficit equivalent to 1 per cent of GDP. Now the situation is far worse. Should prices drop to 2003 levels, the region’s current account deficit would be about 7 per cent of GDP, Mr Ocampo estimates. 
 
The challenge of financing this gap, equivalent to about $350bn, poses the region’s “greatest risk”, he says. 
 
Although the whole region is affected, there is a spectrum of concern. At one extreme are spendthrifts such as Venezuela, where investors fear a bond default following the halving of the price of oil, which accounts for 96 per cent of its exports. Last week, Caracas turned to Beijing for a bailout. 
 
At the other are more prudent countries, such as Chile and Peru, which have ample fiscal and hard currency reserves. Brazil lies between.
 
“Investors are discriminating, so I don’t expect contagion from any Venezuelan default,” said Neil Shearing of Capital Economics consultancy. “There are also several reasons why a 1980s-style debt bust is unlikely.”

The first is improved economic policy making, especially the use of floating exchange rates, which act as a buffer. The Brazilian, Colombian and Chilean currencies have dropped more than a quarter in the past two years. “In some ways, investors have already panicked,” said Mr Shearing.

However, Argentina and Venezuela have fixed exchange rates, while oil-exporting Ecuador is dollarised. Elsewhere, weaker currencies can close trade gaps by boosting exports. 
 
Rapid depreciation also feeds inflation, however, prompting central banks to raise interest rates, which slows the economy. This has been Brazil’s experience.

You have to understand that commodities are subject to deep cycles. Don’t get too carried away during the good years
- Alberto Ramos, Goldman Sachs economist

“It is a marathon,” said Alberto Ramos, an economist at Goldman Sachs. “[Brazil’s] adjustment could last more than a year.”

Another reason is that most of the region has low debt and enjoys access to abundant international liquidity to plug financing gaps. “I am optimistic here,” said Mr Ocampo.

Yet, although South America attracted copious foreign investment in the past decade, reaching $188bn last year, more than a third has been into mining and energy. Such investments could now dry up.

Furthermore, high foreign reserves do not always offer protection for indebted corporates when currencies plunge — as Russia shows.

South American companies have about $300bn of hard currency bonds, according to Bank of America, a figure dominated by Brazil’s Petrobras, where a corruption scandal has locked the state oil company and some subcontractors out of capital markets.
 
The broad implications for South America from this new state of affairs are threefold. First, belt-tightening will slow growth. Brazil is cutting public spending by 2 per cent of GDP, while Colombia has increased taxes to cover revenue shortfalls. “Slower growth is the new normal,” said Mr Shearing.

Second, the region needs a new post-boom economic model, especially if local manufacturing were to be hollowed out by cheap Chinese imports. Greater economic orthodoxy may result.

“You have to understand that commodities are subject to deep cycles,” said Mr Ramos. “Don’t get too carried away during the good years.”

Third, there may be a re-emphasis on north-south trade ties that languished during the commodity bonanza. Ms Rousseff’s desire to improve US relations — and even Washington’s rapprochement with Cuba, as the latter’s benefactor, Venezuela, bounces off the ropes — may be two early signs of this.
