New team in India to grapple with complex trade talks at WTO
US extends anti-dumping duty on Indian mushrooms for 5 years
South Africa's economy is ill, admits President Zuma
Australian unions decry China free trade deal for fear of cheap labor
New Zealand fighting Indonesia trade curbs
APEC advances regional connectivity in Cebu gab
A stronger Indian-American alliance? 
Por trabas de Argentina ya se perdieron 2.300 empleos
 
New team in India to grapple with complex trade talks at WTO
Sidhartha 
31 August 2015
The Times of India
NEW DELHI: With just over 100 days to go for the crucial ministerial meeting of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization in Nairobi, the commerce department finds itself with a new set of negotiators to grapple with the complex talks.
In addition, several tricky bilateral deals are in the pipeline with negotiations for the high stakes Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) and the free trade agreements with Australia and Canada entering critical phase.
Around 60 days ago, Rita A Teaotia took over as the new commerce secretary, replacing HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Rajeev Kher whose nine-year stint in the trade department ended on his superannuation. On Friday, the government moved J S Deepak to the department of IT as the new secretary on promotion. Deepak dealt with multilateral talks and was a crucial link in India renegotiating the deal on farm subsidies in return for a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO agreement on trade facilitation. He also led the dialogue on bilateral trade agreements and was a key trade strategist in the government.
Similarly, JS Dadoo, who was dealing with the proposed trade agreement with Australia has been replaced by Arvind Mehta, an old commerce department hand, who now has to deal with the pressure from Down Under to free trade in farm and dairy products. Among the senior members of the trade policy division that deals with HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO issues, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Sudhanshu Pandey will be the sole survivor from the Bali ministerial meeting when the Indian team lands for talks in Nairobi in December.
Officials reckon the changes, which are routine, necessitate the need for a core team of negotiators to be in place so that India's trade interests are adequately pursued. While there is a lot of focus on a bloated bureaucracy, when it comes to crucial areas such as trade talks, the government has followed an HR policy that goes back to the days of GATT (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's predecessor), they said. Officials have often complained of not only the team being severely short-staffed but also inexperienced. "By the time you learn the ropes, it's time to move on to the next assignment," complained a former trade negotiator. Bennett, Coleman & Co., Ltd.

US extends anti-dumping duty on Indian mushrooms for 5 years
30 August 2015
Press Trust of India
New Delhi, Aug 30 (PTI) The United States has extended the anti-dumping duty on Indian preserved mushrooms for another five years.
The move would impact domestic exporters as the US is a major export destination for India.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" US International Trade Commission (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" USITC) has "determined that revoking the existing anti-dumping duty orders on preserved mushrooms from Chile, China, India, and Indonesia are likely to lead to continuation or recurrence of material injury within a reasonably foreseeable time.
"As a result of the Commission's affirmative determinations, the existing orders on imports of this product from Chile, China, India, and Indonesia will remain in place".
An official here has also confirmed that the restrictive duty has been extended on the Indian commodity for five years.
In 2014-15, India exported mushrooms worth USD 16.08 million and during April-May this fiscal the exports aggregated at USD 1.63 million.
India's mushroom exports to the US declined to USD 0.11 million in 2014-15 from USD 24.76 million in 2011-12.
According to a report, the global mushroom production in 2009 was 2.4 million tonnes. China is a leading player in terms of production.
As per estimates, India produced 40,600 tonnes of mushroom in 2009-10.
Punjab, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan and Jammu & Kashmir are the major states which are producing the commodity. Solan in Himachal Pradesh is popular as 'Mushroom City of India'.
Major export destinations for Indian mushroom are the US, UAE, Russia and Israel.
'Preserved mushrooms' refer to mushrooms that have been prepared or preserved by cleaning, blanching, and sometimes slicing and cutting.
Mushrooms are very nutritious, rich in proteins, fibre and have folic acid content that is uncommon in vegetables and amino acids which are usually absent in cereals.
At present, the per capita consumption of mushroom in India is a dismal 40-50 gm as compared to 2-3 kg in the US and Europe.
Anti-dumping duties vary from product to product and from country to country. Countries initiate anti-dumping probes to check if domestic industry has been hurt because of a surge in below-cost imports. As a counter-measure, they impose duties under the multilateral HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO regime. Press Trust Of India Limited

South Africa's economy is ill, admits President Zuma
31 August 2015
The Mercury
First new power station in 20 years comes on stream
PRESIDENT HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Jacob Zuma yesterday acknowledged that the South African economy was "sick" as he launched the first unit of Eskom's new Medupi power station in Limpopo.
Zuma threw down the gauntlet to labour and business to put the country first as the domestic and global economies faced headwinds. "Should we not come together and recognise the economy is sick? You cannot say it is business as usual when the economy is sick… Should we not talk about business and labour tightening the belt?" asked Zuma.
The country's economy moved close to recession, which is a drop in gross domestic product (GDP) in two consecutive quarters, in the second quarter with GDP contracting by 1.3 percent after growing by 1.3 percent in the previous quarter. 
Two of South Africa's partners in the Brics group of five countries, Russia and Brazil, are both already in recession. Statistics SA figures showed that only the government, transport and retail sectors had grown in the second quarter while agriculture, mining and manufacturing declined.
The mining and manufacturing sectors, in particular steel, have announced plans to cut thousands of jobs amid declining commodity prices and subdued demand from China.
The rand's decline, which saw the unit hit record lows to the dollar last week, is also a headache for the economy.
"If the private sector says let us cut labour because the economy is not doing well, I don't think it is good," Zuma said.
"With regard to labour, for it to say we don't care what happens, we want higher wages. This will impact on the government," he added.
The first Medupi unit, known as unit 6, will add 794 megawatts of power to the national grid and is the first new power station to open in South Africa in 20 years. Its planned operational life is 50 years. Once completed it would be the fourth-largest coal-fired plant and the largest dry-cooled power station in the world, the government said.
Zuma said that while energy shortages remained a "serious challenge" for South Africa, the opening of the Medupi unit showed progress was being made. "Shortage of energy does not only cause enormous inconvenience, it is a serious impediment to economic growth," Zuma said.
"Pressure is being alleviated. There is light at the end of the tunnel," Zuma said.
"There's no time to waste," Zuma said, adding that the utility appreciated the need to bring the rest of the station online without further delay. "We must move faster as a country."
The first of six units at the plant will help Eskom address blackouts that have hobbled South Africa's economy for 99 days this year. Its launch also came after 22 days of no power cuts at Eskom despite the Koeberg power station being shut for maintenance.
However, South Africa is not yet out of the woods.
"We are not saying there will be no load shedding. We will keep load shedding to a minimum," Eskom acting chief executive HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Brian Molefe told journalists yesterday on the sidelines of the launch.
The utility would adhere to strict project management principles to avoid delays and cost overruns that saw Medupi power station's price tag swell to R105 billion, he added.
The increase in the budget is due to labour disputes and construction delays and mean that the project was now due for completion in 2019, seven years behind schedule.
"We will ensure that timelines are adhered to," he said.
Medupi, which saw construction start in May 2007 to address power shortages, was delayed by a seven-week long unprotected strike last year over bonuses, which threatened to prolong load shedding.
Abram Masango, Eskom's executive for group capital, blamed under-estimation for the escalation of costs at Medupi. Masango noted that only 10 percent of the costs at Medupi had increased as a result of cost overruns, adding that it was normal for costs to escalate in capital projects. - Additional reporting by Bloomberg and Reuters. Independent Online

Australian unions decry China free trade deal for fear of cheap labor

31 August 2015
Nikkei Report
Australian labor unions are protesting the free trade agreement Australia and China signed in June, putting out TV commercials in hopes of galvanizing opposition to a possible influx of Chinese workers and stopping the parliament from ratifying the treaty.
Both countries are adamant that the deal cannot be amended. Still, the government of Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Tony Abbott, which hopes to get the accord ratified by the end of the year, will likely face tough negotiations with the opposition Labor Party.
In a commercial paid for by the militant HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union, or CFMEU, an elderly Australian man sits with his blue-collar son, daughter-in-law and grandchildren at the dining table.
The man says he can't believe Australia has signed a free trade agreement with China. When his son asks why he is upset, the man says workers brought into the country by Chinese companies will take jobs from Australians. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Australian Council of Trade Unions, or HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" ACTU, an umbrella group that includes the CFMEU, organized demonstrations against the trade deal across Australia in July and August.
Help (not) wanted
Fliers distributed by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" ACTU claim low-skilled, underpaid foreign workers with poor English will flood into Australia if the agreement goes through, and that 158,000 Australians will lose their jobs because the government has made it much easier for Chinese workers to get visas.
The government dismisses the labor unions' dire predictions as a fabrication. Foreigners seeking a work permit are generally required to show that there are no Australians available to do the job. The government insists that although the trade agreement changed some procedures for visa applications, Chinese workers will be hired at the same wages and under the same working conditions as their Australian counterparts.
The Labor Party, which spent a long time negotiating the free trade pact with China while it was in power, will not oppose ratification. But it hopes to amend the deal to make visa screening stricter. It says it will review the deal when it is back in power
Although Abbott's Liberal-National government accuses the labor movement of unfairly attacking Chinese workers, the labor union protests have garnered some public support. For decades, the country's "White Australia Policy" favored European immigrants over those from elsewhere. The policy ended in the 1970s, and now China is Australia's largest trading partner. Still, many in the country are leery of Chinese workers.
Australia is also having a hard time in the negotiations for the Trans-Pacific Partnership, a trade pact with 11 other Pacific nations. The deal with China is more of a priority than the TPP, according to Andrew Robb, the trade minister.
Beijing, for its part, is driving a hard bargain. A high-ranking Chinese official told an Australian newspaper that Beijing is opposed to any changes in the pact and would demand additional concessions if discussions are reopened. Nikkei Digital Media Inc.
New Zealand fighting Indonesia trade curbs
Christopher Adams in Jakarta 
31 August 2015
The New Zealand Herald
New Zealand is prepared to fight for “the principles of trade” in its beef battle with Indonesia, says our ambassador to the Southeast Asian nation.
This year, NZ and the US requested that a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation dispute settlement panel assess the import restrictions that led to a collapse in Kiwi beef exports to the world’s most populous Muslim nation.
Indonesia, which was previously New Zealand’s second-biggest beef export market, introduced the restrictions in 2011 as part of a programme aimed at becoming self-sufficient in a number of agricultural products.
The non-tariff barrier saw the value of New Zealand beef and offal exports slump to $48.8 million in 2012 from $185 million in 2010.
Exports recovered last year following relaxation of the import quotas, but a subsequent resumption of restrictions resulted in New Zealand beef exports tumbling to only 28 tonnes in January this year compared with 2269 tonnes in the same month a year earlier, according to Meat Industry Association figures.
“We’re prepared to fight for what we think are the principles of trade,” said ambassador to Indonesia Trevor Matheson. “These are not just principles that we have chosen out of the sky — these are principles that Indonesia accepted by becoming a member of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO.”
NZ has a free-trade agreement with Indonesia through its combined FTA with Australia and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Association of Southeast Asian Nations, which came into force in 2010.
The import restrictions have hit the wallets of Indonesian consumers.
“The price of beef here is double the world price,” Matheson said. “We’ve made those representations to Indonesian ministers and officials that it’s hard to understand how such policies benefit their own people.”
Indonesian Trade Minister Rachmat Gobel lost the portfolio this month after outrage over the price spike. His successor, Thomas Lembong, has indicated beef imports could rise, but only “if necessary”.
New Zealand’s Trade Commissioner in Jakarta, Tim Anderson, said previously strong exports of beef offal products to Indonesia had been a “game-changer” for Kiwi exporters. However, the import restrictions had made companies wary of the country, he said. New Zealand exports to Indonesia were worth $886 million in 2013. Christopher Adams is being hosted in Indonesia by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Asia New Zealand Foundation. 
APEC advances regional connectivity in Cebu gab
30 August 2015
Manila Bulletin
Senior officials of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" APEC) will have a meeting of the “Friends of the Chair on Connectivity” on 03 September in Cebu at the side-lines of the Third Senior Officials' Meeting to discuss member economies' progress on the first-year implementation of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" APEC Connectivity Blueprint for 2015-2025.
Launched by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" APEC Leaders in 2014, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" APEC Connectivity Blueprint was developed to guide the region's cross-cutting and inclusive efforts toward a vision for a “seamlessly and comprehensively connected and integrated Asia-Pacific balanced on three pillars - physical connectivity, institutional connectivity, and people-to-people connectivity.”
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" APEC's Connectivity Blueprint maps out initiatives that make it easier to do business across and within borders, such as improved transportation and telecommunications infrastructure as well as modernized customs regimes that are responsive to market and technological demands. Similarly, the Blueprint calls for economies to make it easier for students, business persons, and tourists to travel around the region.
At the special meeting on connectivity this September, Senior officials are expected to welcome the progress made by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" APEC sub-fora and members alike on their respective initiatives and projects towards the shared vision of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" APEC Connectivity by 2025. Using a comprehensive approach, all HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" APEC stakeholders are encouraged to apply the blueprint to their respective initiatives. Manila Bulletin Publishing Corp
A stronger Indian-American alliance? 
Joseph Nye 
31 August 2015
TODAY (Singapore)
When Indian Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Narendra Modi invited United States President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Barack Obama to attend his country’s Republic Day ceremonies earlier this year, it signalled an important change in relations between the world’s two biggest democracies.
Ever since the 1990s, three American administrations have tried to improve bilateral relations, with mixed results. While annual trade between the countries has soared during this period, from US$20 billion (S$28 billion) to more than US$100 billion, annual US-China trade is worth six times more, and the political relationship has had ups and downs.
The two countries have a long history of confusing each other. By definition, any alliance with a superpower is unequal; so efforts to establish close ties with the US have long run up against India’s tradition of strategic autonomy. But Americans do not view democratic India as a threat. On the contrary, India’s success is an important US interest, and several factors promise a brighter future for the bilateral relationship.
The most important factor is the acceleration in India’s economic growth, which the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" International Monetary Fund projects will exceed 7.5 per cent through 2020.
For decades, India suffered from what some called the “Hindu rate of economic growth”: A little more than 1 per cent a year. It might more properly have been called a 1930s British socialist rate of growth. After independence in 1947, India adopted an inward-looking planning system that focused on heavy industry.
Market-oriented reforms in the early 1990s changed that pattern, and annual growth accelerated to 7 per cent under the Congress party, before slumping to 5 per cent. Since the 2014 general election brought Mr Modi’s Bharatiya Janata Party to power, the government has reversed the slowdown.
And prospects for continued growth are strong. India has an emerging middle class of several hundred million, and English is an official language spoken by some 50 to 100 million. Building on that base, Indian information industries are able to play a major global role.
Moreover, with a population of 1.2 billion people, India is four times larger than the US, and likely to surpass China by 2025. Its sheer scale will be increasingly important not only to the global economy, but also to balancing China’s influence in Asia and managing global issues such as climate change, public health, and cybersecurity.
India also has significant military power, with an estimated 90 to 100 nuclear weapons, intermediate-range missiles, 1.3 million military personnel and an annual military expenditure of nearly US$50 billion (3 per cent of the world total).
And, in terms of soft power, India has an established democracy, an influential diaspora and a vibrant popular culture with transnational influence. Bollywood produces more films every year than any other country, outcompeting Hollywood in parts of Asia and the Middle East.
COMPETING WITH CHINA
But one should not underestimate India’s problems. Population alone is not a source of power unless those human resources are developed, and India has lagged well behind China in terms of literacy and economic growth.
Despite its progress, around a third of India’s population lives in conditions of acute poverty, making the country home to a third of the world’s poor. India’s US$2 trillion GDP is only a fifth of China’s US$10 trillion, and a ninth of America’s US$17.5 trillion (measured at market exchange rates).
Likewise, India’s annual per capita income of US$1,760 is just one-fifth that of China’s. Even more striking, while 95 per cent of the Chinese population is literate, the proportion for India is only 74 per cent — and only 65 per cent for women.
A symptom of this problem is India’s poor performance in international comparisons of universities, with none ranked among the world’s top 100. The nation’s high-tech exports are only 5 per cent of its total exports, compared with 30 per cent for China.
India is unlikely to develop the power to become a global challenger to the US in the first half of this century. Indeed, even in terms of soft power, a recent study by the Portland Consultancy in London placed India outside the top 30 countries. China ranked 30th, and the US came in third, behind the United Kingdom and Germany.
Nonetheless, India has considerable assets that already affect the balance of power in Asia. While India and China signed agreements in 1993 and 1996 that promised a peaceful settlement of the border dispute that led them to war in l962, the issue has heated up again, following Chinese actions in recent years.
India and China are fellow members of the BRICS (along with Brazil, Russia, and South Africa). But cooperation within that caucus is limited. While Indian officials are often discreet in public about relations with China, and wisely want bilateral trade and investment to grow, their security concerns remain acute. As part of the group of Asian countries that will tend to balance China, India has already begun to strengthen its diplomatic relations with Japan.
It would be a mistake to cast the prospects for an improved US-India relationship solely in terms of China’s rising power. Indian economic success is an American interest on its own. So is the open approach taken by India and Brazil on issues such as governance of the Internet, at a time when Russia and China are seeking more authoritarian control.
No one should expect an Indian-American alliance any time soon, given historical Indian public opinion. But one can predict a relationship in the coming years that will be both sui generis and stronger. PROJECT SYNDICATE
ABOUT THE AUTHOR: Joseph Nye, a former US assistant secretary of defence and chairman of the US National Intelligence Council, is University Professor at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Harvard University and a member of the World Economic Forum Global Agenda Council on the Future of Government. He is the author, most recently, of Is the American Century Over?. MediaCorp Press Ltd
Por trabas de Argentina ya se perdieron 2.300 empleos
El País - Uruguay 
29 August 2015
Las restricciones a las importaciones que aplica el gobierno kirchnerista generaron una caída del empleo de 46% en las industrias que producen bienes para el mercado argentino.
Los industriales marcan a la Declaración Jurada Anticipada de Importación (DJAI) como la mayor traba comercial a la vez que señalan que han tenido inconvenientes para cobrar sus ventas ante la escasez de divisas.
Industriales consultados por El País señalaron que actualmente "no se está vendiendo casi nada" por las trabas comerciales, pero también porque "Uruguay quema" en materia de costos.
Un informe elaborado por la Cámara de Industrias (CIU) sobre la situación comercial con Argentina y el impacto en el sector, indicó que el empleo directo generado por las empresas que producen bienes para el mercado argentino cayó 46% en ocho años, pasando de 5.000 a 2.700 puestos de trabajo.
A su vez, la menor demanda de mano de obra estuvo concentrada en los sectores industriales dedicados a la fabricación de prendas de vestir, tejidos de punto, tejeduría, artículos de papel y cartón y plásticos.
Además, el informe se refirió al deterioro de las exportaciones uruguayas a Argentina en los últimos años medidas en dólares corrientes, con un descenso de 31% en el período comprendido entre 2011 y 2014.
La CIU también consultó a sus agremiados sobre los mayores inconvenientes que han tenido para ingresar sus productos hacia Argentina. En ese sentido, la obligatoriedad impuesta por el gobierno argentino a los importadores de presentar una DJAI por cada compra en el exterior fue la principal señalada.
"Las DJAI terminaron de liquidar las exportaciones de Uruguay", afirmó a El País el directivo de la Cámara Industrial de la Vestimenta (Cinvest), Elbio Fuscaldo.
Explicó que la DJAI luego de autorizada tiene un plazo de 180 días para efectuar la importación. "Al importador le da tiempo, una vez que la sacó, de salir a buscar la mercadería a cualquier lado. La puede ir a buscar a China entonces. Tiene dos meses para que se la produzcan, un mes y medio de flete y le sobra tiempo para despacharla", indicó Fuscaldo.
En 2012, la DJAI suplantó a la licencia no automática de importación, necesaria para la compra en el exterior de determinados productos. "Cuando teníamos las licencias, las exportaciones de Uruguay caían y nosotros nos quejábamos como locos por todos lados porque no salían. Pero como tenían una vida de 45 días solamente obligaba a los importadores a comprar en proveedores cercanos", dijo el industrial. "Las DJAI favorecieron a China", concluyó.
El mes pasado, la HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Organización Mundial de Comercio (OMC) concluyó luego de una denuncia presentada por Estados Unidos, la Unión Europea y Japón que el régimen de las DJAI debe expirar el 31 de diciembre de este año.
"Ello, lejos de ser interpretado como un avance o aliciente respecto a lo que pueda ocurrir con las exportaciones de Uruguay hacia el mercado argentino, a nuestro juicio, debe constituirse en una nueva alerta", sostuvo el documento de la CIU. Esa alerta se sustentaría en el desconocimiento sobre probables medidas o acciones restrictivas que, luego de eliminar las DJAI, podría tomar el próximo gobierno argentino.
"Puede que haya alguna perspectiva positiva, pero todo el mundo está muy cauto. No se sabe quién gana las elecciones; qué va a hacer el que gane; a cuánto va a estar el dólar y mucho menos a cuánto va a estar el día en que importen", dijo Fuscaldo.
Sobre el comercio actual con Argentina, Fuscaldo fue contundente al decir: "está peor; no se está vendiendo casi nada".
Otro de los inconvenientes señalado por los industriales fue el de las restricciones cambiarias en Argentina. El informe de la CIU indicó que "una de las dificultades que persiste ha sido la problemática para el cobro de las ventas a Argentina. Estos inconvenientes se generan esencialmente debido a la escasez de divisas liberadas por el HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Banco Central de la República Argentina", dado el cepo cambiario impuestas por el gobierno de aquel país. "Según lo expresado, esto sigue haciendo al mercado argentino aún menos atractivo de lo que ya es".
Por su parte, la presidenta de la Asociación Uruguaya de la Industria Plástica (AUIP), Esperanza Romariz, dijo a El País que desde hace años las ventas hacia Argentina vienen en caída, con empresas más afectadas que otras según el nivel de dependencia con ese mercado.
A eso se suma un problema de competitividad que no solamente afecta al sector. "Tenemos la energía más cara, los sueldos más caros, un costo de vida carísimo. Hoy quema Uruguay", afirmó la empresaria.
En 2014, las exportaciones de bienes uruguayos con destino a Argentina, medidas en dólares corrientes, volvieron a mostrar una nueva caída en relación al año anterior, esta vez de 18%. A su vez, entre enero y junio de 2015, bajaron 2% frente a igual período de 2014.
Por su parte, se observa una persistente caída en la participación de las exportaciones de bienes con destino a Argentina en el Producto Interno Bruto (PIB) de Uruguay, situándose en 2014 en el 0,7%, la mitad del promedio histórico desde que se constituyó el Mercosur en 1991 (1,4% del PIB). En 2014, las ventas externas a Argentina representaban el 4% del total, mientras que a mediados de los 90 alcanzaban al 20%. El Pais/Uruguay. © NoticiasFinancieras – 
END
 
Josep Bosch, Information Officer
Information and External Relations Division
+41227395681
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.