HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S. trade office says Chinese laws may breach WTO rules
·         HYPERLINK \l "China Tells Treasury New Banking Rules Delayed, But Details Still Murky
·         HYPERLINK \l "US to impose sanctions on overseas cyber attackers
·         HYPERLINK \l "EU cannot maintain protection against Chinese imports, EU lawyers say
·         HYPERLINK \l "India says will shake up trade tariffs to compete globally
·         HYPERLINK \l "India moves closer to WTO norms
·         HYPERLINK \l "Saudi Arabia, Philippines Broaden Bans on U.S. Poultry After New Cases of Influenza
·         HYPERLINK \l "EU to support Azerbaijan's joining WTO
·         HYPERLINK \l "World Bank sees protracted recession in Russia
 
U.S. trade office says Chinese laws may breach WTO rules 
 
WASHINGTON, April 1 (Reuters) - China's bank technology restrictions and a draft anti-terrorism law may run counter to the country's international trade commitments, the U.S. Trade Representative said in a report released on Wednesday.

The U.S. trade office's regular review of telecommunications trade continued the pressure over initiatives that have upset U.S. industry groups and that the Obama administration has also raised at the highest level with Chinese counterparts.

Rules asking technology suppliers to Chinese banks to divulge source code, pushing China's state-owned banks to buy technology from domestic vendors, "may raise substantive concerns" about China's obligations under a range of World Trade Organization agreements, the report said.

The rules may also have been adopted without sticking to China's commitments to provide adequate time for public comment on draft measures and to publish final measures, it said.

The draft counter-terrorism law "has generated serious concerns among U.S. stakeholders and may raise questions with respect to China's obligations," the report said.

A senior U.S. Treasury official said on Monday, during a visit to Beijing by U.S. Treasury Secretary Jack Lew, that China had agreed to delay implementing the bank rules.

Industry groups have been cautious about the prospect of launching WTO action against China, which can take years.

USTR said it would continue to press for the bank rules to be suspended and urge China not to act on the draft counter-terrorism law.

In a separate report, USTR detailed a wide range of other trade barriers U.S. firms face in exporting, including to China, where issues range from increased tariffs on aircraft to foreign investment limits and a ban on U.S. beef.

"China remains among the least transparent and predictable of the world's major markets for agricultural products, largely because of uneven enforcement of regulations and selective intervention in the market by China's regulatory authorities," USTR said. (Reporting by Krista Hughes; Editing by Emily Stephenson, David Gregorio and Bernard Orr)
 
 
China Tells Treasury New Banking Rules Delayed, But Details Still Murky
World Trade Online
Posted: April 01, 2015 
The Chinese government has told U.S. Treasury Department officials that Beijing is delaying the implementation of new banking regulations that would require foreign companies supplying China's financial institutions to turn over sensitive commercial information, according to a spokeswoman for the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative.
 
"Treasury officials were told by the Chinese Government on Monday that the banking regulations have been delayed,” the spokeswoman told Inside U.S. Trade in an email Tuesday (March 31). But she added that there has been no official word on this matter and could offer no further details.
 
“We are awaiting official confirmation of such a delay, and continue to seek China’s reconsideration of the approach it has taken to regulate [information and communication technology] equipment in the banking sector,” she said.
 
News of the delay coincided with Treasury Secretary Jack Lew's March 30 meetings with Chinese Vice Premier Wang Yang and Premier Li Keqiang in Beijing. Lew indicated before his meeting with the vice premier that the cybersecurity regulations were going to be discussed.
 
“We have already made clear our concerns regarding forced technology transfer and other attempts to bar technological competition, most recently in the banking sector, and I look forward to further discussion today,” Lew said, according to a transcript of his remarks.
 
Industry sources responding to the news said it is still unclear how these regulations are being delayed. The policies in question require all Chinese financial institutions to ensure 75 percent of their information technology infrastructure uses "secure and controllable" or Chinese-developed products and services by 2019. One open question is if China is simply pushing back the deadline, or suspending the rules for further consideration.
 
“We are still trying to understand the situation given the limited information available, but the Chinese leadership does seem to agree a delay is needed to reassess these measures,” Kenneth Jarrett, president of the American Chamber of Commerce in Shanghai, said in a statement.
 
“The Chinese government has appeared to have taken actions to reconsider the measures in light of serious concerns raised by global industry and government stakeholders. If the delay is officially confirmed, we welcome that news,” Jarrett added.
 
These policies, which went into effect on March 15, apply only to the banking sector for now, but sources have said they expected the policies to be applied to other sectors. In order to be deemed secure and controllable, the products and services must undergo security testing that business associations have described as "intrusive," and contain local intellectual property like encryption algorithms that were developed in China. The rules also prevent the flow of cross-border commercial data and require producers submit a product's source code to the Chinese government.
 
The announcement comes on the heels of China's national legislature earlier this month saying it will not take up a draft counterterrorism law that would have also required companies to install so-called “back doors” into their products and services for the Chinese government to use. That law would have applied to all companies, including domestic ones.
 
Lew highlighted the importance of the United States and China to work together to “establish and maintain clear rules in cyberspace” at a March 31 speech at the Asia Society Northern California in San Francisco. He reiterated his criticism of China's cybersecurity regulations, but he did not address whether those regulations had been delayed.
 
The secretary's trip to China touched on other issues in the bilateral economic relationship between the United States and China, as well as preparations for the next Strategic and Economic Dialogue.
 
 
US to impose sanctions on overseas cyber attackers
Gina Chon in Washington 
Financial Times
April 1, 2015 5:54 pm
 
Barack Obama has declared cyber threats from abroad a “national emergency,” as the US president took action to impose sanctions on overseas actors engaging in cyber attacks that threatenAmerica’s national security or economic health. 
 
The president’s executive order gives his government new powers to target significant cyber threats that affect critical infrastructure, disrupt the availability of web sites or networks, or steal trade secrets and financial information, such as large troves of credit card data. 
 
US officials declined to name potential targets of the new sanctions but said, as an example, that the executive order could be used against individual hackers hired by companies or countries. 
 
The US has already ratcheted up its response to cyber breaches, imposing additional sanctions in January on agencies and officials in North Korea, which it blamed for the breach at Sony Pictures Entertainment last year. In May 2014, it indicted five Chinese soldiers for hacking into six US companies. 
 
It is unclear whether the new authority will be used in cases that could raise political tensions, such as sanctions against Chinese officials. 
 
The new authority closes gaps that have posed a challenge to US law enforcement, such as cyber threats from countries that do not have extradition treaties with the US, lack strong cyber security laws or turn a blind eye to such attacks. 
 
The US hoped the executive order would encourage other countries to consider such sanctions, said Michael Daniel, special assistant to the president and cyber security co-ordinator. Potential punishments include freezing assets under US jurisdiction, such as bank accounts, and prohibiting US persons or entities from engaging in transactions with those under sanctions. 
 
A spate of devastating cyber breaches at JPMorgan Chase, Target, health insurer Anthem and others has prompted the Obama administration to encourage more information sharing on cyber threats between government agencies and with the private sector. 
 
Legislation that would encourage such exchanges is again being considered in Congress. Similar bills have stalled in the past because of privacy concerns, but lawmakers are hoping that recent cyber attacks will move the proposals forward this year. 
 
“Cyber threats pose one of the most serious economic and national security challenges to the United States, and my administration is pursuing a comprehensive strategy to confront them,” Mr Obama said in a statement. “This executive order offers a targeted tool for countering the most significant cyber threats that we face.”

Dmitri Alperovitch, co-founder of cyber security firm CrowdStrike, said: “We are optimistic that the actions undertaken by the White House today will raise the cost to our cyber adversaries and establish a more effective deterrent framework to punish actors.” 
 
US officials were quick to emphasise that the new executive order would not be used to police the internet or stifle innovation. The new sanctions powers will apply only to significant cyber threats and would be used against individuals or organisations that knowingly receive or use trade secrets stolen through cyber breaches.

Sanctions could also be imposed when the theft of trade secrets results in a significant threat to national security, foreign policy, or the economic health or financial stability of the US.
 
 
EU cannot maintain protection against Chinese imports, EU lawyers say 
 
* EU lawyers say EU cannot ignore rules on China's new WTO status
* EU yet to decide, could favour China to win favour with Beijing

By Francesco Guarascio and Robin Emmott

BRUSSELS, April 1 (Reuters) - European fears of being forced to lower tariff defences against cheap Chinese imports have grown following a confidential warning from the EU's own lawyers, who say the bloc should not ignore changes to global trade rules set to favour Beijing.

In a draft letter seen by Reuters, the head of the European Commission's Legal Service, Luis Romero Requena, warned the head of the trade directorate that the EU would not have a good case to disregard the effects of the World Trade Organization viewing China as a more market-based economy -- a status that will make it harder for other powers to justify current high tariffs.

In asking its lawyers to help it decide, the EU executive has shown how it is caught in a dilemma between shielding local industry and jobs and seizing a chance to win friends in Beijing and gain an edge over U.S. rivals as China opens up its markets.

A spokesman for EU Trade Commissioner Cecilia Malmstrom declined comment on the letter but stressed that legal opinions would only form one part of a broader reflection currently under way on the implications of expiring WTO limitations on China's right to claim equal treatment with its free-market competitors.

European manufacturers say the future of EU industry depends on preventing China from flooding markets with illegally cheap goods, but rules allowing the EU to protect itself with some ease expire next year and Europe is divided over how to act.

The WTO recognised when Communist-ruled China joined the free trade body in 2001 that its local prices are not set by market forces. WTO members can normally apply punitive "anti-dumping" tariffs on others only if export prices are below those in the exporter's home market. But with China, the EU and others have been able to ignore low domestic prices and set tariffs to make Chinese exports as expensive as in wealthier countries.

However, those WTO limitations on China appear to expire on Dec. 11, 2016 -- though there is some room for interpretation.

Trade experts expect the United States to take the view that U.S. law makes no requirement for the government to change its treatment of China. Washington has not made its position public.

Europe must take a decision soon because the legislative changes it will entail must be approved by the European Parliament and translated into the bloc's 23 official languages.

In the internal draft document seen by Reuters, EU lawyers recommended recognising the expiration of the current rules, warning that "arguments to the contrary are not well-founded".

In its five-page, line-by-line scrutiny of China's WTO accession agreement, the EU Legal Service lawyers conclude it is "a high-risk approach" to try to argue that Beijing should still be treated differently from other major trading partners.

Trade Commissioner Malmstrom's spokesman told Reuters: "The Commission is currently looking at the legal implications of the expiration of certain provisions of the protocol of accession of China to the WTO relating to the treatment applied to China in trade defence investigations. This will take some time."

China is certain to launch a case at the WTO if the European Union chooses to maintain the status quo and can exert pressure in other ways by restricting EU access to its markets or by retaliating.

Just last month, the EU slapped anti-dumping duties of up to 25.2 percent on some Chinese steel, using prices in the U.S. domestic market as a reference. The process is complex, but if the WTO modifies its view of how free China's market is, tariffs might have to take more account of Chinese domestic prices.

"PLAYING FOR TIME"

Not everybody in Europe agrees with the EU lawyers' view, as China's accession treaty to the WTO is written in a way that allows for different interpretations.

A group of more than 20 European industries, from footwear to solar panels, wrote to Malmstrom on March 4 warning that changes to the rules on China would see the "survival of many European companies...seriously threatened, with severe adverse consequences for European jobs".

They argue that China can get better treatment only if it is recognised as a market economy -- meaning decisions are made based on supply and demand, not the state -- but that remains a long way off, EU and U.S. officials have repeatedly said.

"Some in Commission are trying to play for time, some in the Commission are trying to be too clever and think that the longer they postpone a decision, the more they can squeeze China," said Fredrik Erixon, the director of the Brussels-based European Centre for International Political Economy.

There is a lot at stake and not just for Beijing. The European Union has more than doubled trade with China since 2003, making it its second largest trading partner after the United States. Europe is China's most important trading partner.

Last month, Britain, Germany, France, Italy and other states joined a nascent, Chinese-led Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) in defiance of Washington's misgivings, as China seeks a greater role in shaping global economic governance.

Beijing and Brussels are also negotiating an investment treaty to give the EU greater access in China, from banking to telecoms, and to push Beijing to drop onerous requirements that Europeans must hand over sensitive know-how to expand there.

China eventually wants a free-trade deal.

But in the short term, there is friction as China seeks to produce the kind of sophisticated products that compete directly with Europe and the changes would be huge for European industry. (Additional reporting by Krista Hughes in Washington; Editing by Alastair Macdonald and Angus MacSwan) 
 
 
India says will shake up trade tariffs to compete globally 
By Manoj Kumar and Rajesh Kumar Singh

NEW DELHI, April 1 (Reuters) - India plans to pull its tariff regime closer in line with global norms to prepare for new regional trade pacts being negotiated by advanced economies, the government said on Wednesday.

India has not been invited to join pacts such as the U.S.-led 12 country Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) and is "not in a position to join," partly because its tariffs are not competitive, a top official said at the unveiling of a new five year trade policy.

"If the country is to stand up to these agreements, it's important that we start to address these issues," Trade Secretary Rajeev Kher said, adding that India's access to markets was likely to erode when such pacts take effect.

Kher said India needed lower tariffs for intermediate goods to help it further integrate with global supply chains, and that these industries would have to come more competitive. He did not give more details.

Regional trade pacts are being promoted by advanced economies after years of failure to negotiate a global agreement under the World Trade Organisation.

TPP would link a dozen Asia-Pacific economies by eliminating trade barriers and harmonising regulations in a pact covering two-fifths of the world economy and a third of all global trade.

China, which is not part of the TTP negotiations, is pushing for a separate trade liberalization framework.

"They have been explicit about the fact that there are these mega agreements that we are not invited to - as a response to that they are trying to fix things internally," said Akshay Mathur, head of research at foreign policy think tank Gateway House.

Kher said India was interested in a third grouping known as RCEP that combines Southeast Asian nations and six others -Australia, China, India, Japan, New Zealand, and South Korea.

"India expects to be a major beneficiary of the ASEAN Plus six trade pact for which negotiations are likely to be completed by year end," Kher said.

Experts say the viability of that grouping may depend on India's progress in easing domestic regulations and external barriers that constrain economic activity.

India aims to raise its exports to $900 billion by fiscal year 2019/20, the government said in a statement.

In the first 11 months of the fiscal year to March 2015, merchandise exports stood at $286.58 billion, down from $314.4 billion in the previous year. (Writing by Frank Jack Daniel; Editing by Malini Menon and Clarence Fernandez) 
 
 
India moves closer to WTO norms 
Asit Ranjan Mishra
Mint
 
New Delhi, April 1 -- The government on Wednesday revamped the export subsidy regime and indicated its intention to phase out subsidies for overseas shipments in compliance with rules of the World Trade Organization (WTO) while setting an ambitious export target of $900 billion to be met by 2019-20.

Unveiling the long-delayed five-yearly foreign trade policy (2015-20), commerce minister Nirmala Sitharaman said the policy will no longer be revisited annually and will only be reviewed after two-and-a-half years to provide a stable policy framework.

The new policy merged all subsidy schemes for merchandise exports and service exports into two separate schemes to simplify the export subsidy regime, and for the first time included units within export-oriented special economic zones (SEZs) under the ambit of such incentives.

In the process, the government hacked through a plethora of schemes that had been targeted at specific products and specific markets, complicating the subsidy regime.

E-commerce also received a boost, with the government adding to the export subsidy regime exports of up to Rs.25,000 through courier services for items such as handlooms, books, leather footwear, toys and customized fashion garments from Delhi, Mumbai and Chennai airports.

On 22 October, Mint had reported about planned incentives for e-commerce, and on 30 March on the consolidation of merchandise export subsidy schemes under the new trade policy.

The $900 billion target for exports is more than twice the $466 billion India earned from overseas shipments in 2013-14. If the target is met, India would grab a share of 3.5% of world exports, up from 2% in 2013-14.

The new policy lays down a fresh approach to the export of goods and services from India, said Himanshu Tewari, partner, indirect tax, BMR and Associates Llp. "The changes are beneficial to the exporting community, with special focus on services exporters. Simplification of procedures will go a long way in integrating India in the global value chain, improving India's ranking in ease of doing business index and reducing the transaction cost in international trade," he added.

In simplifying the subsidy regime, the trade policy said the current WTO rules as well as those under negotiation envisage the eventual phasing out of export subsidies.

"This is a pointer to the direction that export promotion efforts will have to take in future, i.e, towards more fundamental systemic measures rather than incentives and subsidies alone," the new policy said.

A long-term branding strategy has been put in place to enable India to hold its own in a highly competitive global market and to ensure that "Brand India" becomes synonymous with high quality, the policy document said.

The new service incentive scheme will be applicable to both domestic and foreign-owned service providers who are providing services from India.

"Earlier, only domestically owned hotels such as Taj Group used to get such incentives while foreign-owned hotel chains such as Marriott were not eligible for such benefits. Now all of them will be eligible for such incentives," said Pravir Kumar, director general of foreign trade in the commerce ministry.

The duty credit scrips available to both service and merchandise exporters as part of such schemes will now be freely transferable and can be used for payment of customs duty, excise duty and service tax.

Sitharaman said the new policy provides a framework for increasing exports of goods and services as well as generation of employment and increasing value addition in the country, in keeping with the Make in India initiative of Prime Minister Narendra Modi to attract foreign manufacturers to the country.

"The focus of the government is to support both the manufacturing and services sectors, with a special emphasis on improving the ease of doing business," she added.

To boost domestic manufacturing under the Make in India scheme, the commerce ministry reduced the export obligation for domestic procurement under the export promotion capital goods programme.

In case capital goods are procured from indigenous manufacturers, export obligation has been reduced from 90% of the normal exports to 75%, to promote the domestic capital goods manufacturing industry.

"It is proposed to give higher level of rewards to products with high domestic content and value addition, as compared to products with high import content and less value addition," the trade policy said.

Kumar said out of 11,500 export product lines that India has, except for 5,500 product lines whose contribution to exports is $1 billion, most other items have been incentivized other than petroleum products and gold.

Commerce secretary Rajeev Kher said that two institutional mechanisms are being put in place for regular communication with stakeholders-the board of trade, which is an advisory body and needs to be reconstituted, and a Council for Trade Development and Promotion, which will have representation from state and union territory governments.

The new policy said India's future bilateral and regional trade engagements will be with regions and countries that are not only promising markets but also major suppliers of critical inputs and have complementarities with the Indian economy.

"The focus of India's future trade relationship with its traditional markets in the developed world would be on exporting products with a higher value addition, supplying high quality inputs for the manufacturing sector in these markets and optimizing applied customs duties on inputs for India's manufacturing sector," it said.

The new policy provides greater predictability because it would not be changed frequently while the focus on building 'Brand India', through different sets of incentives for merchandise and services exports, would help Indian exports become competitive in the world market, Engineering Export Promotion Council chairman Anupam Shah said.

He added that the downside is that export benefits for engineering tariff lines have been reduced and no transition period has been allowed.

"At least six months of transition period should have given so that the exporters could adjust to the new framework. Further, the interest subvention scheme has also not materialized. This will impact adversely on the exports of engineering goods to some extent," he added.
 
 
Saudi Arabia, Philippines Broaden Bans on U.S. Poultry After New Cases of Influenza
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, April 2, 2015
 
April 1 — Trade officials in Saudi Arabia and the Philippines broadened the scope of their bans on U.S. poultry exports after new cases of highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) were confirmed in recent weeks.
 
Both nations, which previously had banned poultry imports from western U.S. states like Oregon and Washington, now will also prohibit poultry imports from Minnesota, according to recent World Trade Organization filings.
 
In December 2014, the U.S. Department of Agriculture confirmed findings of HPAI in guinea fowl from Winston, Ore., and in wild gyrfalcons from Washington (10 WTO, 1/15/15). HPAI since has been found in commercial turkey flocks in California, Minnesota, Missouri and Arkansas, among other U.S. states.
 
Saudi Arabia and the Philippines are among the more than 30 nations that have implemented bans on U.S. poultry meat originating from the affected areas.
 
‘High Mortality’ Outbreak
 
The Philippines Department of Agriculture announced it would impose a temporary ban on imports of poultry meat, day-old chicks, eggs and semen from Pope County, Minn.
 
The decision stems from a recent outbreak of HPAI virus serotype H5N2 in a Pope County commercial turkey breeding farm with signs of high mortality, the WTO filing said.
 
“The Philippines is instituting this emergency measure to prevent the entry of the HPAI virus [and] to protect the health of the local poultry population,” the filing said.
 
Last month, the Philippines issued a temporary prohibition on the importation of poultry meat, day-old chicks, eggs and semen from Idaho and Washington (56 WTO, 3/24/15).
 
Temporary Suspension
 
Saudi Arabia said in a recent WTO filing it would temporarily suspend all imports of poultry meat, eggs and their products from Oregon, California, Washington, Idaho, Minnesota and Missouri.
 
The Saudi Arabian Food and Drug Authority said the precautions were “deemed necessary for the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to prevent the entry of HPAI into the country.”
 
In December 2014, Saudi Arabia said it would restrict poultry imports from Oregon following the discovery of HPAI in a backyard poultry flock there.
 
 
EU to support Azerbaijan's joining WTO 
Trend News Agency (Azerbaijan)
Baku, Azerbaijan, Apr. 1

By Anakhanum Khidayatova – Trend:

The EU is the biggest trading partner and investor in Azerbaijan, and it will support the process of the country’s joining the World Trade Organization (WTO), the head of the EU Delegation to Azerbaijan Malena Mard said during the press conference on the report of the EU’s progress in its relations with the countries of the Eastern Partnership.

“Cooperation with Azerbaijan is very important for the EU, we intend to develop these relations in the future as well,” said Mard.

She said that over the past 10 years, the EU has been developing relations with Azerbaijan within the framework of the Eastern Partnership program, which is the basis for the development of cooperation with partner countries of the European Union.

The EU High Representative Federica Mogherini and European Commissioner for European Neighbourhood Policy and Enlargement Negotiations Johannes Hahn began consultations on the next steps within the framework of the ENP, the diplomat said.

“We want to change the policy of work with neighbors and began extensive consultations to review this policy,” said Mard. “I hope that the new program of the EU's neighborhood will be ready by the fall.”

The first results of operation of the agreement on simplification of visa regime between the EU and Azerbaijan, which entered into force, are already noticeable, according to the head of the mission.

“Statistics shows that last year we issued 75,000 visas to citizens of Azerbaijan,” she said.

The EU will continue to support the development process of civil society, according to Mard.

"Our cooperation with Azerbaijan continues in all areas,” she said. “We hope that the country will remain a key partner of the EU."

“The EU allocated 94 million euros for the development of relations with Azerbaijan in 2014-2017,” the diplomat said. “The EU also allocated 20 million euros to support the reforms in the field of education in the country.”

Mard said that the bilateral relations between the EU and Azerbaijan will be discussed as part of European Commissioner for European Neighbourhood Policy and Enlargement Negotiations Johannes Hahn’s visit to Azerbaijan on April 7-8.

“Proceeding from a report on the EU progress in its relations with the Eastern Partnership member-states, one can make a conclusion that the energy relations between Azerbaijan and the EU are at a good level,” she said.

"The sides perfectly cooperate as part of implementing the Southern Gas Corridor project,” she said.

A round of bilateral negotiations on Azerbaijan's accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO) was held in Geneva on March 3-7.

Azerbaijan started negotiations with the WTO member countries in 2004. Currently, the country is negotiating with 18 countries.

Negotiations are now completed, and the protocols signed with Turkey, the Sultanate of Oman, the United Arab Emirates, Georgia and Kyrgyzstan. The country is at the stage of signing the protocol with China and Moldova.

The Southern Gas Corridor is one of the priority energy projects for the EU. The project is aimed at diversification of routes and sources of energy supply and thereby increase EU’s energy security. It envisages the delivery of gas from Azerbaijan’s Shah Deniz gas and condensate field to Europe.

 
World Bank sees protracted recession in Russia 
 
* World Bank sees Russian economy contracting in 2015 and 2016 
* Sanctions may inflict long-term economic damage 
* Dearth of investment is major medium-term challenge 
 
MOSCOW, April 1 (Reuters) - Russia faces a protracted recession as the impact of Western sanctions lingers and oil prices stay low, the World Bank said in a report published on Wednesday. 
 
In its baseline scenario, the bank expected Russia's gross domestic product to contract by 3.8 percent in 2015 and a further 0.3 percent in 2016, describing medium-term growth prospects as dim. 
 
The World Bank's lead economist for Russia, Birgit Hansl, said "adjustment to the new oil price reality and the sanctions environment" was a key policy challenge. 
 
"If we look more into the medium term, the main challenge for Russia is the continued dearth in investment," she said, presenting the report. 
 
The bank's latest forecasts are more pessimistic than those made in December, when it expected the economy to shrink by 0.7 percent this year and grow by 0.3 percent in 2016. 
 
The new baseline forecasts assume that the oil price will recover only marginally over the next two years, averaging $53 per barrel in 2015 and $57 per barrel in 2016, reflecting ample global supplies and moderate demand. 
 
Under a more optimistic scenario, with oil averaging $65.5 per barrel in 2015 and $68.7 per barrel in 2016, the economy would contract by 2.9 percent this year and grow by only 0.1 percent in 2016, the World Bank said. 
 
Its latest forecasts assume that sanctions imposed against Russia because of its role in the Ukraine conflict would stay in place in 2015 and 2016. 
 
The sanctions could have damaging long-term consequences that may last even after the sanctions are lifted, the bank said, citing the case of South Africa where sanctions imposed in the 1980s caused a major slump in investment. 
 
In Russia's case, sanctions were likely to exacerbate an existing investment shortage. 
 
"Low investment demand hints at the deeper structural problems of the Russian economy and has already initiated a new era of potentially small growth," the report said. 
 
The bank also warned that a projected 3.8 percent budget deficit this year could "severely deplete" the budget's Reserve Fund, currently equal to around 4.7 percent of GDP. 
 
Hansl said, however: "One could argue that it is prudent to use fiscal buffers at these times as a counter-cyclical measure." 
END
 
 