WTO informal talks to ascertain positions
WTO: India against dilution of Doha agenda
Obama says U.S., not China, must write trade rules
Sisi to present Egypt’s economic reform program at Davos Forum on Wednesday
WTO Special Session Committee to Meet Feb. 2
India Will Appeal WTO Ruling Requiring Lifting of Ban on U.S. Poultry Imports
Gov't confirms customs restrictions to remain in place
Senate Kills 'Buy American' Amendment To Keystone XL Pipeline
S.Korea to levy anti-dumping duty on Japan's pneumatic transmission valves
Office-Paper Makers Allege Dumping, Seek Import Duties
World Trade to Grow 4.7 percent in 2015; U.S. Exports Expected to Rise 5.3 Percent
Shoppers bombarded by discounts after franc shock
Simplifying the Rules of Origin
Turning 20 marks time for the WTO to grow up
 
WTO informal talks to ascertain positions 
NAYANIMA BASU New Delhi 
21 January 2015
Business Standard
 
The World Trade Organization (WTO) is to hold an informal meeting on Wednesday with the heads of delegations, including of India, in Geneva. The aim is to ascertain the positions of countries on the post-Bali work programme, an important element being a solution to the food stock issue.

“The informal meeting is to kick off the negotiations aimed at reaching an agreement on the post-Bali work programme and wider Doha Round in the near future. This meeting will outline the countries’ positions on how to proceed and where there could be difficulties,” an official told Business Standard.

The outcome is expected to “feed into the ministers’ discussions in a way” when they meet in Davos on the sidelines of the World Economic Forum on Saturday for a ‘mini-ministerial’. The official added that negotiations on a permanent solution had started and should intensify in the next couple of months.

A WTO ministerial is the highest decision making body. A mini-ministerial refers to a meeting of ministers from some key countries like America, Germany, Canada, Australia, India, China and Brazil.

India will be represented by Finance Minister Arun Jaitley.

Developed countries are increasingly worried that developing countries such as India and China might be “reluctant” to negotiate a permanent solution to the food stockholding issue, now that they have a concession in a ‘Peace Clause’ that will be in perpetuity until a permanent solution, officials said. India and China run massive public stockholding schemes, resulting in huge subsidies.

WTO director general Roberto Azevêdo recently stated they’d put a mandate on the 160 member-countries to identify their negotiating stance on the entire Doha package by July. It has also set a deadline of December this year for a permanent solution to the food stock issue.

In December, the WTO is going to hold its 10th ministerial meeting in Nairobi, Kenya.

Under pressure from India, the WTO membership agreed to change what was agreed in Bali, Indonesia, during the ninth ministerial. Instead of four years, India obtained a permanent ‘Peace Clause’ that gives it freedom to grant unlimited subsidies to its poor and marginal farmers. This interim measure also gives immunity to India from challenges by other countries even if it exceeds the limit prescribed under earlier WTO norms.

 
WTO: India against dilution of Doha agenda 
 
New Delhi, Jan 20 (PTI) Opposing "cherry-picking" of issues by developed countries at WTO, India suggested that there should be no dilution of the stalled Doha development agenda.

Besides, India has said that a permanent solution on the issue of public stock holding for food security purposes was critical and should be addressed on priority basis by the members of the World Trade Organization (WTO).

The issues were discussed by Commerce and Industry Minister Nirmala Sitharaman and WTO Director General Roberto Azevedo in a meeting last week in Jaipur on the sidelines of the partnership summit.

"The Minister said that the Doha mandate should not be re-opened; nor should there be any cherry-picking of issues from the Doha Development Agenda or introduction of new issues that only served the commercial interests of a few developed countries," a statement issued by commerce ministry today said.

The Doha Round of negotiations launched in 2001 have remained stalled since July 2008 when the trade ministers' meeting in Geneva collapsed due to differences between the rich and the developing nations mainly on the level of protection for farmers in developing countries.

Sitharaman also appreciated the openness and flexibility shown by the WTO chief in their earlier interactions.

"Observing that she was aiming to set the contours of the discussion in the months ahead, rather than the agenda, the Minister said that India strongly subscribed to the multilateral trading system and the WTO," the release said.

The Minister also emphasised that that there should be no differentiation made amongst developing countries as regards commitments to be undertaken or in the matter of special and differential treatment for developing countries.

Referring to the commitment by WTO members to finalise a work programme on the rest of the Doha Development Agenda by July and the upcoming Tenth Ministerial Conference of the WTO in Nairobi in December, Azevêdo said "pragmatism was needed in order to move forward and promised that he would do everything he could to help the WTO members to decide on the way forward". PTI RR CS NS

 
Obama says U.S., not China, must write trade rules 
 
WASHINGTON, Jan 20 (Reuters) - President Barack Obama said on Tuesday the United States and not China must write trade rules for Asia and called on Congress to give the White House a freer hand to close trade deals.

Obama, who is pushing to overcome resistance to so-called fast-track authority from within his own party as well as conservative Republicans, said if China prevailed, U.S. workers and businesses would be at a disadvantage.

"That's why I'm asking both parties to give me trade promotion authority to protect American workers, with strong new trade deals from Asia to Europe that aren't just free, but fair," he said in the State of the Union address, also acknowledging past deals had not always "lived up to the hype."

China is not part of the Trans-Pacific Partnership the United States is negotiating with 11 other trading partners, which aims to set common standards on issues such as workers' rights and the environment as well as lower trade barriers.

The Asian giant is instead pushing for faster progress towards a trade pact with the wider Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) bloc.

National Association of Manufacturers President Jay Timmons said fast-track, which gives Congress a yes-or-no vote on trade agreements in exchange for setting negotiating objectives, would make trading partners take the United States more seriously and backed Obama's focus on China.

"I think it's important to note that there are countries all over the world, China included, that would like to take away America's mantle of economic leadership," he said.

Trade supporters and critics are already lobbying lawmakers on fast-track authority, and Maryland lawmaker Steny Hoyer, the second-ranking House Democrat, said the White House had to consider Democrats' concerns about trade deals hurting jobs and wages.

"The majority of Democrats right now are very hesitant, to say the least, and not at all sure that trade is good for working people," said Hoyer, who voted against fast-track in 2002 but has supported major trade deals. (Additional reporting by Julia Edwards; Reporting by Krista Hughes; Editing by Ken Wills) 
 
 
Sisi to present Egypt’s economic reform program at Davos Forum on Wednesday 
20 January 2015
Egypt Independent
 
President Abdel Fattah al-Sisi is heading a delegation of the Egyptian Economic Group Ministers at the Davos World Economic Forum in Switzerland on Wednesday to present the economic reform program adopted by Egypt to regain its position as one of the most important economies in the Arab, African and international regions. Meanwhile, Minister of Trade and Industry Mounir Fakhry Abdel Nour met with Markus Leitner, the Swiss ambassador in Cairo, to discuss the participation of Swiss investors in the Sharm al-Sheikh economic summit in March to view investment opportunities in national projects, such as the Golden Triangle Project in southern Egypt, the al-Sebaeya Phosphate Project, new and renewable energy projects and small and medium enterprises. Egypt has the second highest return on investment rate in the world, which makes it a most important investment destination.

Abdel Nour called for the activation of the free trade agreement with Switzerland, Norway, Iceland and Liechtenstein that allows the entry of Egyptian products to the markets of central and northern Europe. He said that he is attending the ministerial meeting of the World Trade Organization (WTO) at the sidelines of the forum and at the invitation of the Swiss Minister of Economy to discuss the latest developments in the WTO negotiations on development issues.

 
WTO Special Session Committee to Meet Feb. 2
WTO Reporter, January 21, 2015

Jan. 20 — The World Trade Organization's Special Session Committee on Trade and Development plans to meet next month to discuss its negotiations related to the Doha Development Agenda (DDA).
 
The meeting is scheduled for Feb. 2 and will be overseen by Committee Chairman Ambassador Harald Neple of Norway.
 
Neple held a round of informal consultations in December aimed at “finalizing a number of agreement-specific proposals” that are expected to become the basis of the Special Session's work program, according to recent comments from WTO Director-General Roberto Azevedo.
 
Going forward, members of the committee intend to table a “list of the provisions where they would like to see work being done,” Azevedo said. “Substantive proposals explaining the rationale, and the problems identified, are expected to be submitted at the second stage,” he said.
 
Their work will contribute to the WTO's broader 2015 goal of producing a “clearly defined work program” to address the remaining elements of the DDA by July 1.
 
Azevedo's comments are available at http://www.wto.org/english/news_e/news14_e/gc_rpt_10dec14_e.htm.
 
 
India Will Appeal WTO Ruling Requiring Lifting of Ban on U.S. Poultry Imports
By Amrit Dhillon
WTO Reporter, January 21, 2015
 
Jan. 20 — India will appeal a World Trade Organization ruling calling on the country to lift its ban on U.S. poultry imports, according to a Department of Animal Husbandry official.
 
“We're just finalizing our appeal and should file it in the next few days. The bottom line is that we have to protect our domestic poultry industry, though we know the Americans won't like it,” the official told Bloomberg BNA Jan. 20.
 
The Poultry Federation of India, which fears losing the market to cheaper American chicken, has been lobbying the government to appeal the WTO order of Oct. 14, 2014, which said the Indian ban—imposed to protect the country against the spread of bird flu—was unjustifiably discriminatory (199 WTO, 10/15/14).
 
“The government keeps saying, ‘In a few days, in a few days.’ But frankly I don't think the appeal will be filed until after President [Barack] Obama has left the country,” said Shyam Kumar, Vice-President, Poultry Federation of India. Obama will visit India Jan. 25-27.
 
“The thinking in the government is that if India finds it hard to come up with an argument against the WTO ruling, then it might decide instead to impose a high duty on American imports,” Kumar said. “Not against full chickens—because the Americans won't export those—but against chicken parts, which they do want to export. So the high price will make them uncompetitive. They won't sell here at that price,” he said.
 
 
Gov't confirms customs restrictions to remain in place 
20 January 2015
Buenos Aires Herald Online
 
Internal Trade secretary Augusto Costa has confirmed to business leaders that customs restrictions on imports will stay in place, despite strong international pressure for barriers to be lifted.

Costa and Foreign Trade deputy secretary Paula Español met today with representatives of several business chambers, where the commitment to upholding commercial restrictions was made clear by the government officials.

According to an official statement, the audience aimed to "work on the alignments of foreign trade administration for the coming year," after Argentina lost a World Trade Organisation (WTO) hearing for protectionism against the United States, European Union and Japan.

The nation was ordered to remove customs regulations that obstruct trade with other countries, with the WTO upholding the complaints filed in 2012.

But Costa affirmed that "the current functioning logic of the system of trade administration" would be maintained, pointing out the "productive dialogue" with business sectors.

 
Senate Kills 'Buy American' Amendment To Keystone XL Pipeline 
World Trade Online
Posted: January 20, 2015 
The Senate voted Tuesday (Jan. 20) to kill an amendment to a pending bill authorizing the Keystone XL pipeline that would have required the use of U.S. iron, steel and other manufactured goods in the project's construction. It did so in a 53-46 vote in favor of tabling the amendment.
 
The U.S. steel industry had opposed the amendment and expected it to fail. In a Jan. 20 conference call with reporters, American Iron and Steel Institute (AISI) President Thomas Gibson said his group supports the underlying bill to approve the Keystone XL pipeline and wants the Senate to approve legislation that is as close as possible to the version passed by the House on Jan. 9. The House-passed bill does not include the "Buy American" requirement.
 
Gibson also indicated that while his group supports Buy American requirements for public projects like highways and bridges, imposing them on a private construction project like the Keystone XL pipeline is not viable because it could violate U.S. trade obligations. "The pipeline is a private project, not a government procurement project, so the same rules can't apply," he said.
 
Senate Energy & Natural Resources Committee Chairman Lisa Murkowski (R-AK) said during floor remarks opposing the amendment that she worried it would lead to a "slippery slope" of the government directing a private company to use specific materials for a project. She said "this would be the first time that Congress has directed or forced private parties to purchase domestic goods and materials."
 
One trade expert said that applying a blanket "Buy American" requirement to a private construction project could violate the national treatment obligations of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). Specifically, GATT Article III:4 requires signatories' laws and regulations to accord imported goods treatment that is "no less favorable" than that accorded to domestic products.
 
Government procurement is excluded from the GATT, although the U.S. has committed to open up some public contracts to foreign suppliers under the Government Procurement Agreement.
 
The Senate amendment, which was offered by Sen. Al Franken (D-MN) and had four Democratic cosponsors, included language stating that the Buy American requirement should be implemented in a way that is consistent with the U.S.'s obligations under international trade agreements.
 
Asked whether this would effectively nullify the Buy American requirement, Gibson said this question was speculative because he did not expect the amendment would pass. The White House has threatened that President Obama would veto the Keystone bill.
 
The Club for Growth, a conservative group focused on free-market issues, on Jan. 19 issued a key vote alert against the Franken amendment, meaning the vote will be included on its legislative scorecard. According to the alert, the amendment would "invite retaliation from other countries, as has happened in the past when Congress has approved 'Buy American' language."
 
The Franken amendment, which was co-sponsored by Sens. Tammy Baldwin (D-WI), Joe Manchin (D-WV), Barbara Mikulski (D-MD) and Debbie Stabenow (D-MI), would have required that, "to the maximum extent consistent with the obligations of the United States under international trade agreements," iron, steel and other manufactured goods used for the pipeline and facilities approved by the bill be produced in the U.S.
 
It also provided two specific exceptions to the Buy American requirement, the first of which would have applied if iron, steel and the applicable manufactured goods are "not produced in the United States in sufficient and reasonably available quantities with a sufficient quality." The other exception would have applied if using U.S. goods increases the cost of the construction by more than 25 percent.
 
The Keystone bill authorizes TransCanada Keystone Pipeline, the company behind the pipeline, "to construct, connect, operate, and maintain the pipeline and cross-border facilities specified in an application filed … to the Department of State."
 
On Jan. 7, the White House issued a veto threat to the House version of the Keystone bill, saying in an Office of Management and Budget statement that it would "circumvent longstanding and proven processes for determining whether cross-border pipelines serve the national interest" by preempting the administration's permitting process.
 
 
S.Korea to levy anti-dumping duty on Japan's pneumatic transmission valves 
 [e]Yoo Seungki 
 
SEOUL, Jan. 21 (Xinhua) -- South Korea is to levy anti-dumping duties on pneumatic transmission valves imported from Japan to prevent the unfairly undercut Japanese products from denting local companies, the Trade Ministry said Wednesday.

The Korea Trade Commission recommended that an anti-dumping duty of 11.66-23.97 percent be imposed on the Japanese products for five years. The recommendation was made to the Finance Ministry, which has a right to come to a final conclusion.

A punitive duty of 11.66 percent would be levied on SMC Corp, with a 23.97 percent duty to be imposed on CKD Corp and all other Japanese companies.

The pneumatic transmission valve is a part generating mechanical motion with compressed air that is used in cars, electronic products and general machinery.

As of 2013, the domestic valve market amounted to 64.7 billion won (60 million U.S. dollars), with 73 percent of the total dominated by Japanese projects.

The trade commission launched the anti-dumping probe in February 2014 after local companies said they were hurt by Japanese makers'undercutting practices.
 
 
Office-Paper Makers Allege Dumping, Seek Import Duties 
21 January 2015
Dow Jones Institutional News
By James R. Hagerty  
 
Four paper manufacturers and the United Steelworkers union are asking the U.S. government to impose duties on imports of office paper that they say are priced unfairly low.

Their claim, due to be filed with the U.S. Commerce Department on Wednesday, alleges that rivals in China, Indonesia, Brazil, Portugal and Australia are dumping certain types of uncoated paper on the U.S. market, including that used for such things as computer printers, book publishing, junk mail and envelopes.

Dumping involves selling at prices deemed less than "fair value," which can mean below the price in the exporter's home country or less than the cost of production plus a reasonable profit.

The companies also say producers in China and Indonesia are benefiting from government subsidies that allow them to reduce prices.

The U.S. market for the type of uncoated paper involved in the complaint is estimated at $4.5 billion a year, according to Domtar Corp., one of the companies calling for duties. In the first nine months of last year, imports of such paper from the five countries named were up 40% from a year earlier, even though U.S. demand for it is declining, the companies say.

Imports of such paper accounted for more than 16% of the U.S. market in last year's first 11 months, said Chip Dillon, a partner at Vertical Research Partners in New York, up from 12.7% a year earlier. As U.S. paper makers have retired old plants, he said, importers have rushed in.

The Commerce Department and the U.S. International Trade Commission will have up to about 14 months to determine whether trade laws have been violated, U.S. producers have been harmed and duties should be levied on the imports.

Over the past 15 years, U.S. paper makers have persuaded the government to put duties on a variety of products from China and other countries, including tissue paper and some coated paper.

The Commerce Department generally has taken a tougher stance against Chinese exporters in dumping disputes in recent years, said William Perry, a partner at law firm Dorsey & Whitney in Seattle. Mr. Perry, who often represents importers in trade cases, said the trend is worsening trade tensions with China, provoking more retaliation. "We're throwing a rock; they're throwing a rock back," he said.

In addition to Domtar, the companies filing the latest complaint are Packaging Corp. of America, Lake Forest, Ill.; Finch Paper LLC, Glens Falls, N.Y., and P.H. Glatfelter Co., York, Pa.

International Paper Co., Memphis, Tenn., declined to participate, a spokesman said. He said the company manufactures in 10 countries and relies on the flexibility of a global network.

The steelworkers union, which represents about 130,000 paper, pulp and forestry workers in the U.S. and Canada, said eight U.S. paper mills that made uncoated paper have closed or curtailed operations since 2011, eliminating thousands of jobs. Domtar, a Montreal-based company that makes paper in the U.S. and Canada, plans to convert a paper production line in Ashdown, Ark., from uncoated paper to fluff pulp, used in diapers.

"These jobs are too valuable to let go to people who aren't following the same set of rules we are," said Jon Geenen, the union's international vice president.

The U.S. market for uncoated paper has been shrinking 3% to 4% annually in recent years as more documents are handled electronically and companies shave costs, said Mike Garcia, president of Domtar's pulp-and-paper division. He said the market appeared likely to continue contracting gradually in the next few years but should eventually level off.

U.S. imports of uncoated paper in rolls or sheets, a broader category than covered by the trade petition, totaled $2.71 billion in last year's first 11 months, while exports came to $1.05 billion, according to Global Trade Information Services.

 
World Trade to Grow 4.7 percent in 2015; U.S. Exports Expected to Rise 5.3 Percent
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, January 21, 2015
 
Jan. 20 — Global trade will increase at a moderate 4.7 percent rate in 2015 compared to 3.3 percent in 2014, according to a report published by the United Nations' Department of Economic and Social Affairs (DESA).
 
“While this will be an improvement, the ratio of the growth of world trade to that of the [world gross product] will still be only 1.5, not a full recovery to the pre-crisis trend” of 2 to 1, DESA's 2015 World Economic Situation and Prospects report said.
 
The continued recession among some of the developed countries in Europe has led to weak import demand that has negatively affected trade flows in developing countries, the report said.
 
“Growth of world trade is projected to pick up some momentum from the subdued pace of the past few years in the aftermath of the financial crisis, but the dynamism of the two decades before the crisis may not return soon,” it said.
 
Doha Letdown
 
The World Trade Organization's scant progress in advancing the Doha Round of multilateral trade negotiations is “failing to provide new impetus to trade growth,” the report said.
 
The WTO's 160 members are planning to prepare a work program this year to address the remaining issues of the Bali Ministerial agenda and establish a road map to conclude the Doha Round.
 
The WTO members said they want to address the specific agricultural and development issues that have stalled negotiations over the past two decades.
 
Meanwhile, the proliferation of proposed regional trade agreements (RTAs) “may generate new trade flows in some regions, but the overall effects of RTAs on world trade in the long run are not certain and cannot replace the role of the multilateral trading system,” the report said.
 
As of June 2014, some 585 regional trade agreements notifications were made to the WTO, of which 379 were in force.
 
Trade Protectionism Trend
 
The growth of trade protectionist policies stemming from the 2008 financial crisis remains a concern, the report said.
 
The Group of Twenty (G20) countries adopted 1,244 trade-restrictive measures since October 2008, but only 282 of these had been removed by mid-October 2014, according to WTO data.
 
Between mid-May and mid-October 2014, G20 members put in place 93 new trade-restrictive measures, the WTO found.
 
“This highlights the importance of renewed global efforts to reduce trade restrictions by refraining from the imposition of new measures and eliminating existing ones,” the DESA report said.
 
U.S. Trade Forecast
 
U.S. exports are expected to grow by 5.3 percent in 2015 based on an increased foreign demand for capital goods and industrial supplies, the report said.
 
The “substantial strengthening” of U.S. trade projected for this year would build on a “relatively weak” 2.7 percent growth rate in 2014, it said.
 
Two other factors likely to affect U.S. trade prospects in 2015 are the “significant” increases in U.S. oil production and the increased value of the dollar versus other global currencies.
 
“The degree to which the rising dollar will have an impact on export growth remains to be seen; it will depend on the level at which exchange rates stabilize as well as the situation among the trading partners,” the report said.
 
Regional Trade Analysis
 
Trade in the Russian Federation and the European Union have suffered from the ongoing sanctions stemming from Russia's annexation of the Crimea region of Ukraine, the report said.
 
Looking ahead, the risk of geopolitical tension around Ukraine could “further dampen trade prospects if there is a significant flare-up or further tightening of sanctions,” it said.
 
Trade in developing countries, particularly tourism and commodity exports, have suffered from effects of the Ebola outbreak, terrorist attacks, and domestic and political turmoil, among various African nations.
 
Such trends are expected to reverse in 2015, the report said, as North Africa seeks to reach positive export growth, East and Southern Africa experience “continued robust growth” and West African trade improves, the report said. Overall, export growth in developing nations is expected to increase from 3.9 percent in 2014 to 4.5 percent in 2015, the report said.
 
Growth in exports among East Asian nations is expected to improve to 4.8 percent in 2015, up from 4.0 percent last year. The strong export growth of South Asian economies in 2014 is expected to drop from 8.6 percent to 8.5 percent in 2015. Western Asian economies are expected to have stagnant export growth at 3 percent in 2015, the same as the year prior.
 
The DESA report said trade in Latin America and the Caribbean will be mixed this year with slight improvements in export rates in some countries.
 
 
Shoppers bombarded by discounts after franc shock
Swissinfo
Jan 20, 2015 - 16:52
 
Retailers are rushing to offer bargains to Swiss shoppers after a shock surge in the franc, taking advantage of lower import costs but also fearful of losing custom to cheaper rivals over the border in France and Germany.
 
Until last Thursday, the Swiss National Bank (SNB) had capped the value of the franc at 1.20 per euro. The surprise decision to remove that limit has left the currencies virtually at parity, with one euro buying 1.01 francs on Tuesday.
 
The rise in the franc is expected to have a painful impact on Swiss exports and tourism, but it is a boon for Swiss residents buying imported goods or tempted to shop over the border in eurozone countries – Germany, France, Austria and Italy – and Swiss retailers are scrambling for their custom.
 
Chic clothing store Grieder in Zurich, near the headquarters of banks Credit Suisse and UBS, has knocked a fifth off its prices. Watchmaker Roger Dubuis is lowering prices by up to 6% while rival Audemars Piguet may follow.
 
A new Mercedes has now been discounted by 18% in Switzerland. Rival Audi is also considering an “adjustment” for its Swiss customers.
 
Swiss media say furniture stores, travel agents, supermarkets and petrol stations have all cut prices too.
 
Burgernomics
 
But rather than expecting a sales boom, many retailers may simply be worried about Switzerland haemorrhaging retail demand to the eurozone, where prices have long been cheaper – and just got cheaper still.
 
Even at 1.20, the franc was highly valued compared with before the 2008 economic crisis, when one euro would buy around 1.55 francs.
 
A survey by Deloitte found about 80% of chief financial officers regarded a rate around parity as a disadvantage for their firm, while 1.20 was neutral and 1.30 would help them.
 
At IKEA in Switzerland, a Frostig refrigerator costs CHF1,299. The same model costs €599 across the border in Germany or France.
 
McDonald’s Big Mac costs CHF6.50 in Switzerland, roughly 50% more than in France. For residents of Geneva or Basel, it is little more than a drive across town to take advantage of such discounts.
 
“Companies are barely out of crisis mode, yet now they will need to focus on coming to terms with the appreciation of the franc,” said Michael Grampp, chief economist at Deloitte in Switzerland.
 
 
Simplifying the Rules of Origin 
Wasi Ahmed 
20 January 2015
The Financial Express (Bangladesh)
 
Bangladesh, Jan. 20 -- There is, apparently, no debate over the positives from relaxed rules of origin (RoO) on increased exports. The case is more aptly so when it comes to the least developed countries (LDCs) which, for the most part, are constrained to raise their exports to desired levels due to difficulties in complying with RoO norms -- often found too stringent by such economies. This is precisely why, LDCs have been clamouring on the issue given a chance in the multilateral forum of the World Trade Organisation (WTO).

Recognised as one of the key tools of market access, the rules meant to determine the origin status of products from exporting countries are not just about tracing where (the country) the products originate from.

In respect of the bulk of the natural -- agricultural and aquatic - products, it is the source of origin that fulfils the RoO requirements by way of recognising these as wholly obtained products. But in case of the manufactured products, it is by way of determining the required value addition that constitutes the compliance norms.

Depending on the nature and terms of trade agreements among countries - bilateral or regional - the requirements of the RoO vary. However, because of supply-side constraints in most LDCs, especially in respect of manufactured products requiring inputs from third-country sources, these countries are generally offered comparatively relaxed conditions for their products to qualify for market access and preferential duty in the desired overseas destinations under the Genearlised System of Preferences (GSP) or Regional Trade Agreements (RTAs).

The reason why RoO features as one of the long-drawn issues of the LDCs is that many of these countries contend that the developed and developing countries alike often resort to using the RoO as protectionist barriers to shield their domestic markets from competition.

At a discussion meeting jointly organised by the Metropolitan Chamber of Commerce and Industry (MCCI) and the Bangladesh Foreign Trade Institute (BFTI) in the capital recently on 'Bali Decision on Preferential Rules of Origin for LDCs: Issues for Bangladesh', speakers spoke of RoO as trade-restrictive, denying access of the country's products to various overseas markets, and called upon the government to team up with the LDC group in a concerted way towards further liberalising and relaxing the qualifying norms under the rules of origin regime.

In recognition of the fact that RoO is crucial to the LDC exports, the Committee of Rules of Origin at the WTO reviews the developments time to time in line with proceedings of the global trading practices.

The issue came up prominently at the WTO Bali Ministerial. It was agreed there that in line with the WTO Work Programme, subsequent negotiations on RoO will require a proactive engagement on the part of the LDCs. This goes to imply that much of the ongoing demands for simplified and flexible rules of origin will depend on how the LDCs themselves pursue and advance their common cause through future trade negotiations on the matter.

Rules of Origin have been under consideration by the WTO since its inception in 1995, but a consensus is yet to be arrived at. The main reason for lack of consensus could well be that different Members of the WTO expect RoO to serve different functions.

Now, looking at the issue too simplistically might offer misleading results. True, simplified rules of origin (with no twists to be abused otherwise by importing countries) will immensely benefit LDCs like Bangladesh. In fact, it is the relatively relaxed rules of origin (in the European Union, for example) that has helped countries like us over the past decades to thrive, despite the looming threats to prospects of export growth. Further relaxation of RoO has ramifications that are to be taken into account.

There can be no denying that given an environment of minimum value addition, say of 15-20 per cent, exports, including of manufactured products, will definitely be easier for many countries. But in the process, there may be little or no expansion in the linkage industries. This is believed to be the general principle governing the whole issue, and truly so.

On the other hand, simplification of RoO is not about lowering value addition only. There is a definite need for simplification in other aspects as well -- as demonstrated in the EU GSP scheme. It has been found that as a fallout of the simplification of the EU GSP, exports from Bangladesh to the EU grew around 16 per cent between 2011 and 2013. It has also helped the growth in the export of diversified products.

Given the dynamics governing RoO, there is the definite need for the LDCs to get together in order to firm up their stand on how to go about in future negotiations on the issue for their collective benefit. Bangladesh, needless to say, has a key role to play in this.

 
Turning 20 marks time for the WTO to grow up
Patrick Low 
South China Morning Post
21 January, 2015
 
Many would be tempted to say that the World Trade Organisation can only mark, not celebrate, its 20th anniversary this year. Shot negotiating deadlines, dashed hopes and endless reiterations of entrenched positions have punctuated the WTO’s two decades of existence with a tedium that has tried even the institution’s strongest supporters.

A succession of anni horribiles has pundits wondering “if” the WTO’s multilateral goals can be reached, rather than “when”. Yet no government, or serious commentator for that matter, has suggested that a moribund WTO is an acceptable new normal.

The gap between words and deeds has persisted for far too long. One can only hope that repeated assertions of fealty to a system based on universality and inclusiveness is stubborn, if frustrated, realism and not a cynical game of blame and responsibility avoidance.

Unlike trade liberalisation, global rule-making cannot be achieved outside a multilateral setting

But to deny the WTO a record of achievement is much too harsh a judgment. For years the institution has tried to sell itself on erroneous grounds instead of playing to its strengths.

The greatest achievement of the WTO is not trade liberalisation. That record is restricted largely to a coordinating role in reducing tariffs on manufactured goods among industrial countries over several decades after the second world war.

Limited progress has been made in agriculture and services. And the WTO is not the chosen venue for developing and emerging economies to liberalise. The considerable degree of trade openness embraced by these countries in recent decades is understated and uncommitted in the WTO.

If 2015 is not going to add to the musty sense of WTO decline, progress is needed on at least three fronts.

First, while not excluding itself from trade liberalisation, the WTO should acknowledge more honestly its limitations in that field. It needs to focus more on making and enforcing rules, where it has been far more successful. Moreover, it is there where the WTO can make its unique contribution as a multilateral institution. Unlike trade liberalisation, global rule-making cannot be achieved outside a multilateral setting.

The institution’s important gift to global order and predictability through its work as a rule keeper is usually below the radar. Nearly 20 WTO committees and working parties meet regularly, without ceremony or fanfare, to work through the minutiae of trade policy.

These committees do many things. They provide a forum for transparency and non-litigious exchange. Some committees also play compliance monitoring and review roles. Governments might use them to hint at the possibility of future litigation where they are unhappy with a partner’s policy stance. They help shape opinion and advance mutual understanding.

Their work is the lubricant of the system, but rarely considered worthy of media coverage. The WTO should make a lot more of this contribution to trade governance and change perceptions of what it actually does.

Second, despite the multiple pronouncements of outside observers that the Doha Round is dead and the WTO should move on, governments are hard-wired not to make public acknowledgements of failure. Capitulation would weaken the institution and further corrode credibility.

Something has to be done to close the Doha Round, albeit in more modest terms than were initially envisaged in the shadow of the September 11, 2001 terror attacks in the United States. This is the greatest immediate challenge.

Perhaps the Doha negotiations could be facilitated by engagement on a longer view aimed at updating and completing the content of the WTO’s work. This is the third challenge for 2015. In a world deeply integrated through globalised production and consumption, the WTO needs to move away from the “them and us” focus of many of its rules. The virtual economy, investment and perhaps competition policy are just some of the issues that could receive closer attention.

Progress or the lack of it on these matters in the WTO’s 20th year will shape the institution’s fortunes for the next decade. The WTO will hold its 10th ministerial summit in Nairobi, Kenya, in mid-December. The venue is symbolic of change and the future.

Will the institution, and above all the governments that populate it, live up to the challenge of looking ahead? Much needs to be done this year for that to happen.
