HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "Trade supports Malaysia’s development
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO Week Ahead: COOL Appeal Report Due, Azevedo Travels to Southeast Asia
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S. loses WTO appeal in meat labeling dispute -source
·         HYPERLINK \l "House Will Move to Repeal COOL Should U.S. Lose Appeal in WTO Dispute
·         HYPERLINK \l "Discuss local subsidies before import tariffs, India tells WTO
·         HYPERLINK \l "USTR Calls On Businesses To Help Implement TFA By Nairobi Goal
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO Trade Facilitation deal to cut costs for poor: IATA
·         HYPERLINK \l "EGA Members Begin To Pore Through Product List, Gauging Support
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S.$120 Billion Trade Finance Gap Holding Back African Growth
·         HYPERLINK \l "Taiwan says tighter controls on Japanese food imports temporary
·         HYPERLINK \l "EU investigates claims Russia, China dumping steel on EU market
·         HYPERLINK \l "Obama Backs Trade Remedy Law Changes, ENFORCE In Customs Bill
·         HYPERLINK \l "Etihad says top US airlines get $71.5 bn in subsidies
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S. Seeks To Splinter Lisbon Union At WIPO After Suffering Defeat On GIs
·         HYPERLINK \l "Worried About Currency Manipulation? Worry About the WTO
 
Trade supports Malaysia’s development 
by Roberto Azevêdo
The Star
18 May 2015
 
TWO thousand years ago, traders and settlers from India and China came to these shores to build ports and trading centres. Malaysians have been leaders in trade ever since.

Trade is integral to the Malaysian economy and the ratio of trade to overall economic activity is among the highest in the world. 
 
Our recently released 2014 trade figures underscore Malaysia’s strength in this area. When you exclude trade between European Union member countries, Malaysia ranked as the 17th largest exporter in the world and the 18th largest importer.

Over the last five decades, the nation’s economy has been growing at a rate of 6.5% per year and this trade-powered growth looks set to continue for many years to come as Malaysian entrepreneurs become ever more globally competitive.
 
According to the World Bank’s Ease of Doing Business study, Malaysia ranks 18th globally, making it one of only a handful of developing countries in the top 20. 
 
In terms of its efficiency at moving goods across borders, Malaysia does even better, ranking 11th.

This is no accident. Successive Malaysian governments have worked hard to improve efficiency, reduce malfeasance, construct first-rate infrastructure facilities and create a business-friendly environment.

Sound macroeconomic policies have kept inflation and unemployment low and the country is open to trade and investment. Indeed, average tariffs applied to imports are only 6% and roughly two-thirds of manufactured imports come into Malaysia duty-free.

Malaysia is clearly open for business – and foreign investors have taken notice. Foreign Direct Investment in 2013 rose to US$12.3bil (RM43bil), up from US$10bil (RM35bil) the prior year.

This has helped Malaysia climb the value-added ladder in the production of goods and services. 
 
Rich in natural resources like oil and gas, and in agriculture products, Malaysia has also diversified its production and export base and is now globally competitive in electrical and electronic goods, chemicals, tourism and financial services.

All of this is supported by Malaysia’s membership of the World Trade Organisation. 
 
For example, Malaysia was part of the WTO’s 1997 information technology agreement which has helped to support the boom in global trade in IT products. 
 
Malaysia is now negotiating with 24 other WTO members to expand this agreement to include a wide range of new products with a global trade value of roughly US$1 trillion (RM3.5 trillion).

Malaysia also worked hard to bring about the WTO’s Trade Facilitation Agreement in Bali in 2013. This agreement will make moving goods across borders faster, easier and cheaper. 
 
It is estimated that this accord could annually deliver a boost to the global economy of up to US$1 trillion and create 21 million jobs worldwide.

Regional and bilateral trade agreements are also an important part of Malaysian trade policy. 
 
Malaysia has signed seven bilateral trade agreements with its trading partners and another six deals as a member of Asean - the regional bloc which the country chairs this year.

There is currently a lot of focus on the Trans-Pacific Partnership negotiations and on the Regional Compre­hensive Economic Partnership. 
 
Some suggest this proliferation of regional agreements may, in some way, constitute a threat to the WTO and the multilateral trading system. 
 
I would argue that the opposite is true.

Trade liberalisation is contagious and when countries agree to open markets in a regional setting they are more inclined to do so globally. 
 
Regional initiatives like Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation have also been laboratories for generating important initiatives - like trade facilitation and the negotiations to scale back barriers to trade in environmental goods, which we are taking forward in the WTO.

Indeed, while these regional agreements tend to grab the headlines, we are also reaching a critical juncture in negotiations on the WTO’s long running Doha Development Agenda. 
 
Since the beginning of the year WTO members have, for the first time in many years, engaged in serious negotiations to liberalise trade in agriculture, manufactured goods and services. 
 
New proposals have come to the fore and there is a renewed commitment to finding solutions.

Many ministers have expressed the desire to strike a deal in December at our Ministerial Conference in Nairobi (the first such WTO meeting to be held in Africa) that would enable us to conclude these talks. 
 
For this to happen, however, WTO members need to set the stage by agreeing in July on a framework accord that would serve as a roadmap to success in Nairobi.

Narrowing the gaps that divide WTO members has proven challenging and there is much work to be done if we are to succeed. 
 
But the prize on offer is very significant.

On a global scale a successful deal would help to inject much-needed growth into the world economy – and for a trade-oriented country like Malaysia, an enhanced global trading system would offer significantly increased opportunities for your ongoing growth and development. 
 
The continued support and leadership of Malaysia will be essential in this effort.
WTO director-general Roberto Azevedo will be on a two-day visit to Malaysia from tomorrow and will be meeting stakeholders and industries. The views expressed here are entirely the writer’s own.
 
 
WTO Week Ahead: COOL Appeal Report Due, Azevedo Travels to Southeast Asia
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, May 18, 2015
 
May 15 — A World Trade Organization dispute panel is expected to issue a decision May 18 in its review of U.S. country-of-origin labeling (COOL) rules.
 
The Dispute Settlement Body (DSB) ruling will determine whether the U.S. must modify or repeal its COOL regulations, which require meat producers to specify on retail packaging where each animal was born, raised and slaughtered.
 
The WTO ruled against the U.S. in two previous decisions, declaring that the COOL rules do not adhere to U.S. obligations under the Technical Barriers to Trade Agreement or the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
 
Mexico and Canada argue that the U.S. COOL rules discriminate against their pork and beef industries by imposing undue burdens and costs exceeding $1 billion per year. Canadian officials said that they will target nearly 40 U.S. products—such as beef, pork, poultry, cherries, chocolate and frozen orange juice—if the U.S. fails to comply with the decision (25 WTO, 2/6/15).
 
The chairmen of the House and Senate agriculture committees said that they would consider repealing the U.S. COOL rules in order to avoid retaliatory trade actions (44 WTO, 3/6/15).
 
Azevedo in Southeast Asia
 
WTO Director-General Roberto Azevedo will travel to Malaysia and the Philippines for a series of meetings to discuss trade issues with high-level government officials.
 
On May 19 and 20, Azevedo will attend an event in Kuala Lumpur hosted by the Institute of Strategic and International Studies. Azevedo is expected to deliver a speech at the event, which is entitled “Benefits and Importance of WTO to International Trade and Developing Members.”
 
On May 21, Azevedo will travel to the Philippines to deliver a speech at an event hosted by the Asian Development Bank.
 
On May 23, Azevedo will attend a meeting of Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation trade ministers in Boracay, Philippines, where he is expected to discuss the latest WTO negotiations aimed at concluding the Doha round.
 
Dispute Settlement Meeting
 
The WTO DSB will convene on May 20 to consider granting a joint U.S.-New Zealand panel request regarding Indonesia's 2012 import licensing programs.
 
The U.S. and New Zealand said the Indonesian measures violate WTO rules because they unfairly discriminate against imports of foreign poultry, beef, apples, grapes, potatoes and other horticultural products. Though Indonesia blocked the creation of the panel in April, the appointment of a panel may not be rejected a second time (75 WTO, 4/20/15).
 
The U.S. will also deliver a statement at the DSB meeting regarding China's compliance with a WTO decision on electronic payment services.
 
Since 2012, the U.S. has urged China to amend its licensing requirements for credit card companies that the U.S. said unfairly favored China Union Pay. Last month, China announced that it revised its regulations effective June 1 to ensure that its policies comply with the WTO dispute panel ruling (82 WTO, 4/29/15).
 
 
U.S. loses WTO appeal in meat labeling dispute -source 
 
May 17 (Reuters) - The United States has lost its appeal against a World Trade Organization ruling ordering it to bring its meat labeling laws into line with global trade rules, according to a government official familiar with the dispute.

In 2011, Canada and Mexico won a WTO ruling that said the U.S. country-of-origin labeling (COOL) rules illegally discriminated against imported meat.

The United States lost a subsequent appeal and was instructed to comply with international rules. But last October the WTO said it had not done so, paving the way for Canada and Mexico to demand the right to impose trade sanctions.

The United States then appealed that decision in November, but the government official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said the WTO had ruled in favor of Canada and Mexico.

A formal WTO announcement is due on Monday.

Canada has said the U.S. rules, which make retailers list the country of origin on meat, cost its farmers and processors about $1 billion a year in lost sales and lower prices. (Reporting by Dave Graham; Editing by Eric Walsh) 
 
 
House Will Move to Repeal COOL Should U.S. Lose Appeal in WTO Dispute
By Catherine Boudreau
WTO Reporter, May 18, 2015
 
May 15 — The House Agriculture Committee has drafted legislation to repeal country-of-origin labeling (COOL) regulations and plans to act quickly if the U.S. loses its appeal of a decision by the World Trade Organization.
 
“If the [WTO] goes the way many of us think it will, and affirms all its other decisions that COOL—which has nothing to do with food safety, its just about a marketing issue—distorts trade, then the committee will move very quickly to repeal COOL,” Chairman of the Agriculture Committee Michael Conaway (R-Texas) told reporters May 15.
 
The chairman is working with Rep. Jim Costa (D-Calif.) on the bill, which would rescind COOL regulations implemented by the Agriculture Department that require meat producers to specify on retail packaging where each animal was born, raised and slaughtered.
 
Congress during debate on the 2008 farm law (Pub. L. No. 110-234) reached a consensus on COOL regulations with the meat industry, as well as with interest groups that said consumers desired more information about their food. However, critics of the labeling requirements continue to argue that large compliance costs and the ongoing trade dispute more than offset any consumer benefits.
 
Canada, Mexico Threaten Retaliation
 
Canada and Mexico initiated the WTO case against U.S. COOL rules, arguing that they discriminate against their pork and beef industries by imposing unwarranted burdens and costs exceeding $1 billion per year.
 
A WTO Dispute Settlement Body in October 2014 decided largely in favor of the two countries, and the U.S. appealed that decision a month later.
 
Canada and Mexico have threatened retaliatory tariff measures if the U.S. loses its appeal and fails to comply with the WTO dispute panel's ruling expected May 18. Canadian officials said that they would target nearly 40 U.S. products, including beef, pork, poultry, cherries, chocolate and frozen orange juice.
 
“If the [WTO] rules against us, both countries have estimated upwards of $2 billion in retaliatory measures, but I don't intend to wait for those,” Conaway said. “However much the retaliatory amount is, is too much.”
 
Conaway said that he thinks the Agriculture Committee could pass legislation during the week of May 18, but getting it before the entire House chamber by Memorial Day would be difficult.
 
Democrats Call for Alternative Fix
 
Several Democratic lawmakers, including ranking member of the House Agriculture Committee Collin Peterson (D-Minn.), don't think that repealing COOL is the best way forward.
 
Rep. Rosa DeLauro (D-Conn.), a member of the House Appropriations agriculture subcommittee, denounced Conaway's legislation during a May 14 press conference and said that some lawmakers fought too hard to put COOL standards into law for them to be repealed.
 
In the Senate, ranking member of the Agriculture Committee Debbie Stabenow (D-Mich.) said that Congress should find a solution that encourages international trade while preserving the right of consumers to know where their food comes from.
 
Senate Agriculture Chairman Pat Roberts (R-Kan.) hasn't ruled out repealing COOL, but said that he will consider any option that will allow the U.S. to be WTO-compliant. “We'll do whatever it takes to protect the livelihood of American farmers, ranchers and industries that will be targeted by retaliation,” Roberts told Bloomberg BNA in an e-mail.
 
Both senators said that they will wait to see the WTO decisions before deciding on next steps.
 
 
Discuss local subsidies before import tariffs, India tells WTO 
D. Ravi Kanth 
18 May 2015
Mint
 
Geneva, May 18 -- India has conveyed to the World Trade Organization (WTO) director general that commitments to reduce trade-distorting farm subsidies must be discussed before pursuing new ideas for reducing import tariffs on agriculture and industrial products for concluding the Doha Development Agenda (DDA) trade negotiations by year-end.

Over the last 10 days, WTO director general Roberto Azevedo has convened closed-door meetings with trade envoys from seven major industrialized and developing countries to discuss new ideas for market-access reduction commitments in agriculture and industrial goods to replace the 2008 revised draft modalities.

Trade envoys from the US, the European Union (EU), China, India, Brazil, Australia and Japan took part in the meetings held between 6 and 12 May.

Also present at the meetings were the WTO General Council chair Fernando de Mateo of Mexico and the heads of the negotiating groups for agriculture and industrial goods ambassadors John Adank and Remigi Winzap, respectively.

The meetings were aimed at drawing up the precise modalities based on a "recalibration" approach in the post-Bali programme for concluding the DDA negotiations by the end of this year at the upcoming 10th ministerial conference in Nairobi, Kenya.

A majority of developing and poorest countries, including India and China, repeatedly demanded that all the existing Doha negotiating mandates, such as the 2001 Doha ministerial declaration, the 2004 July framework agreement, the 2005 Hong Kong ministerial declaration, and the 2008 revised draft modalities in agriculture and industrial goods, must remain as the basis for concluding the stalled Doha trade negotiations.

But the US opposed the 2008 draft modalities on the grounds that they fail to address the changed realities in which major emerging economies such as China and India are being exempted from appropriate reduction commitments in agriculture subsidies and tariffs for farm and industrial products.

In the face of the continued standoff between the developing countries on one side and the industrialized countries led by the US on the other, director general Azevedo has suggested a variation of average tariff cuts for agriculture and industrial goods with substantially truncated flexibilities, said people familiar with the discussions.

"An average low tariff cut will help industrialized countries to shelter their sensitive tariff products, while it might adversely affect a developing country like India to bring down its bound tariff for several products below the current applied rate," said a trade analyst from an industrialized country.

Although Azevedo did not specify any figures for an average cut for agriculture products or a cut on average for industrial products, the seven participants discussed several aspects such as the impact of average cuts on their respective bound and applied tariffs at this juncture.

Besides, the seven countries discussed whether such a framework would have a measurable impact for cutting down high agriculture tariffs in many industrialized countries as well as tariff escalation, which discourages the development of processing activity in the countries where raw materials originate.

More importantly, they discussed how the figures for average cuts for agricultural products deviated from the so-called tier formula of the 2008 revised draft modalities in which higher tariffs would bear higher cuts as compared to lower tariffs.

Clearly, the average cuts with reduced flexibilities are not beneficial for India and other developing countries, said a trade envoy, requesting anonymity.

As regards tariff reduction commitments for industrial goods, the 2008 revised draft modalities suggested the "Swiss formula" with accompanying flexibilities. The Swiss formula results in deeper cuts on higher tariffs based on coefficients (a higher coefficient means lower reduction in tariffs).

The trade envoys from the industrialized countries-the US, the EU, Australia and Japan-suggested that they are open to considering the so-called average cut framework with extremely reduced or no flexibilities in both agriculture and industrial goods.

The US has made it known that with the proposed "recalibration" to reduce the overall level of ambition in market access for agriculture and industrial goods, there should be no demands for any additional flexibilities.

China and India made it clear that they continue to adhere to the 2008 revised draft modalities to conclude the Doha trade negotiations. The two countries said that while they are willing to discuss new ideas, including the average reduction commitments, their governments will judge the outcomes in relation to the 2008 modalities.

More importantly, China and India maintained that they will not accept any framework that would undermine the flexibilities for special products and the special safeguard mechanism in agriculture and specific flexibilities in industrial goods as proposed in the 2008 modalities, the envoy said.

Azevedo, however, did not discuss what ought to be the reduction commitments in the trade-distorting domestic subsidies, export subsidies and export credits that are provided by industrialized countries.

WTO's highest court, the Appellate Body, had established that the domestic subsidies and export-financing schemes for cotton producers in the US had adversely affected the global cotton trade in a dispute launched by Brazil. Also, in another dispute against sugar subsidies, the Appellate Body had passed strictures against the EU.

But, for some inexplicable reason, the trade-distorting domestic subsidies and export subsidies and export credits for farm products were not covered during the meetings, said an African trade envoy familiar with the meetings.

Further, China, India, and Brazil asked the director general to decide the level of ambition for reducing commitments in subsidies in domestic support and export subsidies before the market access consultations to discuss the combination of average and cut on average formula.

A major industrialized country has maintained that there is nothing to discuss in the domestic support pillar, while another major industrialized country is reluctant to discuss the export competition pillar at this point.

The director general's consultations failed to bring any convergence between the industrialized countries on the one side and developing countries on the other due to sharp differences over several issues concerning market access, particularly over the flexibilities that are accorded to developing countries on special products and the special safeguard mechanism in the 2008 revised draft modalities.

 
USTR Calls On Businesses To Help Implement TFA By Nairobi Goal
Inside U.S. Trade - 05/15/2015
 
Deputy U.S. Trade Representative Bruce Hirsh on May 12 called on U.S. businesses with operations in developing countries to help gauge where those countries are in ratifying the Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA) while expressing optimism that the agreement will be implemented before the World Trade Organization's tenth ministerial in December.
 
Hirsh said USTR has reached out directly to countries that have submitted notifications of the commitments they intend to implement immediately upon the TFA's entry-into-force -- known as Category A notifications -- to see where those countries are in terms of TFA ratification.
 
"It would be useful for those on the ground to help us out to determine what the status is with regard to [developing] countries," Hirsh said at a panel hosted by the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.
 
Those developing countries, which Hirsh said total about 60, are expected to ratify the TFA before the WTO ministerial in Nairobi, Kenya. In addition, Hirsh said he expects the 28 European Union member states and 38 "high-income" countries to ratify TFA over the next few months.
 
"WTO members do have varying domestic processes to ratify, to accept the agreement," Hirsh said. "We know that a very large number of them already have those processes underway and have already indicated their expectation to accept over the next few months, certainly ahead of Nairobi."
 
Only four countries have ratified TFA to date: the United States, Singapore, Hong Kong and Mauritius. Two-thirds of the WTO membership, or 108 members, must ratify TFA before it is implemented.
 
Several members including South Africa, Colombia and Guinea were skeptical they could ratify TFA in time for the Nairobi ministerial at an informal meeting of the Preparatory Committee on Trade Facilitation in March (Inside U.S. Trade, March 27).
 
 
WTO Trade Facilitation deal to cut costs for poor: IATA 
18 May 2015
Hong Kong Shipping Gazette Daily Enews
 
THE International Air Transport Association (IATA) has signed a memorandum of understanding with the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE) to cut red tape.

The measure targets poor countries striving to implement the World Trade Organisation's Trade Facilitation Agreement by helping them to cut costs in the air cargo industry.

The accord is expected to lower transport costs by up to 10 per cent through more efficient facilitation thus raising their competitiveness, the UNECE said in a media release.

For the air cargo industry in nations implementing the agreement, capacity would need to be developed to facilitate automated and smart border solutions and secure supply chain processes, reports Xinhua.

"The air cargo industry ships around 35 per cent of global trade by value. For up to 90 per cent of the 'transport' time the goods may actually be on the ground waiting to be processed," said IATA director general Tony Tyler, former CEO of Hong Kong's Cathay Pacific Airways.

He said the WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement presents an opportunity to reduce delays and costs, particularly in developing countries.

Said UNECE executive secretary Christian Friis Bach: "This MoU with IATA will strengthen the implementation of our standards in developing and least developed countries, and as a consequence, help create growth and new jobs."

 
EGA Members Begin To Pore Through Product List, Gauging Support
Inside U.S. Trade - 05/15/2015
 
The United States and 16 other participants in the negotiations for an Environmental Goods Agreement (EGA) began the arduous task of poring through a list of roughly 650 products proposed for tariff elimination in order to determine the level of support or opposition that exists for each good, according to Geneva sources.
 
The process, which happened at the sixth round of talks that took place in Geneva May 4-8, consisted of members signaling which products from the list they wanted to see included in a final deal and probing other participants about their positions. This process will be repeated at the next two rounds, which are scheduled for June 15-19 and July 27-31, sources said.
 
But these sources shied away from specifying which products received broad support and which were met with skepticism or scrutiny. One Geneva source noted that, because this was the first time members reviewed the consolidated list, the fact that a member has questions about a product does not necessarily indicate it is opposed to including that good in the EGA. By the same token, products that seemed to have general consensus at last week's meeting could be the subject of objections at future rounds, this source said.
 
According to this source, Australia -- which chairs the EGA -- is aiming after the July round to divide the consolidated list of roughly 650 goods into two parts, one consisting of products that are broadly supported by the members and another with products that are not. It will then be up to EGA members to lobby each other on which products should be included on the consensus list and which should be left out.
 
This will be a significant shift in the product scope negotiations, which at this point have been described as preliminary by sources. While no dates have been set, one source said members are eying mid-September, late October and late November for the ninth, 10th and 11th rounds.
 
Sources said members during the May round faced many questions about the environmental credibility of the products they were proposing. Whether these products are environmentally credible is an important metric that EGA members say they are focusing on, even though it has no specific definition.
 
But EGA members are also facing technical hurdles as well. For instance, some members have differing tariff classifications on emerging products like light-emitting diodes (LED).
 
Even though the World Customs Organization has issued guidance about where LEDs should be placed in the Harmonized System (HS) of tariff codes, not all of the EGA members have followed that recommendation and this is an issue they have to resolve, one source said.
 
Related News | World Trade Organization | Environmental Goods Agreement | Wednesday | 
Inside U.S. Trade - 05/15/2015 , Vol. 33, No. 19 
147918
 
 
U.S.$120 Billion Trade Finance Gap Holding Back African Growth 
17 May 2015
All Africa
 
May 17, 2015 (New Era/All Africa Global Media via COMTEX) -- Lack of access to affordable trade finance is holding back the economic and employment potential of African countries, says Standard Bank.

According to the African Development Bank's recent report on trade finance in Africa, the conservative estimate for the value of unmet demand for bank-intermediated trade finance is between US$110 billion and US$120 billion, which is significantly higher than earlier estimated figures of US$25 billion.

"Imagine the number of jobs that would be created if small and medium enterprises (SMEs) in Africa, could do the cross-border transactions that would have been supported by the unmet gap in demand for trade finance. The gap means there are corporates out there who would have liked to have done that business but just because they could not access trade finance they could not do those trades," says Vinod Madhavan, Head of Transactional Products and Services at Standard Bank South Africa.

Trade finance has a direct impact on employment and Madhavan, who was recently appointed as member of the Banking Commission Advisory Board to the International Chamber of Commerce (ICC), the largest business organisation in the world, says the African market is clearly underserviced from a trade finance perspective.

"There is an opportunity for trade financiers to help fill this void but there are a number of barriers to trade that need to be removed. This is why creating uniform rules and standards across various facets of trade will go a long way to closing these gaps and removing these barriers," he says.

The ICC Banking Commission produces universally accepted rules and guidelines for international banking practice. ICC rules and guidelines on documentary credits serve as the basis of US$ 2 trillion worth of trade transactions a year. The ICC Banking Commission helps policymakers and standard setters to translate their vision into concrete programmes and regulations to enhance business practices throughout the world.

Letters of credit are very popular in cross-border trade as they are legal and enforceable in all markets that have adopted the ICC standards.

Madhavan says South-South trade in the developing world would be significantly increased if trade finance could meet demand.

According to the World Trade Organisation (WTO), not all developing countries participate equally in international trade, with Africa having the smallest slice of world exports. WTO's World Trade Report 2014 says the potential of trade in supporting development has not yet been fully realised. The emerging trends suggest, however, that trade will be a major force for development in the future.

Despite the positive outlook, the WTO report says 2014 was the third straight year of below average trade growth and that this will not change in 2015.

"There is a need for education; and by that I don't mean just training corporates and businesses about trade rules and risk, but also the market participants and regulators. Regulators also need to understand that when they make a change it has both a direct and an indirect (sometimes unintended) impact on what happens," says Madhavan.

A better understanding of risk finance is needed. "There needs to be a better understanding of how the trade between these markets will grow by taking on more risk in an appropriate manner. This is also where you need the local market participants to give their input and advice," says Madhavan.

There needs to be more understanding of risk, not just counter-party credit, country, currency risk, but also compliance risk, which is on the rise in Africa (and other emerging markets) and there is a growing concern of de-risking by certain players, who would rather step back than face the higher risks.

While global initiatives in the space of managing compliance risk will benefit businesses in Africa, more hard data on the problem is needed so proper advocacy actions can be taken. This is where collaboration at a forum like the ICC can help get a better handle on the problem and come up with solutions that are relevant and appropriate for emerging markets (such as markets in Africa).

This needs to be augmented by increased awareness and support from corporates.

"There is also a need for corporates to realise they need to be more responsible," says Madhavan.

Madhavan's Banking Commission appointment is in line with the Banking Commission's goal to penetrate new markets, particularly in Africa and is timely ahead of the 2016 ICC Banking Commission's Annual Meeting, to take place in South Africa.

"Everyone has realised the potential for growth in Africa and now everyone wants a piece of the action. But this does not come without risks.

This is where the framework for trade being developed by the ICC and with participation of stakeholders like Standard Bank can go a long way to improving understanding of Trade and Trade Finance and thereby ultimately enhancing employment opportunities, across the continent," Madhavan says. 
 
 
Taiwan says tighter controls on Japanese food imports temporary 
 
TAIPEI, May 18 (Reuters) - Tighter controls imposed by Taiwan on Japanese food imports would be temporary and were aimed at uncovering the mislabeling of goods from regions hit by the 2011 Fukushima nuclear disaster, Taiwan's president said Monday.

Taiwan last week began enforcing stricter rules on inspecting imported Japanese food products potentially originating in radiation-exposed areas, prompting a warning from Tokyo that it may call on the WTO for a ruling unless the restrictions are eased.

"These are short term measures," Taiwan President Ma Ying-jeou told reporters. "We value our relationship with Japan."

The two nations should quickly cooperate to determine if the suspect labeling originated in Japan, Taiwan or both countries Ma said.

Earlier this year, Taiwanese authorities said that more than 200 Japanese food products sold on the island originally came from radiation exposed areas near Fukushima Dai-ichi, but were mislabelled as having come from other areas.

Health officials at the time indicated they discovered suspect labeling by importers of Japanese food products, including Chinese-language labels carrying different places of origin that were stuck to mask the products' domestic Japanese labels.

Ma said the issue was legal, rather than scientific, in response to Japan's calls for Taiwan to ease or scrap its rules based on a scientific perspective.

The new rules, which went into effect last Friday, allow only foods with Japanese government-issued place of origin certificates to enter Taiwan. Also, certain items from designated places in Japan will need radiation testing reports before they are granted access into Taiwan markets.

Since the rules took effect, only one out of a batch of 30 food imports from Japan did not have the required proof of origin, according to the latest data on Monday from Taiwan's Ministry of Health and Welfare. The suspect batch was a 15.5 kilogram frozen yellowtail fish product, it said.

Taiwan has since March 2011 banned food products from the Japanese prefectures of Fukushima, Ibaraki, Gunma, Tochigi and Chiba. Local media reported in March that food imports from some of those banned prefectures had crept into local supermarkets due to the mislabeling. (Reporting by J.R. Wu; Editing by Richard Pullin) 
 
 
EU investigates claims Russia, China dumping steel on EU market 
 
BRUSSELS/MOSCOW, May 15 (Reuters) - The European Commission has launched an anti-dumping investigation into allegations China and Russia have been selling a type of steel below market cost on the EU market, it said on Thursday in an official announcement.

The investigation follows a complaint in April from Eurofer, the European steel association, which said Russia and China were dumping cold-rolled flat steel products -- used in cars and home appliances -- on the EU market "causing material injury" to the EU industry.

If following its investigation the Commission finds that the allegations are true, it can impose duties.

The latest batch of duties was announced on Wednesday when the Commission said the EU was imposing anti-dumping duties on imports of a grade of electrical steel from China, Japan, Russia, South Korea and the United States, the second set of measures this year to protect EU steelmakers.

Eurofer says dumped imports have damaged EU industry by driving prices to below the costs of production, causing substantial losses.

China's steel exports rose 32.7 percent in the first four months of 2015 after reaching record levels over the course of last year, with overseas markets offering a lifeline to steelmakers struggling with faltering domestic demand.

Shen Danyang, a spokesman for China's Ministry of Commerce, told a press briefing on Friday that the surge in Chinese steel product exports was "normal and also beyond reproach", and reflected a rise in demand as well as the strong competitiveness of domestic steelmakers.

"Whether it is the United States or other countries, we want to express our opposition to using the rapid increase in Chinese steel product exports as a reason to prepare a series of trade measures," he said.

Spokespeople for two of Russia's largest steel companies said they had not been exporting excessive volumes or undercutting the market.

A spokeswoman for Severstal, said it exported in full compliance with international trade rules.

"The European market is important to Severstal and we therefore plan to take an active part in the investigation, proving the absence of dumping and any injury to domestic producers from our supply chain."

A spokesman for another Russian steel company Novolipetsk Steel said he was certain the firm was not guilty of dumping.

Industry sources in Moscow said Russian companies exported about 724,000 tonnes of cold-rolled steel to the European Union in 2014, compared to 727 tonnes in 2013. (Reporting by Barbara Lewis in Brussels, Jack Stubbs and Svetlana Burmistrova in Moscow and David Stanway in Beijing; Editing by Susan Thomas and Michael Perry) 
 
 
Obama Backs Trade Remedy Law Changes, ENFORCE In Customs Bill
Inside U.S. Trade - 05/15/2015
 
The Obama administration this week formally endorsed the trade remedy law changes included in the customs reauthorization bill to make it easier for petitioners to file successful antidumping (AD) and countervailing duty (CVD) cases as well as all but one provision of a bill aimed at fighting the evasion of custom duties.
 
That provision is the judicial review in the so-called "ENFORCE Act" that would allow interested parties to challenge a U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) decision regarding duty evasion.
 
The Senate on May 14 approved customs reauthorization as a stand-alone bill by a vote of 78-20, but its future is uncertain given House and Administration opposition to a controversial amendment that would put the onus on the Commerce Department to investigate undervalued currency as a subsidy in countervailing duty cases.
 
As a result of the bill stalling, supporters of the trade remedy law changes are working to get bipartisan support for them to be offered as an amendment to a bill extending Trade Promotion Authority (TPA) and Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA). At press time, it was unclear whether lawmakers will opt to offer the ENFORCE Act as an amendment to the TPA-TAA bill.
 
"The Administration welcomes new enforcement provisions contained in the [customs] legislation which will strengthen the Commerce Department's ability to address non-cooperative foreign companies and governments in trade remedy proceedings," the administration said in a May 14 statement of administrative policy (SAP) through the Office of Management and Budget (OMB).
 
This is an apparent reference to the provision that would give Commerce more flexibility to use so-called adverse facts available that are likely to drive up duties. "This provision and others contained in the legislation will enhance the Commerce Department's implementation of AD/CVD laws," OMB said.
 
The adverse facts available provision would clarify that Commerce is not obligated to determine what a dumping or countervailing duty rate would have been if a mandatory respondent had cooperated with the department. This would roll back the rulings of U.S. courts that Commerce should try to figure out what a foreign company's rate would have been had it cooperated in a trade remedy case.
 
This is one of several Commerce-related provisions in Title IV of the customs bill that also includes four key changes to the process by which the U.S. International Trade Commission (ITC) determines injury or threat of injury (Inside U.S. Trade, May 1).
 
The SAP does not refer to the ITC provisions, but supporters of the enforcement package say this does not mean the administration is not supporting all provisions. Some of them noted that the SAP is essentially a one-page statement on a 240-page bill that only highlights a number of provisions. Others speculated that the administration may not have wanted to comment on ITC-related changes because it is a quasi-independent agency not under direct control of the White House.
 
The SAP says the administration supports "most provisions" of the bill that would reauthorize trade facilitation and trade enforcement functions. "The Administration strongly supports the enactment of these provisions," the SAP said.
 
The administration expressed opposition to the provision that urges Commerce to investigate currency manipulation as a countervailable subsidy, as well as provisions that reform the process for enacting duty suspensions known as the Miscellaneous Tariff Bill.
 
According to its SAP, the administration supports a more transparent process for considering duty suspensions but has "concerns that trade policy considerations, such as the effect of duty suspensions on U.S. preference programs and current and future free trade agreement partners, have not been included in the bill."
 
On the ENFORCE ACT, the administration is objecting to have the duty evasion decisions made by CBP be subject to judicial review, even though it is similar to the lawsuits interested parties can file against Commerce and ITC decisions in AD/CVD cases at Court of International Trade (CIT).
 
"We have concerns with a specific provision that would grant the violator or alleger the ability to file a complaint in the Court of International Trade," the administration said in its SAP. "This would undermine enforcement of [AD/CVD] laws, going against the objective of the bill."
 
The administration said it will work with Congress on these proposals going forward. One informed source familiar with the ENFORCE Act said this objection is due to CBP opposition to instituting a judicial review of its decisions in duty evasion cases to which it is not accustomed.
 
This source and other supporters of ENFORCE said the judicial review of CBP is critical, especially since their duty evasion decisions are largely discretionary and conducted without an open factual record that exists in trade remedy cases.
 
According to the customs bill, any interested party, including the entity which raised the evasion complaint to CBP and the entity that was found to be committing duty evasion, can challenge the agency's decision. They can do so by concurrently filing a summons and a complaint in the CIT no later than 30 business days after the CBP completes a duty evasion review. That filing can contest any factual findings or legal conclusions on which CBP based its determination, according to the bill.
 
The bill stipulates that the legal standard of review for the court to find a CBP decision unlawful is if it is "arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not in accordance with law."
 
This is one of two standards that prevail in challenges of U.S. agency decisions; the other is that an agency made a decision that is not supported by the "substantial evidence" in the factual record of a given proceeding, a private-sector lawyer said.
 
He said the applicable standard in the ENFORCE Act reflects the fact that there is generally no formal record in duty evasion cases. He also said it may be harder for a challenger to meet than the "substantial evidence" standard. -- Jutta Hennig
 
 
Etihad says top US airlines get $71.5 bn in subsidies 
15 May 2015
Agence France Presse
 
Etihad Airways said on Friday that the US government has provided America's three biggest airlines with more than $70 billion in benefits and concessions, citing a report it commissioned.

The Abu Dhabi-based airline has itself come under attack from US rivals over subsidies.

"US airlines have received benefits valued at $71.48 billion, more than $70 billion of which has been since 2000, enabling the nation's three largest carriers to transition from the verge of bankruptcy to today's industry leaders," a statement from Etihad said.

Last year, the three largest US carriers posted profits of almost $9 billion, close to half the gains racked up by the entire worldwide aviation industry, the airline added.

In early March, American Airlines, Delta Airlines and United Airlines, along with US airline labour groups, accused Gulf carriers of enjoying interest-free loans, subsidised airport charges, government protection on fuel losses, and below-market labour costs that are considered unfair subsidies by the World Trade Organization.

They called on the US government to open new talks over bilateral air agreements to address what they said are violations of those pacts, giving the Gulf carriers unfair competitive advantage.

Etihad general secretary Jim Callaghan said his airline's study was not intended to criticise the subsidies US competitors received.

"We simply wish to highlight the fact that US carriers have been benefitting and continue to benefit from a highly favourable legal regime, such as bankruptcy protection and pension guarantees, exemptions from certain taxes, and various other benefits," he said.

Callaghan said the benefits had "created a highly distorted market in which carriers such as Etihad Airways have to compete."

 
U.S. Seeks To Splinter Lisbon Union At WIPO After Suffering Defeat On GIs
World Trade Online
Posted: May 14, 2015 
 
After losing another battle against the expansion of a World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) treaty called the Lisbon Agreement that would pave the way for a new international register of geographical indications (GIs), the United States is trying to splinter proponents of the expansion by warning it could bring some of them financial harm.
 
On May 11, the U.S. and 11 other countries proposed a change to the draft rules of procedure for a diplomatic conference on the Lisbon Agreement that would have extended voting privileges to all 188 WIPO members -- opening the possibility for opponents to block the treaty's expansion to include GIs. But the proposal was only able to garner the support of one of the Lisbon Agreement's 28 signatories, collectively known as the Lisbon Union.
 
Now, the U.S. is trying to convince the Lisbon Union's smaller economies that they will not be able to afford to implement a new GI register, according to a Geneva source. The U.S. is carrying the message to these countries -- many of which are in Africa -- that if larger Lisbon Union members register hundreds of GIs, smaller economies may not have the resources to ensure that they are protected in a manner consistent with the agreement.
 
This would make these smaller economies subject to challenges and subsequently large fines, the U.S. has warned, according to the Geneva source. But whether this argument is having any sway yet is difficult to determine.
 
Even if this route proves unsuccessful, the U.S. and its allies in this fight may have another route to inflict pressure: cutting WIPO funding for the Lisbon Agreement. One source from a country not a party to the Lisbon Agreement suggested that anger over the Lisbon Union breaking with WIPO precedent by keeping the diplomatic conference closed might spur parties to try and take this sort of action.
 
WIPO's budget committee, which comprises of 53 members, every two years submits a budget to the general membership that sets funding levels to cover implementation, secretariat functions, and various other costs for the treaties administered within WIPO. The WIPO General Assembly must adopt a budget with a two-thirds majority. Eight members of the Lisbon Union sit on the budget committee, as does the U.S.
 
Broadly speaking, the U.S. aim in this whole fight is to ensure that European Union countries do not obtain another tool to secure monopoly rights over food names that the U.S. agri-food industry believes are generic.
 
The U.S. and EU have long disagreed on the application of GIs, and in the context of the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership negotiations; the U.S. has thus far been dismissive of EU demands on the issue. Washington has argued that the U.S. trademark system offers sufficient protection to geographic food names when warranted, and has objected to the notion of reserving names like “feta” cheese for only certain producers.
 
European Union member states that are signatories of the Lisbon Agreement have been seen as the main proponents of the restricted voting rights and the expansion of the treaty to include a GI register. Those countries are Bulgaria, Czech Republic, France, Hungary, Italy, Portugal and Slovakia.
 
Germany and Switzerland, which is not member of the EU but is a part of the European Economic Area, backed the position of Lisbon Union members that voting rights should be restricted and also expressed an interest in joining the Lisbon Union if the treaty's functions are expanded at the conference.
 
Multiple sources said they now expect the Lisbon Union to agree to an amendment creating a GI register before the conference concludes on May 21. The Lisbon Agreement currently protects roughly 1,000 geographic names known as "appellations of origin," restricting their use to certain producers from those regions. Appellations of origin are typically narrower than GIs and have not posed as much commercial friction with U.S. stakeholders.
 
Non-signatories of the Lisbon Agreement also see the restriction of voting privileges as setting a dangerous precedent at WIPO, according to Geneva sources.
 
Multiple sources have said that diplomatic conferences, which are held to negotiate new treaties or update existing ones, typically extend voting privileges to all WIPO members. A diplomatic conference has not excluded the full membership from voting since 1989, when certain parties adopted the Madrid Agreement on trademarks.
 
“This is about more than the legitimacy of the Lisbon Agreement itself. This issue has alarming implications for the future of WIPO as an organization,” Pamela Hamamoto, permanent representative of the U.S. to the United Nations and other international organizations in Geneva, said in her opening remarks at the conference.
 
Hamamoto spoke on behalf of Argentina, Australia, Chile, Japan, New Zealand, Panama, South Korea and Uruguay, all of which signed a March 30 letter to Lisbon Union members arguing that voting rights should be given to the full membership of WIPO.
 
The U.S. is also pointing out to some African Lisbon Union members that abandoning consensus could be especially dangerous because -- if adopted in future negotiations -- it could lead to them being “bullied,” according to a Geneva source. If successful, this strategy would lead to more countries abstaining from votes at the conference.
 
The failure of the U.S. and its allies in this fight to change the rules of procedure represents the second defeat for Washington in this fight, after it tabled a proposal At WIPO last October to open up the process that was rejected.
 
WIPO members have also expressed fear over the precedent set by the preparatory meeting of Lisbon Union members in October 2014. At that meeting, draft rules were adopted without consensus and without a vote, according to multiple sources.
 
Lisbon Union members rebuffed repeated requests to extend voting privileges to all WIPO members by claiming it was bound by international law to only let its 28 members negotiate the agreement.
 
“With respect to the procedures of the Diplomatic Conference itself, and in response to the request of some countries to be granted the status of Member, we would like to emphasize that we are all bound by existing international law,” a May 5 letter from 26 Lisbon Union members said. Israel and North Korea were the only members not to sign the letter.
 
The letter claims that Lisbon Union members are bound by Articles 39 and 40 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties and Article 13 of the Lisbon Agreement. These articles broadly state that all contracting parties to an agreement must be involved in its renegotiation or amending processes, but does not provide guidance on the participation of non-contracting members.
 
The legal counsel of the WIPO secretariat rebuffed the Lisbon Union members' claim that international law required that voting privileges only be extended to contracting parties after Argentina requested a ruling at the May 11 meeting. But the counsel, at the same time, also rejected the notion that international law requires diplomatic conferences to be open to all WIPO members, saying that the decision whether to extend or restrict voting privileges was the sole discretion of Lisbon Union members.
 
 
Worried About Currency Manipulation? Worry About the WTO
By Bob Davis
Wall Street Journal Blogs
May 14, 2015, 6:05 AM ET
 
If Congress actually passes a law to crack down on alleged currency manipulation by U.S. trading partners, it would likely be challenged in the Geneva-based World Trade Organization.
 
Anti-free trade activists are doing their best to expand negotiations over the Trans-Pacific Partnership to include concerns about so-called currency manipulation. But a provision in a separate customs enforcement bill would do the trick, say experts on both sides of the trade fight.

The provision, pushed by Democratic Sen. Charles Schumer of New York, Republican Sen. Rob Portman of Ohio—a former U.S. trade representative, no less—and others would make a seemingly simple change in U.S. trade law. It would include currency undervaluation as an unfair subsidy under U.S. trade law, which applies to all nations, not just the 12 in the TPP.

For example, should the Commerce Department decide that China–not a member of the TPP deal—had kept its currency undervalued as a way to help Chinese steelmakers, then under the proposed law, Commerce could use that finding to whack China with tariffs. Simple and enforceable.

“Currency manipulation could now be considered a factor, but to have a successful case an industry would still need to show injury,”  Scott Paul, president of the Alliance for American Manufacturing, an organization of steelmakers and the United Steelworkers, said in an email. “And yes, it would apply to ALL trading partners.”

Mr. Paul’s use of the word  “injury,” refers to a provision in all subsidy and dumping cases that the International Trade Commission, a U.S. agency, must determine that an industry is “injured” by the unfair trade practices. (They might not be injured, for instance, if the U.S. industry was booming anyway.)

But such a case wouldn’t end there. China–or whoever was hit with a  U.S. subsidy tariff—would be sure to challenge the judgment at the World Trade Organization, said Peterson Institute for International Economics trade expert Gary Hufbauer,  a free trader. It’s far from clear how the WTO would rule.

But he says one thing is certain: The WTO would take a long time to decide—and by that time, the offending currency practices may have changed. “If the U.S. Congress enacts currency legislation in 2015, the final appellate body decision (by the WTO) might well wait until 2018 or beyond,” he and Cathleen Cimino, another PIIE researcher, warn in an upcoming Peterson Institute blog post.

Mr. Paul, who backs the currency provision, says he wants TPP to have separate currency provisions, so the U.S. has another tool to deal with trading partners.

But if a TPP provision ever came into being, expect that to face a long WTO challenge as well — or a fight at one of the TPP arbitration panels.
END


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.