Little chance of having Doha Round work program by end July: WTO chief

India-US solar issue: WTO panel to give final ruling by October 

India to face the brunt in WTO Solar Power dispute with US

US poultry products likely to enter Indian mkt by Aug next year

OECD: Millions of workers face poverty trap despite recovery

OECD Sees a Global Economic Growth Slowdown

Japan, U.S. Resume Working-Level TPP Talks before Ministerial Meeting

Brazil questions legitimacy of Western sanctions vs Russia

Joburg to house Brics bank's office

New Brics bank poised to be among top in the world

Differences of Brics nations in evidence as club stages summit; Development




Little chance of having Doha Round work program by end July: WTO chief

8 July 2015

Xinhua News Agency

GENEVA, July 8 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Xinhua) -- WTO Director-General HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Roberto Azevedo on Wednesday predicted little prospect of delivering a "detailed and substantive" work program by the end of July.

A meeting of all HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO members was convened in Geneva Wednesday to discuss the current state of play in negotiations on the work program to advance the remaining issues of the Doha Development Agenda.

Azevedo gave his view that members have made significant progress in understanding each other's positions, but as yet it is not enough to provide a sufficiently clear roadmap on the way forward.

"Whether we can deliver a work program is in the hands of the members and their ability to bring forward new proposals in the coming days which will pave the way to find consensus," said Azevedo.

Azevedo said he shared the commitment that "regardless of what happens in the coming weeks, every member remains strongly committed to finding convergence between now and December which will allow us to agree significant outcomes in Nairobi."

Azevedo outlined that "Success in Nairobi remains the ultimate target of our work. Nairobi is about showing real and definite progress in implementing the Bali decisions, delivering for developing and least developed countries, and delivering outcomes that allow us to conclude the DDA (Doha Development Agenda)."

The Doha Round is the latest round of trade negotiations among the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO members. Its aim is to achieve major reform of the international trading system through the introduction of lower trade barriers and revised trade rules.

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO members agreed in November 2014 to agree a work program by July as a springboard towards the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO's 10th Ministerial Conference in Nairobi in December. Enditem

Xinhua News Agency

India-US solar issue: WTO panel to give final ruling by October 

Press Trust of India

8 July 2015, 

New Delhi, Jul 8 (PTI) WTO's dispute settlement panel will give its final ruling by October on a complaint by the US against India's domestic content requirements under the solar power programme, a Commerce Ministry official has said.

The panel would come up with an interim report soon and the final ruling is expected only around first week of October, the official added.

As per the norms, India will give its views and comments on the the interim report and it is up to the panel to include those views.

"The ruling, if it goes against India, will have implications for the domestic solar sector," the official said adding Canada has lost a similar case at the WTO.

The US filed a complaint in the WTO in February 2014 alleging discrimination by India's national solar mission against American products.

The US had alleged that India's programme appears to discriminate against US solar equipment by requiring solar energy producers to use locally manufactured cells and by offering subsidies to those developers who use domestic equipment.

It is also alleged that forced localisation requirements restrict US exports to India markets.

On January 11, 2010, India launched its national solar policy -- the Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission. India had earlier set a target of generating 20,000 megawatts of solar power by 2022 which has been increased five fold to one lakh MW.

US companies see this target as a great business opportunity for them. Because of this, they want India to remove the clause of local content requirement. PTI RR KRH MKJ

Press Trust Of India Limited 

India to face the brunt in WTO Solar Power dispute with US

8 July 2015

Cogencis MoneyWire

Wednesday, Jul 8 NEW DELHI - India might face the flak at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization's dispute settlement body over its solar mission programme case against the US, the verdict for which is expected next month, Business Standard reported. "We have presented our case strongly, but the chances of having a favourable decision looks bleak," a senior commerce department official told the Business Standard 

The hearing for the two cases filed by the US took place in May along with

the launch of the Jawaharlal Nehru Solar Mission, which aims at producing

20,000 MW of solar power by 2022, the report said.

In the petition filed, the US stated that India violated Article III:4 of

the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade by not giving US-imported solar

power national treatment as the mandatory usage of domestically produced solar

power panels restricted entry of US imports, according to the report.

The first petition filed in 2013 was against the Government of India as it

was urging developers of photovoltaic projects to procure solar cells and

molecules from domestic producers only. The US stated that India still insisted

on Domestic Content Requirement in the second petition that it filed in 2014.

On Jun 4, 2015 India lost the poultry imports dispute against the US as it

had violated international trading norms by not allowing poultry imports from

the US.  EndPress Trust of India

US poultry products likely to enter Indian mkt by Aug next year 

Press Trust of India

8 July 2015, 

New Delhi, Jul 8 (PTI) The US may start exporting poultry meat and eggs to India by August next year since the WTO in its ruling last month termed the ban on import from the US as "inconsistent" with international rules.

On June 4, India lost a case at the World Trade Organisation (WTO) after the Geneva-based multi-lateral body ruled that the Indian ban on import of poultry meat and eggs from the US was "inconsistent" with the international norms.

"India has a maximum of 15 months to implement this ruling. So maximum by August-September next year, the US can start exporting poultry meat and eggs. On July 20, India will tell its 'intention to implement' the ruling to the WTO's dispute settlement body " an official said.

The Commerce Ministry is in talks with the Agriculture Ministry to implement the WTO ruling.

India is a big market for the US, which is one of the world's largest exporters of chicken meat.

India's broiler meat consumption has been consistently increasing and is estimated to have touched 3.72 million tonnes in 2014, from 3.45 million tonnes in 2013.

The WTO panel had said that New Delhi's measures were more trade restrictive than necessary.

In 2014-15, bilateral trade between the two countries stood at USD 64.26 billion. The US-India Business Council (USIBC) had said bilateral trade could touch USD 500-billion mark over the next one decade. PTI RR MKJ

Press Trust Of India Limited 

OECD: Millions of workers face poverty trap despite recovery

9 July 2015

The Irish Examiner

Millions of workers in developed countries such as Ireland risk being trapped in poverty, despite the economic recovery becoming widespread, according to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD.

The organisation, which helps governments tackle the challenges of a globalised economy, says time is running out for those at the bottom of the economic ladder.

In the latest HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD Employment Outlook, the group focuses on minimum wages and cites Ireland as among those countries where minimum pay levels have not kept pace with the average industrial wage.

“In many HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD countries statutory minimum wage levels have risen relative to median (average) wages during the recovery... In a few other countries, however, the value of the minimum wage has fallen relative to the median wage (Ireland, Spain, and Turkey, for example) and in some cases, the nominal value of the minimum wage was cut (for example, Greece).”

This finding accords with the recent poll conducted by the independent think tank Tasc, which found that Ireland has one of the highest rates of low pay in the EU and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD.

In its report, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD says minimum wages can promote a number of social objectives, among them operating as a key labour standard for ensuring fair pay, an instrument for making work pay, a tool to boost tax revenue, and an anchor for pay negotiations.

“At reasonable levels, increases in the minimum wage are unlikely to cause substantial jobs loss,” the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD report states.

However, it describes minimum wage levels as a “blunt tool” for tackling poverty. “Many poor families have no one working and minimum wages do not guarantee that workers will be able to work a sufficient number of hours to lift them out of poverty,” it says.

The report shows that unemployment remains significantly above pre-crisis level in the majority of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD countries. In Greece, unemployment soared from just over 7% in 2007 to 25% by the end of 2014.

In Ireland, unemployment rose from less than 4% to just under 10% over the same period. In contrast, some countries experienced little variation. Austria's unemployment level, at just under 5%, was higher than Ireland's during the boom but barely crept beyond that figure when recession struck.

Youth has been among the hardest-hit groups and may experience long-term scarring, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD says.

“Youth have been one of the groups whose employment has fallen most in recent years,” it says. “The rise in youth unemployment is of great concern, particularly in those HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD countries where it has risen to dramatic levels.”

It cites youth jobless levels in Greece and Spain at more than 50% but also notes that some countries have been more successful in combating it, including Ireland.

“Whilst this is encouraging, youth unemployment is still above the pre-crisis level in the large majority of countries. The persistence of high unemployment among youth risks compromising their long-term career prospects,” the report states.

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD also expresses concern at the persistently high level of the so-called NEET rate — youths neither in employment, education, nor training. “Countries hit hard by the global crisis — Greece, Ireland, Italy, Slovenia, and Spain — have seen particularly large increases in the NEET rate,” it says.

Landmark Digital Limited

OECD Sees a Global Economic Growth Slowdown

By Paul Hannon 

9 July 2015

The Wall Street Journal Asia

Growth is set to slow across more of the world's largest economies, including the U.S. and China, according to leading indicators released Wednesday by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.

The Paris-based research body said its gauges of future economic activity -- which are based on information available for May -- also point to slowdowns in the U.K., Canada and Brazil.

If it materializes, the broadening slowdown suggested by the leading indicators would spell another disappointing year for the global economy, which has struggled to recover from the effects of the 2008 financial crisis.

It would also pose a challenge for central bankers, who have already provided large amounts of stimulus in an effort to keep the recovery on track, and would prefer to return interest rates to more normal rates sooner rather than later.

Many policy makers acknowledge that the longer interest rates remain very low, the higher the risk of another crisis in the financial system.

The U.S. economy contracted during the first three months of the year, but many economists attribute that weakness to temporary factors, including harsh weather and a labor dispute at West Coast ports, while the stronger dollar appears to have damped exports.

However, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD's gauge of future activity suggests that following a return to expansion in the second quarter, the U.S. economy is unlikely to grow as rapidly as it did last year. The leading indicator for the U.S. has fallen in each month this year, and now stands at 99.5. A level below 100, where it started the year, signals a slowdown, while a level above signals an acceleration.

The world's second-largest economy is also on course for a continued slowdown, according to the leading indicator for China, which fell to 97.3 in May from 97.5 in April.

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD's leading indicators are designed to provide early signals of turning points between the expansion and slowdown of economic activity, and are based on a wide variety of data series that have a history of anticipating swings in future economic activity.

The leading indicators suggest that while economies that have grown more rapidly than their peers in recent years -- such as the U.S. and China -- are set to slow, those that have lagged behind are beginning to pick up, including France and Italy.

"Composite leading indicators . . . point to growth convergence across most major economies and within the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD," the research body said.

Indeed, the eurozone is one of the few potential bright spots, as its leading indicator remained steady at 100.7 for the third straight month, signaling that growth is "firming." However, the indicator doesn't capture the disruption that would result if Greece were to leave the eurozone.

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Dow Jones & Company, Inc.

Document AWSJ000020150708eb790000u

Japan, U.S. Resume Working-Level TPP Talks before Ministerial Meeting

9 July 2015

Jiji Press English News Service

Tokyo, July 9 (Jiji Press)--Japanese and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"U.S. government officials resumed their talks related to Trans-Pacific Partnership multilateral free trade negotiations in Tokyo Thursday, seeking breakthroughs on differences over "sensitive" rice and auto parts trade.

Tokyo and Washington will hold the working-level talks through Friday, ahead of the upcoming ministerial meeting of the 12 TPP-negotiating countries.

The 12 countries, including Japan and the United States, aim to reach a broad agreement at the four-day ministerial meeting in Hawaii from July 28.

A focal point of the resumed Japan-U.S. talks is whether the two major economies can find common ground on the issues of Japan's import quota for U.S. rice and U.S. tariff abolition for Japanese auto parts, sources familiar with the situation said.

Hiroshi Oe, Japan's acting chief TPP negotiator, is taking charge of negotiations on agricultural trade and Takeo Mori, economic diplomacy ambassador, on auto parts trade.

The U.S. team is headed by Acting Deputy U.S. Trade Representative Wendy Cutler.

Oe told reporters Thursday morning that he wants to help the TPP ministers strike deal by successfully concluding the working-level talks with the United States.

Japan has proposed to set up a special quota for importing U.S. rice for direct human consumption instead of keeping tariffs on the staple food for Japanese people, but the two sides have yet to agree on the quota's size.

Tokyo aims to limit U.S. rice imports to 50,000 tons a year, but Washington demands a larger amount, the sources said.

In the auto parts field, the two countries have been at odds over the scope and speed of tariff elimination by the United States.

Jiji Press Limited

Brazil questions legitimacy of Western sanctions vs Russia

9 July 2015

PNA (Philippines News Agency)

UFA, July 9 -- Brazilian Minister of External Relations Mauro Vieira said on Wednesday that Brazil "considers unilateral sanctions (against Russia) a tool the legitimacy of which is questionable," explaining that Brazil does not recognize any sanctions imposed outside of the UN legal field.

According to the Brazilian foreign minister, a political dialogue is the most effective means of resolving any conflict.

The conflict in Ukraine escalated in April 2014, when Kiev launched a military operation in the country's southeastern regions in an effort to suppress local independence supporters, who did not want to recognize the new coup-installed government.

The West has accused Moscow of supporting independence fighters in Ukraine's southeast, although no factual evidence has been provided to prove the claims. As a punitive measure, the United States, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union and their allies have imposed several rounds of economic sanctions against Russia.

Russia has repeatedly denied its involvement in the situation in Ukraine and has stressed that sanctions are counterproductive to resolving the Ukrainian crisis and hurt not only the target country but those using the measure as well.

After the West imposed sanctions against Russia, Moscow boosted cooperation with Asian, Arab and Latin American countries, including Brazil, which is a member of the BRICS group of developing economies alongside Russia, India, China and South Africa. (PNA/Sputnik)

Published by HT Syndication with permission from HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Philippines News Agency.

For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com 

Philippines News Agency

Joburg to house Brics bank's office

9 July 2015

Cape Times

THE TREASURY yesterday announced that the Brics-led New Development Bank had endorsed South Africa's proposal that the bank's African regional centre be based in Joburg. The Treasury said bank's board of governors, which is made up of finance ministers from Brics member-states, urged the newly elected management to expedite the opening of the Joburg office and identify projects that would be ready to be financed. - Sechaba ka'Nkosi

Independent Online

New Brics bank poised to be among top in the world

9 July 2015

Cape Times

MOSCOW: The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Brics Development Bank will become one of the world's leading financial institutions when it|begins operations next year, the |Russian Economic Development |Minister said.

"It will focus on infrastructure projects, on the most important |areas that allow expanding the |specific areas, and to promote private and public businesses," said Alexey Ulyukayev.

The Board of Governors of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Brics Development Bank (including Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa), which formally marks the beginning of work of the new bank, met in Moscow on Tuesday. The permanent representatives of the countries in the bank were approved.

VEB Foreign Relations Department director Vladimir Kazbekov was nominated from Russia.

The representative of India was appointed as the bank's first president, a representative of Brazil became the first chairperson of the bank's board of directors and a |representative of Russia headed the council of managing directors.

The new bank will start operating in April next year.

The bank's charter capital will amount to $50 billion (R627bn) with further growth to $100bn.

Russia is presiding over Brics this year and is chairing the bloc's |Business Council until April next year. An agreement on the establishment of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Brics New Development Bank to fund infrastructural and |sustainable development projects in Brics member states and emerging economies was signed at its summit last year.

This year's seventh summit in Ufa, which ends today, is regarded as the main event during Russia's presidency tenure. - TASS

Differences of Brics nations in evidence as club stages summit; Development

By Kathrin Hille in Ufa, Joe Leahy in São Paulo and Andrew England in Johannesburg 

9 July 2015

Financial Times

In the lobby of the Holiday Inn in Ufa, three men were huddled over an iPad yesterday morning - one Russian, one Chinese and one South African. "It's down another six per cent," says the Chinese. "Are you afraid?" the Russian asks him.

Their fleeting unity as nervous spectators to China's stock market rout has papered over what is becoming a disparate relationship among the Brics nations - Brazil, Russia, India and China, later joined by South Africa.

As a club that was conjured more than a decade ago, the countries have so far managed to get amid their shared past as the champions of south-south politics, standing up to the hegemony of the developed world, and the tendency of the five big Brics towards socialist or statist policies.

But today, as representatives of the Brics nations meet in the southern Russian city of Ufa for their annual summit, they could hardly be more different in values. Brazil, India and South Africa are chaotic democracies that emphasise rule of law and human rights, while China and Russia are authoritarian.

Russia is upsetting the delicate post-Cold War balance of Europe through its aggression in Ukraine, while China is challenging the US in the Pacific. Brazil is a pacifist power that has renounced the pursuit of nuclear weapons.

Russia's deputy foreign minister, Sergei Ryabkov, praises the Brics as a group where "nobody imposes anything on anybody else". Yet Moscow's attempts to use its presidency of the group this year to push its own political agenda have triggered deep discomfort.

Gleb Ivashentsev, a former diplomat and member of the state-backed Russian International Affairs Council, blasts the US as an instigator of colour revolutions that threaten all Brics countries: "Brics took a common stand on Syria, Libya and Afghanistan. Why not have a common position on Ukraine?" DID HE SAY THIS AT THE SUMMIT?

Analysts from India and Brazil warn to count their countries out if Brics were to pursue a fully anti-Western agenda.

"The new world order isn't going to be fair and just. We recognise that there is a high table, and we want a seat so we can set rules as well," says Nandan Unnikrishnan, vice-president of the Observer Research Foundation, the Indian think-tank. "So the last thing we should do is destroy that high table."

Personal ties between leaders act as a glue of some sort. In South Africa, much has been made of the cosy relationship between President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Jacob Zuma and Russian president HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Vladimir Putin, with one local newspaper describing it as a "bromance".

But close ties at the top have done little to bridge some of the group's political or economic gaps. In stark contrast to the Putin-Zuma relationship, Russia has been the most lacklustre of the Brics countries looking to invest in Africa's growing economies. Last year total Brics trade with Africa hit $376bn, $222bn of which was Chinese, while Russia contributed just $12.5bn, Johannesburg-based HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Standard Bank estimates.

In India, there is a pushback against what is being perceived as Chinese dominance in Brics. "In this grouping, as usual, there's what China wants and there's what everyone else wants," says a senior Indian diplomat.

Perhaps the one area where the Brics group is moving forward is in creating alternatives to the multilateral institutions it has criticised for so long. A $100bn currency pool seen as an alternative to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"IMF in financial crises will start operating this month. Its New Development Bank is expected to start financing infrastructure projects in the five member countries next year.

"The Brics have an opportunity to stop being purely symbolic if they are successful in creating an alternative development philosophy," says Francesca Beausang, analyst at BMI Research and author of a book about the Brics and globalisation. "That should be the purpose of the New Development Bank."

But the recent bad headlines about Chinese markets are casting a pall over any celebration. Much of the economic firepower behind the bank, and behind the projects to be financed by it, is expected to be provided by China.

Additional reporting by Owen Guo in Beijing

