Headlines:
WTO Delays Decision on Japan-Requested S. Korea Panel
·         South Korea blasts delays in WTO dispute settlement
Liberia: Minister Addy Upbeat About WTO Visit
Liberia Poised for WTO Accession 
WTO Says India Needs to Consider US Suppliers for Massive Solar Project
India: Green energy and trade disputes
China manufacturing index slumps in August
India's growth slows as reforms stall
The WTO Agreement on Government Procurement: A world of opportunity or a threat to local business?
Japan, Others Seeking TPP Ministerial Meeting in Late Sept.
OMC ACEPTÓ NUEVO RECLAMO CONTRA MEDIDAS ANTIDUMPING ERUOPEAS AL BIODIESEL
LA NUEVA VISIÓN DEL COMERCIO INTERNACIONAL A PARTIR DE LAS CADENAS GLOBALES DE VALOR
 
Details:
WTO Delays Decision on Japan-Requested S. Korea Panel
31 August 2015
Jiji Press English News Service
Tokyo, Aug. 31 (Jiji Press)--The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization has put off a decision on whether to set up a dispute settlement panel on South Korea's import ban on Japanese fishery products, Japan's Fisheries Agency said Monday.
At a meeting Monday, the WTO stopped short of making a decision as South Korea did not agree to the establishment of the panel. But the WTO is expected to approve the setting up of the panel as requested by Japan at its next meeting, on Sept. 28.
South Korea introduced the ban on some fishery products from eight prefectures, including Fukushima, in the wake of the reactor meltdown at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Tokyo Electric Power Co.'s <9501> Fukushima No. 1 power plant following the March 2011 earthquake and tsunami.
In September 2013, South Korea expanded the scope of the ban to cover all fishery products from the eight prefectures.
Japan tried to resolve the issue through bilateral talks with South Korea. But after the talks ended in failure, Japan on Aug. 20 asked the WTO to set up the panel.
[Jiji Press]
South Korea blasts delays in WTO dispute settlement
By Victoria Guida -- Politico
08/31/2015 
South Korea warned today that delays in the World Trade Organization dispute settlement process are getting out of hand.
It said this point was "illustrate[d] vividly" by a recent notification from the WTO saying the panel in its steel dispute with the United States wouldn't begin work until the end of next year, at the earliest. South Korea made a request in February for the formation of the panel to hear its complaints about U.S. trade remedy duties on its shipments of oil country tubular goods. The two sides agreed to a group of panellists to hear the case in mid-July.
"Korea understands the challenges to the Secretariat posed by the current caseload," it said in a statement at today's Dispute Settlement Body meeting. "However, a delay of this magnitude between panel composition and the initiation of panel proceedings is simply unreasonable."
WTO Director-General Roberto Azevêdo has warned members multiple times that disputes are increasing in number and complexity, putting a severe strain on the limited staff and resources dedicated to arbitrating them. To try to ameliorate the problem, the WTO shifted money from other divisions toward those that support dispute settlement, but deadlines are continually missed -- a point highlighted by Korea.
The East Asian nation pointed out that the Dispute Settlement Understanding requires that the report be circulated no more than nine months after the panel is formed. "Korea is aware that in some instances the deadlines laid out in the DSU can be surpassed by practical realities," the country said, but added that the suggested delay was "excessive."
Liberia: Minister Addy Upbeat About WTO Visit
by Ballah M. Kollie 
31 August 2015
All Africa
Aug 31, 2015 (Liberia News Agency/All Africa Global Media via COMTEX) -- Commerce Minister Axel M. Addy has extolled the Government of Liberia for the success of the recent HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (WTO) visit to Liberia.
He indicated that the just-ended visit sets the stage for the holding of a critical one slated for October this year.
A high-level delegation from the WTO on Liberia's Accession to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization on Tuesday, August 18, visited the country and met with high level government officials.
Addressing the regular MICAT press conference in Monrovia Thursday, the Commerce Minister lauded the continuation of "constructive and proactive engagements" with the ministry.
"The proactive engagement of the Senate and House Committees on Commerce and Industry has set the stage for transformation in the way we do business in Liberia for the benefit of the Liberian people," Addy noted.
Minister Addy praised the media, business partners and citizens for their constructive engagement with ministry which, he said, has helped it to improve on the quality of service with the requisite mechanisms put in place.
He added that engagements will provide innovations that contribute to the success and realization of many aspirations that will improve the business climate for all citizens. 
All Africa Global Media
Liberia Poised for WTO Accession 
Daily Observer
Joaquin Sendolo
Commerce and Industry Minister Axel Addy has told Liberians not to have fear about liberalizing trade and commerce in Liberia as the country is poised to accede to the World Trade Organization (WTO).
Liberia through the Ministry of Commerce and Industry has been making great efforts to achieve accession to the WTO, and predicated upon this WTO’s guests including Ambassador Joakim Reiter, Deputy Secretary-General for United Nations Conference for Trade and Development and chairperson of the working party, and Dr. Chiedu Osakwe, Director of Accession Division of WTO Secretariat are in the country to work out some modalities that will lead Liberia to the WTO conference that will be held in Nairobi, Kenya this December.
The conference in Kenya will be the first to be held on African soil and it is a crucial point at which Liberia’s acceptance to be a member of WTO will be made, depending on whether it will meet criteria having to do with reforms of trade laws in conformity with global standard.
Speaking on August 19 at the occasion marking the visits of the guests, Minister Addy intoned that the world is changing, and what people do anywhere now should be in conformity with global standard.
He said transformation will never take place if a country builds a fence around its borders, and if Liberia can benefit from global initiative such as the WTO, it must carry out domestic reforms of its laws and policy to reflect predictability and transparency.
Despite the open trade policy joining Liberia to the global trade community under WTO, the Minister indicated in his statement that they have negotiated and put in place mechanisms that will protect Liberians’ interest in doing business.
Elaborating further on the significance of becoming a part of WTO, the Minister said it “provides predictability” by allowing trade regulations and policies to be the same in all member countries; and that fees for transactions will be the same and transparent everywhere.
In this manner, he said it will encourage investment that will also enhance job opportunities for Liberians since investors will be able to create job opportunities.
He said in the 20 years of anarchy during which the country suffered, he envisions seeing a new Liberia like pre-war days where rule of law and accountability will be in place to regulate people’s behavior.
He indicated that setting up and implementing rules in the country will enhance vibrant private sector that will provide medical and educational services which will cause people not to seek such services outside of Liberia.
In his remarks, Ambassador Joakim Reiter, Deputy Secretary-General of United Nations Conference for Trade and Development and chairperson of the Working Party, said their visits are meant to commend Liberia’s work leading to accession to WTO.
He, however, said for membership to WTO to be successful, the country must take ownership and no one else.
He said the journey to success in Nairobi in December this year depends on reform programs Liberia will carry out in its domestic laws in conformity with global standard.
He acknowledged that while Liberia has made some tremendous progress, he also advised that the rest of the activities left should be completed in the next few months if Liberia can be successful at the WTO’s first conference on African soil.
WTO Says India Needs to Consider US Suppliers for Massive Solar Project
31 August 2015
Investing.com
India has lost a case against the US at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization over protection for local crystalline silicon and thin-film solar cells.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO ruled that India's domestic content requirements under its new solar power program were inconsistent with international agreements. Indian officials have said they will appeal the ruling to the WTOs dispute panel in the next two months.
The US alleged that India's ambitious solar program discriminates against US crystalline silicon photovoltaic and thin-film solar panel manufacturers by requiring Indian producers to use locally manufactured silicon or thin-film cells and by offering subsidies to those developers who use domestic equipment.
The US also said the forced localization requirements restricted US exports to Indian markets. The panel struck down the Indian government's incentive policies, especially subsidies provided for domestic solar companies for manufacturing the cells.
India's Big Solar Investment
On January 11, 2010, India launched its national solar policy, the Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission.
Its target is generation of 20,000 megawatts of solar power by 2022 is a virtual boon to US solar cell and module producers. Companies such as Solarworld USA and First Solar see India's massive solar parks as a once in a lifetime business opportunity and, sure, they want to be a part of it, but taking the case to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO over local incentive programs could come back to haunt US producers of other metals.
Incentives vs. Requirements
There are incentive programs on the state and national level for using local products in the US. Nationally, the LEED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) standard from the non-profit HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" US Green Building Council, for example, gives credit for any materials or products that have been extracted, harvested or recovered, as well as manufactured, within 500 miles of the project site.
To be fair, the US producers do not want to dump solar cells into India and aren't offering any incentives to export programs, what the US alleges India and other nations are doing with several types of foreign steel being imported to the US.
The US producers merely want to be able to compete in India with manufacturers of solar cells and modules that have operations there. What the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO essentially said, is that, just like export subsidies, a government cannot give too much of a preference for locally produced materials, as well. This includes requiring Indian solar cells. The Indian government also cannot, according to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO, REQUIRE the builders to only specify and purchase local materials.
In this situation, New Delhi may have wanted to take a page out of the USGBCs book and find incentives, rather than requirements, to give to local solar producers.
Fusion Media Limited
India: Green energy and trade disputes
D. Ravi Kanth 
1 September 2015
Mint
New Delhi, Sept. 1 -- It is not official yet, but the writing on the wall is pretty clear. Global trade rules shall continue to trump clean energy policies pursued by sovereign governments. That is what an interim report issued by a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) dispute settlement panel in August has emphatically emphasized. The confidential report has endorsed a complaint lodged by the US against India. According to the report, New Delhi's solar energy policies involving subsidies and domestic content requirements under the Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission are inconsistent with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's liberal trade rules.
The panel, chaired by former New Zealand trade envoy David Walker, has made one thing clear. Regardless of climate change, which is accelerated by rising carbon dioxide emissions, sovereign nations shall not ignore mercantile trade rules even when they pursue renewable energy policies based on local and domestic priorities. New Delhi is bound to challenge the panel report as and when it becomes public.
The chances of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's Appellate Body reversing the panel's ruling are difficult to predict at this juncture. Nonetheless, there is evidence to show that the Appellate Body could opt for the existing trade rules as opposed to pursuing clean energy policies. It has already established a precedent in a dispute launched by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union and Japan against Canada over Ontario's feed-in tariffs programme. Under this programme, renewable energy providers in Ontario entered long-term contracts to sell power to the grid with guaranteed premium prices. As part of the programme, they were required to use a minimum percentage-40-60%-of materials produced locally in the region. Undoubtedly, the programme was a novel scheme for generating employment and renewable energy based on locally manufactured solar cells, modules and panels.
In 2013, the Appellate Body struck down Ontario's feed-in tariffs programme on the ground that it violated global trade rules. There are more disputes pending at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO involving solar and renewable energy programmes. The US, for example, had challenged China's measures such as grants, funds or awards to enterprises manufacturing wind power equipment. China also challenged the US's countervailing (anti-subsidy tariffs) on Chinese solar items. In her book This Changes Everything: Climate vs Capitalism, journalist Naomi Klein says "the biggest emitters in the world are rushing to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO to knock down each other's windmills".
She says "there is an intimate connection between climate change and colonialism and the debts of colonialism and the debts of slave (labour), because it was when Europeans adopted the steam engine that the colonial project was sort of superpowered".
The colonial project and the industrial revolution have led to a coal-based world economy that was later replaced largely by oil and natural gas, Klein has argued persuasively in her book. "But climate change is a delayed response, right? Because all of that-all of the time that coal was being burned, since the Industrial Revolution, it's been building up in the atmosphere. So, it wasn't that we had transcended our relationship with the natural world. It was just that it took a while for the world to talk back. And now it's roaring. And that is climate change."
With 100 days left for the crunch climate change conference in Paris, it is a field day for leaders to make unusual pronouncements to save planet Earth from carbon-inflicted wounds. Leaders and high-profile figures rarely miss an opportunity to score a point about their unwavering commitment to reversing the current carbon dioxide emission patterns. "This is all real," said US President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Barack Obama in his weekly radio address before heading to the Arctic. "This is happening to our fellow Americans right now (due to the impact of climate change in Alaska)," he has argued.
Ironically, Obama's visit coincided with his decision to issue the final permit clearing the way for drilling by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Royal Dutch Shell Plc into oil-bearing rock off Alaska's north-west coast for the first time in more than two decades. It is also an open secret that the US provides billions of dollars in subsidies for its oil industry. A week before the Alaska visit, Obama thundered about the importance of solar energy, including a federal programme to enable people to switch to using rooftop solar panels to generate their electricity.
Coming back to the US-India solar dispute, there are pertinent questions that still remain unanswered. The US, for example, has unabashedly provided federal subsidies to the tune of $39 billion annually for the past five years to its renewable sector. It also offers investment tax credit for solar power and there are well-crafted domestic content policies implemented by individual states in the US. It is not that India is unaware of all these measures. Indeed, India had raised the issue in several HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO committee meetings during the last five years.
The Centre for WTO Studies of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Indian Institute of Foreign Trade has prepared a comprehensive report about the US' local content requirements for the renewable sector in Michigan, Texas and California and water utilities in West Virginia, Pennsylvania and South Carolina. Surely, New Delhi could have easily shown the mirror to the US and raised a dispute against Washington at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO. That is what countries are expected to do at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO where tit-for-tat trade friction is commonplace. The two trans-Atlantic trade behemoths, the US and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union (EU), do not let go of a chance if there is a case to be resolved through the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO. The battle over civil aircraft subsidies for HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Airbus and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Boeing launched by the US and the EU, respectively, demonstrated the fight for each dollar and euro.
Therefore, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Narendra Modi government's conspicuous silence in pursuing a case against Washington has raised many eyebrows. A government that claims to represent an avowedly nationalist agenda cannot be seen to be genuflecting. When push comes to shove, it has to pick up the gauntlet for building a robust domestic renewable energy sector almost on the lines of what Washington is doing for its own industry. Otherwise, there is a danger of being treated as a namby-pamby government.
HT Media Limited
China manufacturing index slumps in August
1 September 2015
Agence France Presse
Chinese manufacturing activity fell into contraction in August, with an official index on Tuesday slumping to a three-year low in the latest sign of a slowdown in the world's second-largest economy.
The official Purchasing Managers' Index (PMI) came in at 49.7 last month, the National Bureau of Statistics said in a statement.
The result, which tracks activity in China's vast factory and workshop sector and considered a key barometer of the nation's economic health, was worse than July's 50.0 reading and the first contraction since February.
A figure above 50 signals expansion, while anything below indicates shrinkage.
The result, which was in line with the median estimate of economists by Bloomberg News, is lowest official PMI since August 2012, but was still better than an independent survey sponsored by Chinese media group Caixin.
The Caixin reading for August plunged to a 77-month low of 47.3, down from July's 47.8, Caixin said in a joint statement with Markit, a financial information services provider that compiled the survey.
The updated result, however, marked a slight improvement over the preliminary figure of 47.1 announced earlier.
The outlook for China's economy has turned decidedly pessimistic even after gross domestic product (GDP) registered an expansion of 7.0 percent in the April-June quarter, surprising economists on the upside.
Indicators in the current third quarter have worsened as have concerns over the health of China's economy, leading to turmoil on overseas stock markets as a bubble also deflates on domestic bourses.
"Recent volatilities in global financial markets could weigh down on the real economy, and a pessimistic outlook may become self-fulfilling," He Fan, chief economist at Caixin Insight Group, said in the release.
China's economy expanded 7.4 percent last year, its weakest since 1990, and GDP has slowed further this year.
Analysts have said giant explosions last month in the port of Tianjin as well as a military parade set for Thursday in Beijing to commemorate the 70th anniversary of the end of World War II -- for which factories have been closed and a public holiday declared -- probably weakened manufacturing activity in August.
In a separate statement, the NBS said efforts to control pollution in Beijing, Tianjin and neighbouring Hebei province were a factor pushing the PMI lower.
Julian Evans-Pritchard, China economist at Capital Economics, noted that the official PMI weakened in advance of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" APEC summit last year in Beijing and before the 2008 Beijing Olympics, "when similar efforts were made to ensure blue skies".
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" China's central bank last week cut its benchmark interest rates for the fifth time since November and also further reduced the amount of cash banks must keep on hand in the latest stimulus aimed at boosting growth.
But ANZ economists Liu Li-Gang and Louis Lam in a research note said more measures were needed, calling for "proactive fiscal policy" and "more financial liberalisation".
Agence France-Presse
India's growth slows as reforms stall
By Charles Riley and Mark Thompson 
31 August 2015
CNN Wire
HONG KONG (CNNMoney) -- Even India is having trouble sustaining robust growth.
In the middle of a gloomy global landscape, economists were looking to India to provide a rare bright spot after it overtook China to become the world's fastest growing large economy earlier this year.
But those hopes were dashed Monday when official data showed GDP grew at an annual rate of 7% in the three months to June 30. That was down from 7.5% in the first quarter of the year, and weaker than analysts were expecting.
The BRICS group as a whole -- Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa -- and many other emerging markets are all suffering from weaker growth.
China's stock markets are crashing, and there are worries over slower growth in its economy. Brazil and Russia are already in recession, and South Africa's economy shrank by 1.3% in the most recent quarter.
The monsoon session of India's parliament, which concluded earlier this month, failed to produce major economic reforms, making it "one of the biggest disappointments" of Modi's tenure, according to Shilan Shah of Capital Economics.
A plan to modernize India's goods and services tax, which would help smooth trade and standardize costs, failed to gain enough support. Instead, the session was dominated by protests held by opposition parties.
"With attention soon likely to turn towards the flurry of state elections scheduled for mid-2016, a big opportunity to push through difficult reforms has been missed," Shah said.
The country's GDP statistics came under scrutiny this year, following major changes in how economic growth is calculated in Asia's third-largest economy.
In January, India's statisticians changed the base year used to calculate national accounts, and made adjustments to better reflect manufacturing activity.
Overnight, GDP growth in fiscal year 2014 was upgraded from 4.7% to 6.9%.
The dramatic revisions upended the prevailing narrative, which portrayed India's economy as one that was struggling to gain real traction, even if it was headed in the right direction following Modi's election in 2014.
Many of Modi's promised reforms have failed to materialize, and without the benefit of cheap oil imports, India's growth would likely be even weaker.
Cable News Network LP. 
The WTO Agreement on Government Procurement: A world of opportunity or a threat to local business?
Jodie Burger 
31 August 2015
Mondaq Business Briefing
The Australian Government's accession negotiations to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO Agreement on Government Procurement (GPA) seem to have fallen under the radar. This is strange given that (if China and Australia successfully conclude negotiations) the market for government procurement accessible to Australian businesses is estimated at around USD$3.2 trillion.
It seems like a world of opportunity for Australian businesses looking to sell goods and services into other countries, but what does it mean for competition in Australian markets?
AUSTRALIA'S ACCESSION NEGOTIATIONS
The GPA is a plurilateral HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO agreement in which parties agree to give other parties access to procurement for nominated government agencies above a chosen threshold.
Parties are legally bound not to discriminate against other parties' tenderers and must have an independent review body available to aggrieved tenderers.
On 2 June 2015, the Minister for Trade and Investment announced that Australia will engage in negotiations with a view to acceding to the GPA.
Currently, 45 countries are parties to the GPA, with China and 9 others anticipated to join in the near future. New Zealand recently joined on 12 August 2015.
IS IT GROUND BREAKING?
The Australian Government has been (understandably) eager to espouse the benefits of access to government markets around the world, especially China's procurement market (if China accedes).
But there has been limited commentary about the specific nature of the opportunities in overseas markets, as well as what the GPA means for Australian suppliers competing within Australia.
Australia has free trade agreements with numerous GPA parties but not all of these include access to government procurement.
Notably, the recently-signed China-Australia Free Trade Agreement (ChAFTA) contains an express commitment to negotiate a reciprocal agreement only after China accedes to the GPA.
It is reasonable to expect that the GPA will significantly expand markets available to Australian businesses, especially in China and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union. However, the devil will be in the detail - it remains to be seen just what procurement markets the other parties allow access to under the GPA.
LOCAL INDUSTRY
The Commonwealth Procurement Rules enshrine the principle of non-discrimination, but state-level government procurement often mandates or prescribes weight to the presence of the tenderer in Australia or the State/Territory.
The State and Territory governments reportedly support Australia's accession negotiations. However, given a preference for local industry is clearly incompatible with the GPA, it is unclear whether States or Territories will be required to abandon their consideration of local presence, or whether their procurement markets will not be nominated for the GPA.
Interestingly, just as New Zealand has expressly reserved favourable treatment to Maori under the Treaty of Waitangi, Australia may be able to preserve support for indigenous corporations.
SMALL TO MEDIUM ENTERPRISES
Australia's ability to set its own procurement policy uninhibited has allowed it to flexibly balance policy considerations with the concept of 'value for money'.
In particular, the Commonwealth and numerous States' procurement policies specifically support SMEs.
Australia's preferential treatment for SMEs would prima facie be prohibited on the basis that it indirectly discriminates against foreign entities. This may mean that Australian SMEs see a decline in the tenders they are successful in.
In its submission, the Australian Fair Trade & Investment Network stated that Australia should ensure that it preserves the preferential treatment of SMEs.
AUSTRALIA'S PUBLIC INTEREST
It is commonly accepted that sensitive industries such as defence and national security should be sourced internally (ie not from offshore companies) on the basis that it is in Australia's public interest.
But just how many other national values and public interests are at odds with opening our procurement markets to overseas competitors?
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Textile Clothing and Footwear Union of Australia (TCFU) argued in its submission to DFAT that goods sourced from organisations with minimum ethical and labour standards are in our public interest.
The TCFU argues that it would be improper for Australia to bind itself to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO GPA, given that (among other considerations) preferring labour, environmental, or human rights standards is arguably discriminatory and would breach a commitment to the GPA.
Sensitive areas such as the privacy of personal information should also be considered. Australia has strict privacy laws that could be challenging for suppliers from countries in which governments can access information within their jurisdiction.
How will Australia balance its privacy laws and policy when tendering for sensitive data storage contracts? Perhaps these will need to be carved out of the GPA.
HAVE YOUR SAY
The process of identifying markets that should be included or excluded from the GPA is complex.
At the moment, there are many unanswered questions about how DFAT will frame Australia's proposed accession to the GPA.
Looking at it optimistically, the GPA should give Australian businesses an opportunity to open their eyes to - literally and figuratively - new lands of opportunity.
But there is already concern that the Commonwealth's non-discrimination principles harm Australian businesses and accession may make it more difficult to support local industry, small businesses, and public values.
DFAT is still accepting submissions on its proposed accession and negotiations here. If you are an interested stakeholder, now is the time to have your say on how this proposed action may impact competition (positively or negatively) and the government procurement industry.
The content of this article is intended to provide a general guide to the subject matter. Specialist advice should be sought about your specific circumstances. 
Japan, Others Seeking TPP Ministerial Meeting in Late Sept.
31 August 2015
Jiji Press English News Service
Tokyo, Aug. 31 (Jiji Press)--Japan and some other countries participating in Trans-Pacific Partnership negotiations are trying to arrange a plenary ministerial meeting in late September, informed sources have said. 
The countries are speeding up arrangements to realize a ministerial meeting of all of the 12 nations negotiating for a TPP deal for regional trade liberalization ahead of key political events in member states, such as a general election in Canada on Oct. 19.
The United States, another TPP negotiation member, however, seems to be examining carefully when the proposed ministerial meeting should take place, as no clear signs have emerged of early agreements on thorny issues, such as intellectual property protection.
The TPP talks have been left in the doldrums since the 12 countries failed to achieve a deal at the latest ministerial meeting, in Hawaii in July, despite the strong resolve for an agreement expressed by major participants ahead of the conference.
In a telephone conversation last week, Japanese Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Shinzo Abe and U.S. President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Barack Obama agreed on the need to realize a TPP deal at an early date.
In response to this, some of the 12 countries, including Japan and Canada, have started adjusting schedules at a working level in the hope of holding a ministerial meeting by the end of September, said the sources familiar with the situation.
"We hope the ministerial meeting will take place and reach an agreement no later than early October," one source said, apparently looking at political schedules, especially in Canada. Another source expressed similar hopes.
One of the biggest stumbling blocks to a TPP deal is the deadlock between the United States and other countries, such as Australia and emerging economies, over how long drug development data for advanced biotechnology-based medicines should be protected.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" U.S. government is expected to start domestic groundwork on the issue in full after the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" U.S. Congress returns on Sept. 8 after a recess. But if the government is unable to secure agreements with both Congress and the drug industry, it may be difficult to hold a TPP ministerial meeting in September.
If a broad TPP deal is reached in late September, all 12 countries would be able to sign the treaty and start domestic procedures around the start of 2016 for ratification of the pact.
But if a ministerial meeting follows Canada's general election, TPP negotiations are likely to be halted for some time to wait for the formation of the country's new cabinet.
Delays in a TPP deal would make domestic procedures more difficult for some member states with major political events ahead, such as the House of Councillors election in Japan in summer 2016 and the U.S. presidential election in autumn that year.
But if the 12 countries hold a ministerial meeting in too much of a rush, they may end up repeating the July failure. Some negotiators view mid-November this year, when the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum members, including all 12 TTP states, will hold a summit, as the final deadline for realizing an early TPP treaty.
The 12 countries face the question of whether to step up efforts to resolve difficult issues for an early conclusion or delay negotiations further until after upcoming political events, including the U.S. presidential election.
Jiji Press Limited| 
OMC ACEPTÓ NUEVO RECLAMO CONTRA MEDIDAS ANTIDUMPING ERUOPEAS AL BIODIESEL
Ginebra, 31 de agosto (Télam)
El reclamo argentino contra los aranceles antidumping a las exportaciones de biodiesel que aplica la Unión Europea se reforzó hoy al aceptar la Organización Mundial de Comercio (OMC) una nueva demanda contra este mecanismo de protección del mercado comunitario, esta vez contra el combustible que le vende Indonesia.
El Órgano de Solución de Diferencias de la entidad multilateral decidió, en su reunión de hoy en Ginebra, conformar un panel (tribunal arbitral ad hoc) para dirimir el reclamo de Indonesia, que apunta a la revisión de las medidas antidumping que la Unión Europea impone a los envíos de biodiesel de ese país, el mismo planteo realizado por Argentina en diciembre de 2013.
La controversia planteada por Indonesia apunta a cuestiones fundamentales del mecanismo antidumping europeo, entre ellas metodológicas y legales, por ser violatorias a los compromisos establecidos en la OMC en cuanto a comercio de bienes, de acuerdo con los argumentos de la demanda, según fuentes consultadas en Ginebra.
Las medidas cuestionadas por Indonesia son las mismas por las que Argentina viene reclamando en la OMC, donde el país logró establecer un panel en junio de 2014, y que, según confirmaron las fuentes, estima dar a conocer su informe a fin de este año.
La disputa, que implicó el cierre del mercado europeo para el biodiesel argentino, con un perjuicio para las exportaciones del país de casi dos mil millones de dólares anuales, se inició en mayo de 2013, cuando Bruselas decidió aplicar aranceles antidumping al producto procedente de Argentina e Indonesia para proteger su industria, al convalidar una denuncia del European Biodiesel Board, que representa a 62 empresas de 19 países comunitarios por la supuesta venta del combustible de esos países por debajo del costo.
Desde noviembre de ese año, la UE fijó el derecho antidumping para el diesel argentino en 24,6 por ciento, que llegó cierre virtual de esas exportaciones, que en 2011 sumaron 1.847 millones de dólares, equivalentes a 13 por ciento de los envíos del país al mercado europeo y que posicionaba a Argentina como primer abastecedor del bloque.
El sector de biodiesel en Argentina se destaca por su sostenibilidad y alto nivel de desarrollo, escala, e integración de toda la cadena productiva y es actualmente uno de los productores más eficientes a nivel global, a diferencia de la industria europea, que está sobredimensionada.
Por ello, para el gobierno argentino las restricciones impuestas al biodiesel nacional se inscriben en una política proteccionista europea, especialmente dirigida contra los países en desarrollo
Por otra parte, el OSD adoptó hoy el informe del panel, favorable a la Argentina, en la disputa sobre el cierre del mercado estadounidense a las exportaciones de carne argentina, mantenido durante doce años, con pérdidas estimadas en alrededor de dos mil millones de dólares.
La adopción por parte del OSD del informe fue celebrada hoy por la delegación argentina en la OMC, aunque su contenido ya había sido hecho público hace un mes.
De esta manera, quedó el plena vigencia la recomendación del panel, que determinó que las medidas impuestas por Estados Unidos para prohibir el ingreso de carne vacuna refrigerada o congelada desde todo el territorio argentino, y de animales, carnes y productos de origen animal procedentes de la Patagonia, son incompatibles con el Acuerdo sobre Aplicación de Medidas Sanitarias y Fitosanitarias (MSF) de la entidad multilateral.
Al adoptar el fallo, el OSD recomienda a Estados Unidos a “poner sus medidas en conformidad con las obligaciones que les corresponden” en el marco del Acuerdo MSF, de acuerdo con los procedimientos de la entidad multilateral, que no aplica sanciones directas a sus miembros sino que los insta a cumplir la normativa.
No obstante, en junio pasado, en previsión de un fallo adverso, Estados Unidos, anunció a través de su Servicio de Inspección de Salud Animal y Vegetal (APHIS) del Departamento de Agricultura (USDA) que daría vía libre a la importación de carne bovina fresca enfriada o congelada de la denominada zona Argentina Norte, considerada libre de aftosa con vacunación.
Según estimaciones del Ministerio de Economía y de la Cancillería, cuando la reapertura del mercado se haga efectiva, lo que puede ocurrir en septiembre, Argentina estará en condiciones de exportar carne hacia Estados Unidos por 280 millones de dólares en lo inmediato, tras la pérdidas de exportaciones por 1.600 millones en los últimos ocho años a ese mercado y de alrededor de 432 millones de dólares a Canadá y México, sus socios en el Nafta.
Los frigoríficos, nucleados en el Consorcio de Exportadores de Carnes Argentinas ABC, esperan colocar hasta 25 mil toneladas por 137 millones de dólares en Estados Unidos y Canadá, que podrían ampliarse a 228 millones de dólares. Fuente: omc
LA NUEVA VISIÓN DEL COMERCIO INTERNACIONAL A PARTIR DE LAS CADENAS GLOBALES DE VALOR
Buenos Aires, 30 de agosto 
(Télam)
El surgimiento de las cadenas de valor, que transformó el modelo de producción y de consumo, modificó también la visión del comercio internacional, reformuló las negociaciones multilaterales y consolidó un nuevo mapa mundial, en el que Sudamérica se encuentra rezagada respecto de otras regiones, según el jefe de Estadísticas de la Organización Mundial de Comercio (OMC), Hubert Escaith, quien prevé que en el futuro India reemplazará a China como agente de cambio de la economía global.
"La visión del comercio internacional cambió. Hoy el 80 por ciento del valor de las manufacturas corresponde a servicios", definió Escaith, tras explicar que las nuevas formas de intercambio sobrevienen de la transformación del modelo empresarial en cadenas globales de abastecimiento o de valor y su producción transnacional fragmentada.
"El comercio es cada vez más de bienes intermedios que de productos acabados", lo que incrementa la incidencia del transporte, los servicios aduaneros, entre otros, hace más necesario dar importancia a las políticas comerciales, ya que "muchas veces éstas son a largo plazo" frente a un mundo "en el que todo cambia", señaló el experto francés durante un seminario en un hotel porteño, organizado por la Fundación ICBC.
Escaith, economista y doctorado en matemática aplicada a la Economía, resaltó que a partir de este nuevo paradigma "la relación entre el comercio y la inversión es muy importante", algo que "al dejarse de lado en las negociaciones multilaterales de la OMC, hizo proliferar los acuerdos comerciales regionales".
En diálogo con Télam, el especialista consideró que "el éxito mismo de las cadenas de valor, que permitió a países en vías de desarrollo tener un crecimiento tan rápido en los últimos 20 años, modificó también la geopolítica y el mundo es hoy muy diferente en términos de peso económico y político", 
"Las hipótesis de negociaciones que se habían formado en 1995, hoy no responden muy bien a la realidad geopolítica", como reflejar el peso de China y los países emergentes, así como incorporar nueva cuestiones, entre ellas el comercio de productos vinculados a la protección del medio ambiente.
Según Escaith, hacia el futuro de la llamada Ronda de Doha, lanzada en 2001 para establecer nuevas normas de comercio internacional y avanzar en la liberalización global, cobran "importancia creciente los acuerdos sectoriales, como los de la eliminación arancelaria de productos de tecnologías de la información, alcanzado en junio en Ginebra.
No obstante, resaltó que la discusión sobre los subsidios agrícolas y otras cuestiones planteadas en la agenda de Doha, lejos de ser obsoletos "son parte de la estructura" y de "negociación necesaria", ya que "es difícil seguir adelante con temas nuevos sin aclarar estas cosas que están en la mesa".
Pero además, destacó que el acuerdo de Facilitación de Comercio, logrado el año pasado en Bali, que reúne pautas aduaneras y es considerado una bisagra para destrabar la Ronda, conlleva aspectos relacionados con las cadenas de valor, como el tránsito o la organización de las aduanas.
Al respecto, lamentó que aún pocos países hayan adherido a este acuerdo, situación que atribuyó a que, algunos, los que tienen déficit comercial, "ven las dificultades para comerciar como una barrera proteccionista". 
"Parece razonable, pero si se analiza desde la perspectiva de canal de valor es fatal, porque para poder exportar uno necesita tener acceso a insumos competitivos a nivel internacional, hay que facilitar importaciones para poder exportar. La prueba es que muchos países solo son capaces de exportar a zonas de libre comercio, donde facilitan el comercio, pero por alguna razón no lo quieren extender al resto", precisó.
El economista, quien antes de estar a cargo de las estadísticas de la OMC, sobresalió en Bagdad dentro de la Comisión Económica y Social de Asia Occidental, y también en México y Chile como parte de la Comisión Económica para América Latina y el Caribe (Cepal), explicó que el mapa de penetración de las cadenas de valor, consideradas desde la producción hasta el consumo, tiene hoy tres zonas geográficas definidas.
Asia oriental, los antes llamados "tigres asiáticos" que nacieron con las cadenas de valor, más China, por un lado; América del Norte con el acuerdo de libre comercio Nafta, siendo allí Estados Unidos el principal mercado de consumo de la cadena, y Europa, el mayor encadenamiento, factible a partir de la caída del muro de Berlín y la incorporación de los mercados antes bajo dominio de la ex Unión Soviética.
"De América del Sur, fuera de abastecer de materia prima y algunos ejemplos en Uruguay con el desarrollo del know how en software, no hay mucha incidencia de las cadenas globales de valor", evaluó.
Sin embargo, ponderó que la región "tiene una gran ventaja comparativa" por la gran población de habla hispana que hay en Estados Unidos, hacia donde podría exportar servicios de business o call centrer, como hacen los países de El Caribe.
También vislumbro "nuevas posibilidades de inserción de América latina", a través de la relación Asia Pacífico, vínculo que tiene aún preguntas sin respuestas, entre ellas si "el Mercosur va a seguir mirando hacia adentro", lo que "está generando preocupación".
Por otra parte, Escaith reconoció el impacto que está teniendo en el comercio y la economía global, la crisis de los últimos días en China, situación que atribuyó a "un modelo agotado", como ocurrió en 2008, cuando "se agotó el modelo de Estados Unidos como consumidor de última instancia".
"Se dice que China creció mucho en base a exportaciones pero creo creció mucho en base a inversión. Las autoridades quieren cambiar de modelo, ir hacia donde el consumo de los hogares puede ser un nuevo motor porque los chinos quieren evitar lo que llaman la trampa del ingreso medio. Es fácil pasar de país pobre a país de ingreso medio a través de transformación estructural, pero seguir los pasos del desarrollo a moverse a una sociedad de ingresos altos precisa de un cambio más profundo", consideró.
En cambio, estimó que "hacia el futuro hay candidatos como la India para ser agentes de cambio", un país que "tiene mucha ambición y un coeficiente de comercio internacional bastante bajo comparado con su tamaño económico y su importancia en termino de población".
END
 
Josep Bosch, Information Officer
Information and External Relations Division
+41227395681
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.