Headlines:

Coalition opposes both Senate COOL options
Politics inevitably seep into U.S. beef industry
India says deal on public food stockholding essential
Is China a Market Economy?
Can WTO legitimately make global trading rules?
TPP failure could spell trouble for other trade talks
Several major obstacles still in the way of achieving a TPP
China has good agenda for global growth
Obama Unveils Rule to Cut Carbon Emissions From Power Plants
President Obama’s Tough, Achievable Climate Plan

 

Details:

Coalition opposes both Senate COOL options

By P. Scott Shearer, Bockorny Group, Washington, D.C. 

3 August 2015

National Hog Farmer

A coalition of 142 consumer, environmental, labor, ranch and faith groups sent a letter to the Senate Agriculture Committee’s leadership urging the Senate to reject both the Sen. Pat Roberts' (R-KS) bill to repeal country-of-origin labeling and the bill by Sens. Stabenow-Hoeven that would provide for a voluntary COOL program.

The coalition supports the continuation of a mandatory COOL program so consumers will know where their food comes from and producers can identify their livestock as born and raised in America. The coalition said, “It is premature for Congress to unilaterally surrender to saber-rattling from our trading partners in the midst of a long-standing dispute. COOL opponents have highlighted Mexico and Canada’s threats of retaliation as if their aspiration to seek billions of dollars in penalties were already approved by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization. But these unapproved, unrealistically high retaliation claims are merely aggressive litigation tactics designed to frighten the United States, a standard practice in HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO disputes. Congress should not fall for it.”

Vehemently opposes

The coalition “vehemently” opposes repealing COOL but also opposes any effort to “weaken” mandatory COOL by converting it to a voluntary program. The coalition stated, “Voluntary COOL labeling is no solution to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO dispute: Meatpackers won’t use it, consumers won’t see it, farmers and ranchers won’t benefit from it and Canada and Mexico have already bluntly rejected this so-called compromise. Voluntary COOL is indistinguishable from repealing COOL.”

Those signing the letter included Catholic Rural Life, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Center for Food Safety, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Center for Rural Affairs, Consumers Federation of America, Farm Aid, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Food and Water Watch, Friends of the Earth, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"National Farmers Organization and R-CALF.

Penton Business Media

Politics inevitably seep into U.S. beef industry

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Steve Kay

3 August 2015

Beef Magazine

Politics permeates every aspect of our lives. So it’s inevitable that it seeps into the beef industry. One example is how politicians passed a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"country-of-origin labeling (COOL) law that has been disastrous for the North American livestock and meat industry. Now they are struggling to bring COOL into compliance with HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"World Trade Organization (WTO) rulings against it. Another is HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"USDA’s decision to allow imports of fresh beef from the Patagonia region of Argentina and 14 states in Brazil, despite producer concerns about the threat of foot-and-mouth disease (FMD) entering the U.S.

The House of Representatives acted with commendable speed in June by passing a measure to repeal COOL for beef, pork and poultry. Now the Senate must do this to bring the U.S. into compliance with its international trade obligations. Senators must act before Canada and Mexico start imposing up to $3.1 billion worth of retaliatory tariffs annually on a wide range of U.S. goods.

Yet at the time of writing, several key members of the Senate hadn’t grasped the fact that repeal is the only option left. Sen. Debbie Stabenow (D-Mich.), the ranking member of the Senate Ag Committee, in late June proposed a voluntary COOL program in place of mandatory COOL for beef and pork. Several other senators supported this move. What’s mystifying is that these senators refused to acknowledge that Canada and Mexico strongly oppose a voluntary program, and that they have 100% control over the outcome of this long-running saga. They have won four times at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO, which means any U.S. resolution has to meet their approval. 

Canada says its tariffs will target agricultural products produced in Michigan, such as beef, pork and apples, and in other states whose senators support mandatory COOL. Agriculture is Michigan’s second-largest industry, so Stabenow will likely have to agree to a repeal to avoid damage in her backyard. The clock is ticking. Canada and Mexico might start HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"applying their tariffs as early as next month.

Then there’sHYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" FMD.HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"USDA’s decision to allow fresh beef from South America to enter the U.S. brought a storm of protest from all cattle producers' groups, the only time they have agreed on anything. It didn’t deter HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"USDA’s HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) from publishing a final rule to allow importation of chilled or frozen beef from the two regions. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"National Cattlemen’s Beef Association (NCBA) immediately accused the Obama administration of allowing imports purely for political gain.

APHIS stipulated imports could only occur under specific conditions that mitigate the risk of FMD. APHIS risk assessments indicate that beef from those regions can be safely imported, provided certain conditions are met to ensure the beef will not harbor the FMD virus, it said. Its risk assessments also concluded Argentina and Brazil are able to comply with U.S. import certification requirements. NCBA, though, continues to criticize APHIS’ risk analysis, and said imports threaten the viability of the U.S. industry, as well as hundreds of thousands of American cattle-producing families.

In contrast, the North American Meat Institute (NAMI) welcomed APHIS’ decision. The decision reaffirms the U.S. position that human and animal health regulation of international trade must be based on sound scientific risk assessments, an approach that ultimately benefits the U.S. industry, said NAMI President and CEO HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Barry Carpenter.

Penton Business Media

India says deal on public food stockholding essential

3 August 2015

New Delhi, Aug. 3 -- As the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO) failed to finalize a work programme on Friday, India fired a salvo for a "permanent" solution for public stockholding programmes for food security, saying it is an "essential deliverable" at the upcoming ministerial meeting in Nairobi.

The work programme was mandated to be agreed by 31 July for concluding the Doha Round of trade negotiations at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO's 10th ministerial conference in Nairobi set for 15 December.

But unbridgeable differences over demands for changing the existing parameters for reducing domestic farm subsidies by major industrialized countries, particularly the US, have put paid to the work programme.

Without the blueprint, it is not clear how the Doha negotiations launched in 2001 will conclude in Nairobi. Many countries, particularly a large majority of developing countries, expressed their disappointment at the failure to arrive at the roadmap for the Nairobi meeting.

"There are still huge differences in expectations," said HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Roberto Azevedo, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO's director general, at the final trade negotiations committee meeting before members proceeded for summer recess.

Echoing a common refrain of the US that the red lines of the US, China and India for reducing domestic farm subsidies do not overlap, Azevedo repeated that "red lines do not overlap".

Without elaborating on the differences, he said "substantive progress towards convergence has remained very limited".

"We will need to see a step-change in members' flexibility and political engagement if we are to make progress," he said.

In a sharp response, India expressed concern over the lack of "meaningful" engagement by members on its alternative proposal for a permanent solution for public stockholding programmes for food security.

India, along with other members of the G-33 farm coalition led by Indonesia, made detailed proposals on how a permanent solution can be finalized by including subsidy payments for public stockholding program-mes in the so-called 'green box' disciplines that are exempted from reduction commitments.

During the past 10 years, major industrialized countries had shifted their controversial farm subsidy programmes to the 'green box' to avoid any scrutiny at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO.

"The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO's 'green box', which is meant to hold non-trade-distorting subsidies, is now home to about $120 billion of the $130 billion in nutrition programmes and farm supports," according to Timorthy Wise, an academic at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Tufts University in the US.

But the US and other major industrialized countries rejected the G-33 alternative proposals on the ground that the 'green box' disciplines are meant to be non-distorting.

"We are deeply concerned that members are not engaging meaningfully on that (G-33 proposal) and instead asking for alternatives to be explored," India's trade envoy Anjali Prasad said at the meeting.

"As India has repeatedly pointed out, a permanent solution to this problem (of food security) is an essential deliverable at Nairobi," she emphasized.

India has also reiterated "certain important parameters" to ensure credible outcomes at the Nairobi meeting. New Delhi said it will not accept the dilution of "development dimension (of the final outcomes)", "special and differential flexibilities(for developing countries), and "less-than-full reciprocity (the industrialized countries undertake higher commitments)".

Prasad argued that India will not accept new norms that would reduce is policy space under the existing provisions.

Of late, the US and the EU have repeatedly said the Doha Round must be concluded at Nairobi. The US also suggested at a recent meeting that there would be a trainwreck if the Doha negotiations are not concluded, an African official said.

"We don't subscribe to a Nairobi 'make-it-or-break-it' narrative or conclusion of the Round at any cost or in any manner whatsoever," Prasad warned.

The US said unless major countries show "flexibility" to undertake commensurate commitments, there cannot be progress. Washington said it is prepared to show flexibility but others must also do the same.

In a sharp response to the director general's assessment, Brazil said it will not accept an "unbalanced outcome", in which agriculture is left behind with zero progress while other areas are subjected to substantial commitments. "Any viable outcome requires movement in domestic support as a necessary condition," Brazil maintained.

"The holidays should also serve to put an end to the apparent illusion entertained by a few that we could once again end up with agriculture left behind with close to zero progress, while on other fronts including, NAMA (non-agriculture market access), services and rules, there could be broader movements, even if related to only policy space," said Brazil envoy Marcos Galvao.

"That is not going to happen. Brazil, for one-and I know we are not alone-will not be part of any attempt to build consensus upon any kind of unbalanced outcome," the envoy argued. 

hindustantimes.com 

Is China a Market Economy?

By Gary Clyde Hufbauer and Cathleen Cimino-Isaacs 

3 August 2015

Caixin Online

A showdown in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO that has implications for anti-dumping cases and could play a role in setting future trade rulesA potential mega battle is brewing over trade rules and the provision of market economy status for China that could reach the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization in 2016.

Whether particular countries grant China market economy status has important implications for the adjudication of anti-dumping cases. In international trade, dumping occurs when a country exports a product at a price below the normal cost of production or price paid in the exporting country.

When China joined the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO in 2001, Article 15 of its Protocol of Accession generally allowed other members to disregard Chinese prices and costs in anti-dumping cases and instead base the calculation of dumping margins using external benchmarks. An exception was made if Chinese producers could "clearly show" that market economy conditions prevailed in the industry. Article 15 essentially authorized "nonmarket economy" methodologies long used by the United States and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union in anti-dumping cases against communist countries.

Taking advantage of this provision, authorities in the United States, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union, Japan and Canada, among others, almost always use surrogate prices and costs to calculate Chinese dumping margins. Rarely are the authorities satisfied that market economy conditions prevail in Chinese industries.

This comparison with surrogate prices and costs typically leads to much higher dumping margins and thus much higher penalty duties imposed to bring the delivered price in the importing country closer to "normal value." Since China is a leading target of dumping cases worldwide, the non-market economy methodology is a sore point with Chinese officials. A decade ago, the country mounted a vigorous diplomatic campaign asking trade partners to accord it market economy status. The campaign succeeded with New Zealand, Singapore and Malaysia in 2004 and Australia in 2005, among others, but it did not persuade the United States, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union, Japan, Canada and several others.

All this brings us to the prospect of controversy come December next year. Article 15(a)(ii) of China's Protocol states: "The importing HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO Member may use a methodology that is not based on a strict comparison with domestic prices or costs in China if the producers under investigation cannot clearly show that market economy conditions prevail." But buried in Article 15(d) is the critical sentence: "In any event, the provisions of subparagraph (a)(ii) shall expire 15 years after the date of accession." Chinese officials strongly argue that this sentence requires all countries to accord it market economy status on December 11, 2016, 15 years after its accession, and that HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO members can no longer use surrogate costs and prices in anti-dumping cases.

Some U.S. and EU lawyers read the text differently. While they agree that Article 15(a)(ii) will effectively disappear, they do not agree that the protocol confines HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO members to a binary choice between market economy (with its strict comparison of export prices with Chinese prices or costs) and non-market economy status (which allows comparison with surrogate prices or costs). They point to the opening language in Article 15(a), which says: "[T]he importing HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO member shall use either Chinese prices or costs for the industry under investigation or a methodology that is not based on a strict comparison with domestic prices or costs in China." To be sure, under Article 15(d), the whole of Article 15(a) potentially disappears, but only "once China has established, under the national law of the importing HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO Member, that it is a market economy, the provisions of subparagraph (a) shall be terminated." Come December next year, the United States and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union might well argue that China has not established that it is a market economy. They could modify their current surrogate practices and instead use "mix-and-match" approaches – claiming that some Chinese firms or industries operate under market conditions and others do not. For those that do not, they could use surrogate prices or costs.

Whether the United States takes a hardline mix-and-match approach, rather than grant China market economy status across the board, could well turn on policy considerations rather than legal parsing. Among these considerations will be the general atmosphere of commercial relations with China in 2015 and 2016, including the evolution of the yuan exchange rate (devaluation would inspire a hardline approach) and the outcome of the U.S.-China Bilateral Investment Treaty negotiations (success would have the opposite effect).

With that observation from the economic text of realpolitik, we recommend that the United States should adopt a rebuttable presumption of market economy status in post-2016 anti-dumping cases. If a U.S. petitioner can show that the Chinese firm accused of dumping is state-owned or state-controlled, does not publish financial accounts in accordance with international standards, or in other ways ignores commercial considerations in its business dealings, then the U.S. Commerce Department could revert to surrogate prices or costs.

This approach would have two benefits: it would encourage Chinese state-owned and state-controlled firms to publish financial accounts and operate according to market principles, and it would answer fears by some U.S. firms that they are being forced to compete with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Chinese Ministry of Finance.

If something like this mix-and-match approach is adopted, China might well initiate HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO litigation in response to an affirmative anti-dumping decision. But 2018 seems the earliest date for a final decision by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO's appellate body. And even if China prevails in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO, the targeted Chinese firms would not receive retroactive refunds for anti-dumping duties collected before the ruling. Again, this hard commercial reality would encourage Chinese firms to publish accounts and operate according to market principles.

Answering these questions is of grave importance. The market economy battle, along with another potential battle over currency manipulation, has been spurred by the politically charged belief in the United States that China does not play fair – a legacy of many years of U.S. trade deficits. These disputes could shape future trade rules, disputes and remedies for years to come.

Gary Clyde Hufbauer is a senior fellow and Cathleen Cimino-Isaacs is a research associate at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Peterson Institute for International Economics This article originally appeared on the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"East Asia Forum website and is republished here by permission.

Caixin Media Company Limited

Can WTO legitimately make global trading rules? 

4 August 2015

Indo-Asian News Service

The last quarter of 2001 saw two dramatic events that had a transformational impact on the global community: first the terrorist attacks on the US in September followed by the launch of the Doha Development Round through the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO's 4th Ministerial Conference in Qatar in November.

A couple of months prior to the commencement of the conference, Muraosoli Maran, then the Indian commerce minister, commissioned a book to be released prior to the meeting. The objective was to capture the sentiments and, more importantly, the fears of the developing and under-developed countries, as seen through the member states of SAARC. Bibek Debroy and I edited the volume, which, thereafter, went into multiple editions.

After the manuscript was complete, Bibek and I argued about the title. All the chapters in the book were highly critical of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO and the arm-twisting of the developed countries - especially the US and EU, as also the autocratic manner in which the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO, under its then director general, Mike Moore, was functioning.

I had argued that there was a clear political agenda, driven primarily by the US, as to why the Doha Round was being dubbed the 'Development Round'. None of the developing countries, for instance, were demanders of a Development Round. It was a proposal from the developed countries, especially the US. In my view, post-9/11 and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO negotiations were intrinsically linked. Washington needed friends because chasing Al Qaida through overt and covert operations would necessarily require friendly and cooperative governments in the developing world.

It was my assessment that proposing a development round was to win friends and influence governments in poor countries. This was nothing short of deception at the highest level. After all, a genuine development round meant that trade would lie at the heart of the development agenda with the developed world unilaterally opening-up to products from poorer countries. This was least likely to happen. I believed then, and I maintain now, that the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO is a rich man's club and that Doha was a fraud foisted on the developing world as it was always intended to collapse.

My suggestion to Bibek, consequently, was to title the book: Savaging the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO. With supreme diplomatic finesse, Bibek persuaded me to agree to something milder and the book was finally published under the title: Salvaging the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO Future - Doha and Beyond. Maran released the book on the eve of his departure for Doha and was forthcoming in expressing his apprehensions on the proposed Round.

After almost 15 years, the Development Round negotiations are yet to be concluded. Nobel Prize winning economist Joseph Stiglitz had argued that "the so-called free trade talks should be in public and not corporate interest" if they are to be genuinely development oriented; instead, in his view, the talks would perpetuate a managed trade regime and a negotiation process that is undemocratic and non-transparent.

The mandated deadline of July 31 to agree on a clearly defined work programme on the remaining Doha issues, especially because they have been so polarizing, has gone without substantive progress. India, too, has already given indication that it will not ratify the trade facilitation pact for want of any visible progress in negotiations on finding a permanent solution on food security for public stockholding purposes.

At a time when farmers' suicides continue unabated, the government recognizes that it is first accountable to its own people and not to an amorphous multilateral trading system that is visibly biased in favour of developed countries. For the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO Secretariat, the talks are a make-or-break scenario that clearly reflects the widening chasm between rich and poor countries. Indeed, even the most diehard negotiator would concede that talks on the Doha Development Round are on the verge of collapse.

The US does not see any significant gains through a successful round. Consequently, it is focussing on regional agreements. Europe is crisis-ridden to offer any major concessions. The Chinese economy is under severe strain with signs of a slowdown. A well-crafted deception, forged in the aftermath of 9/11, has played itself through successfully. Development was never the end objective.

Perhaps it is time to ask if HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO, controlled as it is by the corporate sector and developed countries, can legitimately be the policeman, guardian and rulemaker of the international trading system. If not, the obituary for the Doha Development Round might well turn out to be the obituary for the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO as well.

IANS India Pvt. Ltd. 

TPP failure could spell trouble for other trade talks

By Yuya Yokobori in Maui, Hawaii/

The Yomiuri Shimbun/

04 August 2015

ANN Asia News Network

Maui, Hawaii (The Yomiuri Shimbun/ANN) - The failure to reach a broad agreement on the Trans-Pacific Partnership during ministerial talks here last week could harm Japan¿s efforts to create a ¿mega trade zone¿ through other major accords, such as an economic partnership agreement (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"EPA) with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union. Up until now, the momentum of TPP negotiations toward an agreement has spurred nations not participating in the talks to strengthen their free-trade frameworks. The loss of this momentum could weaken this effect.

Synergistic effect

The Japanese government hopes another round of ministerial-level talks for the TPP can be held this month, though negotiations over dairy products and other issues have hit a rough patch. Further delay in reaching a general agreement could force the government to reassess its trade strategy.

The government is attempting to create a huge trade bloc through the TPP, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"EPA with the EU, and the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) that is being negotiated by 16 East Asian nations including Japan, China, South Korea and members of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

Japan and the EU in May agreed to aim for a broad agreement on the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"EPA this year, though negotiators have had trouble finding common ground on such issues as how much to reduce tariffs.

A member of the Japanese negotiating team said a TPP agreement could have helped break the gridlock in talks with the EU.

If the TPP is implemented, it is expected to vitalize trade between Japan, the United States and other member nations by lowering tariffs on goods. EU nations, which are not taking part in the TPP, could see automobile exports to Japan and the United States fall, as tariffs for their products would not change.

European automakers and other industries are quick to object to their home countries lowering tariffs. But the prospect of reduced exports to Japan, the United States and other TPP member nations could increase motivation to create a free-trade zone that includes the EU.

¿If Japan opens its markets to a high level through the TPP, it could negotiate for the same level with the EU," a source with ties to the Japanese negotiating team said. Anticipation of this ripple effect is why the ministers¿ failure to reach a TPP accord was so disappointing.

US-EU also affected

China has shown a strong desire to conclude the RCEP. The TPP, which is being spearheaded by Japan and the United States, is often seen as an effort to create an economic zone to counter China, while the RCEP is perceived as China¿s effort to create a trade bloc centered around itself. Stagnation in the TPP negotiations could sap China¿s desire to proceed with the RCEP.

The TPP talks will likely also impact the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) being negotiated by the EU and United States. The two sides disagree strongly on some issues, such as food safety standards, so negotiations have been slow-going. A TPP accord could put pressure on the EU side and help speed up the talks.

NZ not backing down

TPP minister Akira Amari has floated the idea of holding another round of minister-level TPP talks, possibly by the end of August, based on a ¿shared understanding¿ among the 12 nations taking part in the negotiations.

Yet not everyone is optimistic that progress can be made. ¿Just because we meet doesn¿t mean we¿ll reach a broad agreement. A meeting in August is uncertain," a negotiator from an emerging economy said.

New Zealand Trade Minister Tim Groser, whose country is seeking to expand dairy imports to Japan, the United States and Canada, showed no willingness to make concessions at a dinner meeting with the other ministers. Getting rid of tariffs is a basic principle of the TPP, he insisted at the dinner, according to a person close to the negotiations.

Trying to persuade New Zealand could further delay the prospect of a general agreement.

COPYRIGHT: HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"ASIA NEWS NETWORK

Several major obstacles still in the way of achieving a TPP

4 August 2015

Business Times Singapore

IT was always unduly optimistic to have assumed that the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) talks in Hawaii would end in a done deal. The obstacles - access to agricultural markets, the car trade, extended protection for drugmakers, longer intellectual property protection for copyright, workers' rights, and uniform environmental standards - were not going to be overcome easily. So at the weekend, it was announced that the meeting had failed to reach a final agreement. Talks would go on.

One of the major sticking points seems to have been the decision by the United States to withdraw its offer of access to its sugar, dairy and meat markets. The American sugar market, and its agriculture generally, is one of the most cossetted sectors of its economy. For instance, Hawaiian sugar producers have been on corporate welfare for decades and would have all gone out of business if the US market had been opened to Philippine sugar producers. As well, American farmers get huge subsidies because it suits the political class in Washington.

There is even a subsidy that pays farmers NOT to produce, as a means to sustaining high prices for certain commodities. And it is always the promise of continued - or better yet, new and bigger - subsidies that helps get local politicians elected every time. The intellectual property protection provisions reek of rent-seeking, if leaked documents are any guide. It looks as if the US is trying to get everyone to adopt its flawed copyright law in its entirety. For instance, it would force signatories to enact laws that would ensure that regional coding in digital products that allow price discrimination be upheld.

The TPP also seeks to extend copyright for authors from life-plus-50 years to life-plus-70 years. Worse, for corporate-owned copyright (for example, computer software and GMO or genetically modified organism seeds), the protection would go from 95 years at present to 120 years. The most egregious clause seems to be a proposal covering misuse of trade secrets. This one could be used to enact harsh criminal punishments against anyone - even journalists and whistleblowers - who reveals or even accesses information through a "computer system" that is allegedly confidential.

Then there are the provisions on patents. Public-health systems in several countries could suddenly become vastly more expensive, without pharmaceutical firms doing very much to earn their extended revenue streams. Two Australian academics have pointed out that in a previous free trade agreement (FTA) with the US, the system of reference pricing was knocked out. Thus, Australian rules that held that drugs with identical or similar clinical outcomes should have similar prices were abandoned. This led to a steep rise in the cost of medicines.

Now the Australian Treasurer laments that the country's universal healthcare system is becoming unsustainable - without revealing that it was its own 2004 FTA with the US that is the cause of the problem. Fortunately this time, both Malaysia and Vietnam stood firmly against such proposals. And given the secrecy of the negotiating text, Malaysia alone has promised the entire text will be presented to the public and to Parliament for debate. Its International Trade and Industry Minister Mustapa Mohamed said: "Whether or not Malaysia becomes a party to the TPP will be a collective decision."

US President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Barack Obama couched the TPP in geostrategic terms - as an instrument to keep China in check and to meld an alliance that would set the rules for 21st-century trade. He will achieve neither if he cannot stand up to his own special-interest lobbyists.

The twelve Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) Ministers in Lahaina, Maui, Hawaii on July 31, 2015. 

Singapore Press Holdings Limited

China has good agenda for global growth

Michael Spence 

4 August 2015

China Daily

For most of the past 35 years, China's policymakers have set their focus on the domestic economy. Though they had to be increasingly aware of their country's growing impact on the global economy, they had no strategy to ensure that China's neighbors gained from its economic transformation.

But now China does have such a strategy, or at least is rapidly developing one: it extends well beyond Asia, embracing Eastern Europe and the east coast of Africa. A key element of China's strategy is the recently established HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, and to some extent the BRICS' New Development Bank, established last year. Both banks are obvious alternatives to the Western-dominated HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Bank and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"International Monetary Fund.

Also vital to the new strategy are the prospective Silk Road Economic Belt through Central Asia to the Black Sea, and the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road from the South China Sea, through the Strait of Malacca, across the Indian Ocean to the eastern Mediterranean via the Red Sea.

Economists sometimes portray the global economy as a huge bazaar. But it is not. It is a network, in which the links are built by expanding the flows of goods, services, people, capital and - importantly - information. China's goal is to create these links, and it has plenty of assets that will allow it to act as a catalyst of global growth and development.

The most obvious asset is its large and growing domestic market, to which other economies can gain access via trade and investment. China will thus be joining the ranks of the advanced countries in providing an export market (and jobs) for countries at earlier stages of economic development.

In addition, because China has built up a capacity to invest that is far larger than its domestic economy can now absorb, it will inevitably seek opportunities abroad, both public and private. Chinese companies, in particular, will increasingly want to establish their brands internationally. And with the involvement of the AIIB and the New Development Bank, China has developed what amounts to a multinational development strategy.

Also, by virtue of more than 30 swap arrangements with other central banks (the first was with the Republic of Korea in December 2008), China is using its foreign-exchange reserves to help its neighbors and others defend themselves against volatile international capital flows. This is in tandem with the authorities' efforts to promote the internationalization of the renminbi, which is rapidly expanding its role in trade settlement.

There is much more to the internationalization of a currency, but China has already applied to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"IMF to have the renminbi included in the basket of currencies that determines the value of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"IMF's unit of account, Special Drawing Rights, with a decision likely in late 2015.

Joining the US dollar, the British pound, the euro and the Japanese yen in the SDR club would speed the renminbi's progress toward full capital-account liberalization - and thus toward full convertibility.

China's policymakers have long time horizons. Their strategy will doubtless face obstacles in the coming years. The question is whether the strategy is worth pursuing now.

The answer almost certainly is yes. The overland "Silk Road," for example, will reduce China's reliance on sea-lanes, which can be blocked or disrupted, especially at the Strait of Malacca. More generally, Chinese investment will ease the constraints on the Silk Road economies caused partly by slow growth and investment shortfalls in advanced economies. Ultimately, vibrant growing economies in the region will benefit China's economy and its stature.

Many believe that public-sector investment is a good way (perhaps the best way) to use the global economy's productive resources and increase its efficiency and growth potential. But this requires a multinational effort. China's leaders surely want international recognition of their country's global stature. But they also want China's rise to high-income status to occur in a way that is - and that is perceived to be - beneficial to its neighbors and the world. The new external focus of China's growth and development strategy seems to be intended to make that vision a reality.

The author, a Nobel Prize winner in economics, is professor of economics at New York University's Stern School of Business and senior fellow at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Hoover Institution.

Project Syndicate. China Daily Information Company

Obama Unveils Rule to Cut Carbon Emissions From Power Plants

4 August 2015

Dow Jones Newswires 

WASHINGTON—President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Barack Obama on Monday announced the nation's first-ever federal limits on carbon emissions from power plants, the opening pitch of an effort by his administration to sell the plan leading up to an international conference later this year where he hopes to help forge a global accord to cut carbon emissions worldwide.

"There is such a thing as being too late when it comes to climate change," Mr. Obama said in announcing the plan at a White House event Monday. He called the plan, which he said was two years in the making, the "single most important step America has taken in the fight against global climate change."

The final HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Environmental Protection Agency rule requires a 32% cut in power-plant carbon dioxide emissions by 2030 from 2005 levels, an increase from the 30% target proposed last year.

While U.S. power-plant carbon emissions account for just 5% of global carbon emissions, Mr. Obama and his top aides hope the domestic regulation will help prompt similar commitments by other major-emitting countries around the world ahead of a United Nations conference in November and December.

The rule, which is facing fierce political pushback from Republicans in Congress as well as on the presidential campaign trail, will accelerate a shift already underway in the utility sector toward cleaner fuels, renewable energy and consumer-generated power. More than a dozen states and the coal industry have vowed to sue the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"EPA, and several states have threatened to refuse to comply with the rule.

"Instead of being a shining achievement for his legacy, this will be remembered as another irresponsible policy that makes it even harder for Americans to provide for their families and reach the American dream," House Speaker HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"John Boehner (R., Ohio) said in a statement Monday. 

Dow Jones Newswires

President Obama’s Tough, Achievable Climate Plan

By THE EDITORIAL BOARD 

4 August 2015

NYTimes.com 

President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Obama’s Clean Power Plan, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"announced on Monday, is unquestionably the most important step the administration has taken in the fight against climate change.

It imposes the first-ever nationwide limits on carbon dioxide pollution from power plants, the source of 31 percent of America’s total greenhouse gas emissions. It will shut down hundreds of coal-fired power plants and give fresh momentum to carbon-free energy sources like wind and solar power, and possibly next-generation nuclear plants. And when taken together with the administration’s other initiatives, chiefly the fuel efficiency standards for cars and trucks, it reinforces Mr. Obama’s credibility and leverage with other nations heading into the United Nations climate change conference in Paris in December.

The plan’s opponents in industry, the states and Congress are already gathering their forces to try to undermine it on Capitol Hill and in the courts, claiming that the plan will cost thousands of jobs, drive electricity prices through the roof and irreparably damage the economy. But the truth is this: There is nothing radical about it.

For more than a decade, carbon emissions from power plants have been declining — a result of a shift in energy generation from coal to cheap and abundant natural gas, regulation of other pollutants like mercury, which has caused utilities to shut down older plants, and investments in cleaner fuels and energy efficiency.

Coal generation, which 10 years ago provided just over half the nation’s electricity, last year provided 39 percent. Meanwhile, renewable energy sources like wind and solar power — driven by federal tax credits, improvements in technology and state mandates — have risen sharply in that time.

The new rules will codify and accelerate these trends, making sure that the shift to cleaner fuels continues quickly. Their main goal is a nationwide reduction in carbon dioxide emissions of 32 percent by 2030, from a 2005 baseline. Among their many selling points is flexibility: The rules assign each state a specific target for reducing carbon pollution from plants inside its borders, but allows them to develop custom-tailored plans for meeting these targets. States can choose from a menu of options to meet their targets: switching from coal to natural gas, ramping up wind and solar, reducing energy consumption with so-called“demand-side efficiencies, engaging in cap-and-trade systems with other states.

These individual state targets are a result of many months of painstaking negotiations between Washington and the states. Despite this, the plan faces formidable challenges in Congress and the courts. Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky, for instance, has begun a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"pre-emptive strike against the rules, urging states not to submit the required plans (a weirdly anti-state rights strategy, since the rules authorize the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Environmental Protection Agency to impose its own plans on states that do not comply). But the greater threats lie in the courts, where opponents are preparing to argue that the plan usurps states' rights, exceeds the agency’s authority or is deficient in other ways.

And then there is the little matter of the upcoming presidential election. Even if the courts rule that the new regulations are fully consistent with the E.P.A.’s authority under the Clean Air Act, a future president could rescind or delay them. Hillary Rodham Clinton has said she supports the plan and will carry it out. Republicans are unanimously opposed.

Given the rules’ importance — to the country, to Mr. Obama’s negotiating leverage and, not least, to the planet — the politicians will bear watching. 

Dow Jones & Company, Inc.

END

 

 

cid:image001.png@01CC55E4.A4F90770

 

Josep Bosch, Information Officer

Information and External Relations Division

+41227395681

 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.
