Trans-pacific partnership: Obama steps up campaign for trade, exports
Spotlight: Service trade with China set to be new impetus for EU recovery: expert
Le directeur général  de l'OMC en visite de travail les 8 et 9 avril au Maroc
(AE) TRADE: EU wants WTO  panel on Russia's excessive customs duties

 
Trans-pacific partnership: Obama steps up campaign for trade, exports
 
1 March 2015
Manila Bulletin
(c) 2015 Manila Bulletin Publishing Corp. All rights reserved.   
 
Washington DC, United States - President Barack Obama has stepped up his campaign for expanding exports and negotiating new trade deals in Asia and Europe, a rare spot of common ground with Republicans and a raw point of friction with Democrats.
 
Obama is pushing his trade themes in interviews with television stations from states represented by the handful of Democratic senators who may be willing to side with the president on his plans for new commerce agreements.
 
“There have been times in the past where some of the trade deals didn't work out for particular sectors in particular communities,'' Obama told KMBC in Kansas City, Missouri. “Which is why we're organizing trade in the Asia Pacific region, the fastest growing region in the world, to make sure you have strong enforceable labor provisions, make sure you have strong enforceable environmental provisions, make sure you have a level playing field.''
 
Before making those deals, however, Obama wants authority to negotiate trade agreements that Congress can only approve or reject, but not amend. Presidents have had an increasingly tough time getting that authority from Congress; Bill Clinton had to buck his party to win it and George W. Bush got it by a single vote.
 
But Obama's task may be even tougher.
 
“He has a harder challenge because the last Democratic president (Clinton) who did this did it in the context of a historic economic boom, a period in which globalization still looked like it had enormous upsides with relatively little downside,'' said Rob Shapiro, a former senior Commerce Department official and economic adviser to President Clinton.
 
“The upsides are still there, but the downsides have become more apparent.''
 
The Obama administration on Thursday released data promoting the role of exports in the economic recovery. According to the White House, exports supported about 11.3 million jobs in 2013, an increase of 1.6 million over 2009.
 
For Obama, connecting trade to jobs is a key sales pitch because past trade agreements, such as the North American Free Trade Agreement, have been blamed for job losses and for businesses moving overseas.
 
The administration is also making the case that a 12-nation Trans-Pacific Partnership agreement that would include Japan, Australia and Vietnam in the deal, also would serve the nation's economic security interests by providing a bulwark against China.
 
“China is out there negotiating free trade agreements with many of these same countries,'' said Maurice Obstfeld, a member of Obama's Council of Economic Advisers. “These agreements are not based on enforceable labor standards, enforceable environmental standards, and what we would like to do is level up the playing field rather than leave it to others to level down the playing field.''
 
Administration officials also announced initiatives Thursday to make it easier for rural communities to get access to foreign markets, all in the name of building support for Obama's trade agenda.
 


 
 
Spotlight: Service trade with China set to be new impetus for EU recovery: expert
 
28 February 2015
Xinhua News Agency
Copyright 2015. Xinhua News Agency. All rights reserved.   
 
by Xinhua writer Shuai Rong 
 
BRUSSELS, Feb. 28 (Xinhua) -- Closer service trade cooperation with China will provide the European Union (EU) a new impetus for economic recovery and growth, as China is eyeing more sustainable, higher-quality growth by unleashing the services sector in the country's 13th Five-Year Plan period (2016-2020), Chinese economist Chi Fulin has said.  
 
Chi, president of the China Institute for Reform and Development (CIRD), a China-based think-tank, made the remarks here on the sidelines of a symposium Friday under the EU-China Reform Agendas, a project co-launched by CIRD and Brussels-based Center for European Policy Studies. 
 
To further China-EU service trade cooperation, both sides should work to reduce trade frictions, speed up negotiation regarding the signing of Sino-EU Bilateral Investment Treaty and strive to sign the treaty within the year of 2015, he said. 
 
The economist urged China and the EU to make best use of think-tanks in Free Trade Area (FTA) feasibility study, and make a breakthrough in the regard in 2015, thus striving to initiate FTA negotiations as early as 2016 and enter into a comprehensive Free Trade Agreement in an earlier manner. 
 
CHINA'S ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION  
 
He said the upcoming five years is a critical period for China's transformation from a major manufacturing economy to a major service economy, saying the economic restructuring and reforms set for the period carries great significance for China's medium to long term sustainable economic growth. 
 
Service sectors accounted for 48.2 percent of China's gross domestic product (GDP) in 2014, a ratio much lower than the average of 70 percent in developed countries, Chi said, expecting service sectors' contribution to China's GDP to rise to 55 percent by the year of 2020. 
 
The transformation in China will unleash a potential consumption demand amounting to 40 to 50 trillion yuan (6.38 to 7.98 trillion U.S. dollars), providing an impetus of economic growth for the EU, China's largest trade partner for the past decade, according to Chi. 
 
In 2014, the China-EU trade volume totaled 615.1 billion U.S. dollars, accounting for 14.1 percent of China's total trade volume and registering a 9.9 percent year-on-year growth. 
 
China and EU accounted for one third of the total size of the world economy, but the volume of their bilateral trade is only 1.5 percent of the world's total. 
 
Stressing that there is much room for China and the EU to expand trade and economic cooperation, Chi said that if the trade between the two economies grows at an annual rate of 9 percent in the next years, the bilateral trade volume will reach 1 trillion U.S. dollars in 2020. 
 
He noted that between 2003 and 2013, the China-EU service trade registered an annual average growth rate of 17.4 percent, higher than the growth rate of the total trade between each other.
 


 
Le directeur général  de l'OMC en visite de travail les 8 et 9 avril au Maroc
 
Rouane   
28 February 2015
Le Service en français de Xinhua
Copyright 2015.  Xinhua News Agency.  All Rights Reserved   
 
RABAT, 28 février (Xinhua) -- Le directeur général de l'Organisation mondiale du commerce (OMC), Roberto Azevedo, entreprendra le 8 avril une visite de travail de deux jours au Maroc durant laquelle il participera à une conférence africaine marquant les 20 ans de l'OMC.
 
Ce déplacement a été annoncé à l'issue d'un entretien de M. Azevedo avec l'ambassadeur représentant permanent du Maroc auprès de l'ONU, M. Mohamed Auajjar, au siège de l'organisation à Genève.
 
Plus de 45 pays africains prendront part aux travaux de cette conférence qui se tiendra du 8 au 10 avril aux niveaux ministériel et parlementaire, dans la ville de Marrakech où ont été conclus les accords instituant la plus haute instance dirigeante du commerce mondial.
 
La ratification de l'accord de Bali conclu en décembre 2013, le processus de négociations post-Bali et les préparatifs pour la 10ème conférence ministérielle de l'OMC prévue en décembre prochain au Kenya sont parmi les questions à l'ordre du jour.
 
La visite de M. Azevedo dans le royaume intervient à un moment crucial pour l'organisation, appelée à gérer les épineux dossiers du cycle de Doha lancé en 2001 à savoir la libéralisation des produits agricoles et industriels ainsi que l'abolition des subventions à l'exportation.
 
Le 1er janvier 1995, l'OMC avait succédé au GATT (Accord général sur les tarifs douaniers et le commerce) peu après la conférence historique de Marrakech qui a débouché sur la signature de son acte fondateur.
 
Le Maroc avait assumé en 2013 les fonctions de coordonnateur du groupe Africain OMC et présidé le même groupe lors du processus préparatoire de la réunion de Bali. Ses efforts ont permis au groupe des Etats africains de jouer un rôle de premier plan dans le succès de la conférence et la conclusion du précieux accord sur la facilitation des échanges.
 
Depuis sa création il y a deux décennies, l'institution intergouvernementale basée à Genève a accueilli 33 pays supplémentaires et compte désormais 160 Etats membres qui représentent 98 % du commerce mondial. 


 
(AE) TRADE: EU wants WTO panel on Russia's excessive customs duties
 
28 February 2015
Bulletin Quotidien Europe
Copyright 2015. Agence Europe All Rights Reserved   
 
Brussels, 27/02/2015 (Agence Europe) - On Thursday 26 February, the EU called on the WTO to set up a dispute settlement panel to examine the EU's complaint about the tariff treatment Moscow applies to certain European goods in the agricultural and manufacturing sectors (DS 485).
 
In this new dispute taken to the WTO against Russia, the EU criticises Moscow for applying customs duties to certain products that are above the bound rates which Russia committed not to exceed when it joined the WTO in 2012. The EU is targeting Russian duties applied to EU exports of paper and card, palm oil and its derivatives, refrigerators and fridge/freezers.
 
Russia diverges in two ways from what was agreed when it joined the WTO: either it applies a higher customs duty of 15% (instead of 5%), or it sets a minimum amount that must be paid (even if this is not justified by the duty rate that was agreed, expressed as a percentage of the product value), the European Commission explains. These excessive customs duties have a negative impact on European exports of the three products concerned, which are worth approximately €600 million per year.
 
At the end of October 2014, the EU had asked for WTO consultations on this issue, but the consultations - which were held on 28 November - did not enable the dispute to be resolved.
 
This new dispute setting the EU - as complainant - against Russia, is the fourth since 2012, following on from disputes about a Russian recycling tax on vehicles (DS 462), Russian measures targeting pork imports (DS 479) and a Russian tax on light vehicles (DS 479). (Emmanuel Hagry)
 


  ________________________________  
Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.