European Commission inquires over Russia’s ban on fish imports from Baltics 
USTR report: Canada and Mexico billions off on COOL-related losses
WTO remains relevant in age of FTAs, RTAs
U.S. Rejects Accusation on Flooding Vietnam with Cheap Chicken Legs
EU aims to finalise 'TTIP' trade deal next year
LatAm needs to adopt "digital single market" to counter technological lag: UN agency
OECD: global inflation still low
TPP DEAL FAILED BECAUSE IT WAS ABOUT PROTECTIONISM, NOT TRADE
EU Agrees Free Trade Deal With Vietnam

 

European Commission inquires over Russia’s ban on fish imports from Baltics 

4 August 2015

ITAR-TASS World Service

MOSCOW, August 4. /TASS/. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Commission /EC/ has directed an inquiry to Moscow for holding consultations related to Russia’s ban on fish preserves imports from two Baltic countries - Latvia and Estonia, First Deputy minister of Economic Development Aleksey Likhachev told TASS on Tuesday.

"They inquired for consultations but consultations haven’t been held yet. Our position will not be executed against Russia’s legislation," he said.

As was reported earlier Russia’s Federal Service for Surveillance on Consumer Rights Protection and Human Wellbeing /HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Rospotrebnadzor/ suspended imports of canned fish products made by Latvian enterprises Ventspils Fish Canning Plant, GAMMA-A, Sabiedrba IMS, Unda and Suldusgalaskombinats starting from August 1, 2015. Repeated studies of canned fish products made at these plants "revealed violations of consumer protection legislation," the body reported. In particular, the studies revealed "discrepancy in requirements for labeling, discrepancy weight fraction of the core product, discrepancy of the mass fraction of the components of the basic product, discrepancy in terms of energy value and organoleptic characteristics."

Also, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Federal Service for Veterinary and Phytosanitary Surveillance /HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Rosselkhoznadzor/, another body regulating Russia’s consumer market, totally banned import of fish preserves from Latvia and Estonia starting from late May 2015 due to violations dangerous for people’s life detected in the production.

"Some particular problems were revealed there. There will be no problems /with imports to Russia as soon as they are eliminated," Likhachev said.

Earlier the EC said Russia’s ban on imports of Latvian fish preserves contradicts the norms of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization /WTO/. However, as a representative of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Commission said Brussels is ready to solve the problem "by dialog", without resorting to the WTO quasi-judicial agencies.

Fresh, frozen and chilled fish from Estonia and Latvia fell under Russian food embargoes earlier and its imports are impossible through to August 2015, but preserves and fish-meal were not included in the initial list.

ITAR-TASS Information Telegraph Agency of Russia

USTR report: Canada and Mexico billions off on COOL-related losses

Washington, 4 Aug (Politico).-- Canada and Mexico overstated their country of origin labelling-related losses by billions of dollars through faulty analysis, the U.S. Trade Representative's Office says in a HYPERLINK "https://www.politicopro.com/f/?f=41171&inb"41-page report provided to the World Trade Organization.

The report will no doubt be used to bolster the U.S.’s cases against its two neighbouring countries in arbitration hearings to be held Sept. 15-16, in Geneva. The WTO HYPERLINK "https://www.wto.org/english/news_e/news15_e/disp_03aug15_e.htm"announced the dates for the event Monday.

Canada and Mexico are seeking nearly $3 billion in retaliatory measures, but the USTR says the real number should look more like $90.77 million. Running data through its own “partial equilibrium economic "model, the USTR says it concluded that authorization to suspend concessions should not exceed $43.22 million annually for Canada, and $47.55 million annually for Mexico.

“Due to several conceptual flaws and methodological errors … neither Canada nor Mexico has provided a calculation that accurately reflects the level of nullification or impairment,” the report states.

— Chase Purdy

WTO remains relevant in age of FTAs, RTAs

5 August 2015

Joins.com

Negotiations over tariff-free trade in IT products are concluded with 80 nations

For the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO), keeping multilateralism alive with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO at the center is the biggest challenge in an era of proliferating Regional Trade Agreements (RTA).

SaKong Il, Chairman of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Institute for Global Economics and adviser to the JoongAng Ilbo, an affiliate of the Korea JoongAng Daily, sat down with WTO Director-General HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Roberto Azevedo to discuss the issue at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO DG Office in Geneva on July 20.

SaKong: I would like to begin by congratulating you for the successful near conclusion of the ITA (Information Technology Agreement) joined by 80 countries. Under your leadership, I am sure it will be concluded this Friday. I know Korea also played an important role in the process.

Azevedo: Thank you very much. Korea did play a very important role. ITA is a very big deal. We have been trying to get convergence since November when the U.S. and China finally came to some understanding. Since then, we have been trying to see whether we could get an agreement by everybody else.

SaKong: I personally think that it really is a historical event for the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO because, first of all, it shows that the traditional rather rigid single undertaking of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO’s approach to the negotiations can be altered to adapt to the changed situation. Furthermore, it was done for IT, which is the most important industry today and will be more critical in the future.

Azevedo: It is the type of agreement that has more flexibility. It isn’t necessary for participating countries [to join all of the negotiation processes] if they are not ready to do so. Of course, the more countries join, the better it will be.

SaKong: Global trade today isn’t doing well enough. We all know that when the global economy did very well in the past, trade was the engine of growth and recovery. When the global economy was doing well, trade used to grow usually twice as high as the global GDP. But, unfortunately during the last couple of years, the trade growth rate was even lower than that of global GDP growth. According to the most recent HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"IMF outlook, global growth was projected somewhere around 3.8 percent and trade will grow by 4.4 percent, which is a bit faster than global growth but still disappointing. From your perspective, how do you see the phenomenon? Is it mostly cyclical or are there serious structural problems involved?

Azevedo: That’s a good question but I don’t have the answer for that as of yet. We are now in the process of studying this issue very carefully. We can see some reasons for this deleveraging in many different aspects. First of all, Chinese and other emerging economies, which were very export-orientated, are changing their growth models. Also, the economies of commodity exporters such as Brazil are easily hit when commodity prices fall. The EU, which is responsible for one third of global trade, is decelerating. So it is a number of elements linked together. We should give a closer look to how these elements affect the relation between trade expansion and global economic growth.

SaKong: Some economists are saying that the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO has been hijacked by major countries’ endeavor to have pluri-lateral arrangements, e.g. initiatives of the TTP (Trans Pacific Partnership) and TTIP (Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership). According to your recent speeches and remarks, you seem to welcome these initiatives, provided they inform the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO and reveal the contents in a more transparent fashion and so forth. I would like to share your views in this regard.

Azevedo: I think that these regional and bilateral deals that we are seeing today, like I have always said, are a fact of the world. It is like me being against the rain. The rain is going to come and it’s part of the ecosystem. As nature is helped by rain, RTAs also help irrigate trade liberalization in different ways. Also, many of the things that we do multilaterally are originally inspired by things that are negotiated in bilateral agreements or regional agreements.

The problem is not that these agreements are out there. The problem is that we are not delivering here. That is the problem. But even then, we are begging to find ways of doing it. The ITA understanding is a good example. The Bali package is also important. These agreements recognized the fact that not everybody could be on the boat at the same time with the same speed and with the same kind of commitments. Multilateral agreements could be more flexible in different ways.

SaKong: Recently, you said that it will be quite difficult to have a very detailed and specific work program by the end of July regarding the DDA. So how high an expectation do you have on the upcoming Nairobi ministerial in December this year?

Azevedo: I only gave my perspective. Members will have to try to get the work program. But there are only few days left until August. I think we should not be wasting time. The work program is just a tool to help us get to Nairobi and agree to something in Nairobi. So instead of trying to get a mid-point, we should go straight for Nairobi rather than wasting time here negotiating a work program. That’s again just my view. Members will decide.

SaKong: I can see your point well. Perhaps, there are some countries that just don’t want an agreement, so they may just try to block to agree on the detailed work program. It leads me to another critically important issue of major member countries’ political commitment to reinvigorating the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO and multilateral trading system. At the first G-20 summit in Washington in November 2008, G-20 leaders agreed to have standstill on protectionist measures. And then in London in April 2009, the leaders agreed on rollback. These helped to reduce the risk of the “beggar-thy-neighbor” type of protectionist policies to some extent. But today, according to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO investigations, although the number of protectionist measures by G-20 countries has been decelerating during last few months, the number of protectionist measures is still very large. So, I thought that the G-20 leaders, particularly at the coming November G-20 summit, should renew their commitments and again make some strong commitments. It is my view that it would be very useful if you could appeal to the G-20 leaders at the forthcoming G-20 summit since the global economy needs trade promotion as a critical stimulant.

Azevedo: I agree with you that the political commitment has to be there. But the political commitment has to be more than words because the words don’t mean anything.

SaKong: Definitely. Personally, I am quite disappointed by the recent G-20 summits. You know, the G-20 summit is not a one-time event, but it is a process. So until the next meeting the process has to be continued and previous commitments should be implemented. When I worked for the G-20, I always emphasized the importance of implementation, delivery, action programs and numbers, not just photo sessions and communiques, but follow ups with specific numbers. So once they commit themselves, they should ask their ministers to follow up and report to the next meeting.

Azevedo: That’s a good point. I’m thinking about what we need to do post-Nairobi. One conversation that I think we need to have is: What are we going to do with the organization? How can the organization serve the members and the global economy in a better way? The organization is very different from the GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade). It’s not the GATT any more. The world is much more integrated than it was in the GATT era. We have to have an organization for the global world, which is a more integrated world.

SaKong: The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO’s governance itself and the mode of operation have to adapt to the changed situation. The world thrived under the GATT-Bretton Woods system. To make the Bretton Woods Institutions more legitimate and credible, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO needs to adapt to the new situation. The G-20 has been making some efforts. It’s time for the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO to do the same and adapt to the changed global trade environment.

An advocate of multilateralism

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Roberto Azevedo, 57, was elected Director-General of the World Trade Organization on May 7, 2013 to become the first South American to assume the post. Right after being elected, he stressed that the Director-General should actively participate in trade negotiations.

A career diplomat who graduated with a degree in electrical engineering from the University of Brasilia, he was assigned to the Permanent Mission of Brazil in Geneva in 1997. He represented Brazil as chief trade negotiator for the Doha Round in 2006 and served as Brazil’s Ambassador in Geneva to the United Nations’ international organizations starting in 2008.

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"The Guardian has described Azevedo as “a gifted negotiator and an advocate of multilateralism.” Having successfully led expansion of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO’s Information Technology Agreement, he now faces the challenge of carrying on the decade-old Doha round of trade liberalization.

When Advisor SaKong Il presented the Director-General red ginseng as a gift, he said, “I need it!”

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Roberto Azevedo

-Brazil’s Ambassador in Geneva to the United Nations’ international organizations

-Vice-Minister for Economic and Technical Affairs at the Foreign Ministry

-Head of the Foreign Ministry’s Dispute Settlement Unit

-Graduated with a degree in electrical engineering from the University of Brasilia

-Graduated in International Relations from Rio Branco Institute

-ITA

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO’s negotiations among 80 countries to eliminate tariffs on information technology (IT) products reached agreement on July 24.

The agreement will allow some 200 IT products, ranging from computers and memory chips to video game consoles and medical equipment, to be traded with no tariffs among 80 HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO member countries. The total trade in these IT products worldwide is about $1 trillion a year.

-RTA

Regional Trade Agreements refer to multilateral trade pacts made among countries in a certain region or continent. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"North American Free Trade Agreement and the U.S.-led Trans-Pacific Partnership, which is still under negotiation, are both types of RTAs. As the international trade negotiations led by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO have bogged down, RTAs are popular.

DRAMAHOUSE & J CONTENTHUB

U.S. Rejects Accusation on Flooding Vietnam with Cheap Chicken Legs

5 August 2015

Vietnam News Brief Service

The U.S. Poultry & Egg Export Council (USAPEEC) has rejected Vietnam’s accusation on flooding the Southeast Asian nation with cheap chicken legs and thighs, saying prices of the U.S. chicken products in the two markets are similar.

The move came after Vietnam’s Dong Nai Livestock Association and South-eastern Livestock Association have suggested the government launch an anti-dumping probe against imported U.S. chicken products which are offered at VND20,000 ($0.9) a kilogram, four to five times lower than prices of the same products in the American market.

USAPEEC’s President Jim Sumner said U.S.’s chicken legs and thighs are not competing with live chickens preferred by Vietnamese in the Southeast Asian nation. According to the regulations of the WTO, the U.S. has not conducted anti-dumping acts, he said.

The chicken products exported to Vietnam meet U.S. food safety and hygienic requirements, President Summer affirmed.

Responding to the USAPEEC’s statement, Nguyen Van Ngoc, vice president of the South-eastern Livestock Association said the U.S. should publicize the production costs of chicken products which have been exported to Vietnam.

Currently, U.S. chicken legs and thighs are sold at VND15,000-VND16,000 a kilogram to traders who sell them at VND20,000/kg to consumers, Ngoc said.

His association sent its staff to the U.S. who informed that chicken legs and thighs are offered at over VND60,000 a kilogram in local supermarkets and shops in the country.

Vietnam’s import of chicken products has surged, reaching over 50,000 tons in the first half. The U.S.-sourced chicken products account for 70% of the total imported volume, papers noted, adding that in 2014, the country bought 80,000 tons of foreign-sourced chicken products.

The South-eastern Livestock Association said Vietnamese breeding companies and farmers have sold their poultry products at prices below their production costs in the past 11 months. The country’s poultry farming has incurred a loss of VND1 trillion during the period as the raisers lose VND10,000 for every chicken, the association said.

Toan Viet Limited Company

EU aims to finalise 'TTIP' trade deal next year

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Barbara Lewis

5 August 2015

Irish Independent

EUROPEAN negotiators aim to finalise a trade pact with the United States in 2016 in "an optimistic scenario", EU Trade Commissioner Cecilia Malmstrom said yesterday. The planned Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) would be the biggest such agreement.

"We will do everything we can to try to finalise during 2016. That's the optimistic scenario we're working on, but it's possible," she told reporters.

Following on from a tenth round of talks in July, Ms Malmstrom said she would meet US Trade Representative Michael Froman in Washington in September to prepare for more talks in October and also in December.

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Parliament last month effectively gave Ms Malmstrom a mandate to continue negotiations by backing a compromise on setting up a new European court to settle disputes arising from any pact. (Reuters)

Independent Newspapers Ireland Limited

LatAm needs to adopt "digital single market" to counter technological lag: UN agency

mao pengfei 

5 August 2015

Xinhua News Agency

SANTIAGO, Aug. 4 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Xinhua) -- To counter Latin America's lack of digital access and development, the region should consolidate and standardize its telecommunications infrastructure, a United Nations agency said Tuesday.

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), based in Santiago, Chile, said it "proposes moving towards a regional digital single market which will allow taking advantage of network and scale economies to compete in a world of global platforms."

In a study titled "The New Digital Revolution," the agency advocates establishing "a common bloc with a uniform normative and institutional framework" to drive regional efforts to expand the digital economy, including telecommunications infrastructure, such as fixed and mobile broadband networks, and information and communications technology (ICT) industries like hardware, software and ICT services.

The report is to be officially presented during the Fifth Ministerial Conference on the Information Society in Latin America and the Caribbean, which begins in Mexico City Wednesday.

At the conference, countries are expected to outline a new digital agenda up to 2018, updating an existing Regional Plan of Action for the Information Society in Latin America and the Caribbean.

While the region has made some progress in expanding digital access, "countries progress at different speeds and fall strongly behind the developed economies," the report said.

Between 2006 and 2014, said HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"ECLAC, the percentage of Internet users in Latin America went from 20.7 percent to 50.1 percent of the population, well below the average of 81.8 percent in developed countries belonging to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD).

"The production capacity of equipment, software and apps are very weak in comparison with advanced economies and are concentrated in two or three countries of the region," said HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"ECLAC.

Also, the agency added, "the region's lag in terms of 4G mobile connections and the spread of fibre optics hinders the exploitation of advanced technologies. Overcoming this problem implies investment and coordination efforts that could be fostered through a regional digital single market." Xinhua News Agency

OECD: global inflation still low

5 August 2015

Investor's Business Daily

Inflation was below target in most developed nations, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development said. It averaged an annual rate of 0.6% in June, unchanged from the prior reading and well below the 2% desired by most central banks.

Investor's Business Daily

TPP DEAL FAILED BECAUSE IT WAS ABOUT PROTECTIONISM, NOT TRADE

5 August 2015

Dominion Post

The only way a Pacific trade deal will work will be if it returns its focus solely to trade, writes Winston Peters.

FAR from being "breathless children", the term Tim Groser used to disparage the concerns of New Zealanders, there is a nursery rhyme, which describes his failure as trade minister: The Grand old Duke of York.

Groser expensively marched the Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement to the top of the hill, only to march it all the way back down again. And remember how it goes: "And when they were only halfway up, they were neither up nor down."

Despite the soothing assurances since, anyone with a modicum of foreign policy nous knows the TPP is on hold until after the November 2016 United States presidential elections.

In the coming days and weeks, we will discover the reality that, for now, the TPPA is dead in the water. We also have an opportunity to take stock and go to those countries that share our view that "fair trade" is not about trading away either sovereignty or exporters. Instead of reinforcing failure, a smart trade minister would go back to the original "Pacific 4" agreement from whence the TPPA sprang.

NZ First voted for that agreement because it was all about trade.

In other words, New Zealand, Singapore, Brunei and Chile did not need nefarious Investor State Dispute Settlement provisions and corporate privilege to secure a highly-successful free trade agreement. We see no reason why Australia and others will not want in on an expanded "Pacific 4".

So what of Canada, Japan and the United States?

They would become candidate countries aware that it is about trade and not "comprehensive investment outcomes".

YET leaving the hardest trade issues to the last moment was never going to end well. John Key, Steven Joyce and Groser have achieved nothing after seven years of taxpayer- funded negotiation.

The TPP negotiations tipped over because America was unhappy over the intellectual protection of pharmaceuticals.

America also had major issues with the "risk" posed by Australia's sugar industry, while Canada wasn't prepared to budge on its heroically-subsidised dairy industry. Meanwhile, Japan showed the same stubbornness over rice and its car industry, further aggravating the Americans, who wanted to export dairy to all TPP countries without New Zealand "unfairly" getting access into the United States.

Just before it fell over, Australian Trade Minister Andrew Robb said the deal was 98 per cent of the way there.

Yet if the TPP was instead DNA, that percentage is how similar we humans are to chimpanzees, proving the last 2 per cent matters a lot.

It is also not hard to agree with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Australian Financial Review headline, Protectionism wins and US leadership goes missing.

This is a gift, the AFR says, to China. Key's foreign policy redefines running with the hares and hunting with the hounds.

While he puts our young men and women into harm's way in Iraq and holds the Western line in the United Nations, he is inching China's way.

Earlier this year, he committed $125 million towards the Chinese- led HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Asian Development Bank.

On the MH17 resolution, the New Zealand Government and commentariat espoused faux outrage over Russia's use of the veto. Yet there was total silence over China abstaining on the MH17 vote, as there has been about the disputed Spratly Islands.

Meanwhile, our doors are wide open to a tsunami of Chinese money to buy up farms and houses. Few will comprehend the scale until it happens, but any attempt by National to control it will fail given China has "most favoured nation status".

There is nothing as antiseptic as "I told you so" explaining NZ First's reluctance about the long- term implications of the China free trade agreement. An agreement which remarkably goes well beyond trade.

Exporters, farmers and belatedly Federated Farmers, all came to realise that Groser had his pen out in Hawaii and was willing to sign them away.

The only thing stopping him was the TPP collapsing under the weight of self-interest.

The US has always been obsessed with international investor protections, which is why these negotiations, from a US perspective, were always going to be about much more than trade.

So let's go back to basics and secure an agreement that is about both free and fair trade with like- minded countries.

An agreement that, like the "Pacific 4", delivers trade benefits for this country without trading away our sovereignty to achieve it.

Winston Peters is the leader of NZ First, the MP for Northland and a former treasurer and foreign affairs minister.

Fairfax New Zealand Limited

EU Agrees Free Trade Deal With Vietnam

By Tom Fairless 

4 August 2015

Dow Jones Top Global Market Stories

BRUSSELS—The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union said it had agreed in principle on a sweeping free-trade deal with Vietnam that could create a benchmark for future agreements between the bloc and fast-growing Asian economies.

The deal, which follows 2½ years of talks, would remove nearly all tariffs on goods traded between the two regions over seven to 10 years, as well as barriers to trade in services, investment and government procurement.

It comes as U.S. negotiators struggle to wrap up their own trade agreement with 11 Pacific nations including Vietnam.

Cecilia Malmströ m, the EU's trade commissioner, said a deal was reached on Tuesday morning following a telephone conversation with her Vietnamese counterpart Vu Huy Hoang.

Speaking at a news conference, Ms. Malmströ m said the deal with Vietnam was "an important steppingstone" toward the bloc's ultimate goal of signing a broader agreement with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Association of Southeast Asian Nations, an organization of 10 countries that includes Indonesia, Malaysia and Thailand.

Trade between the EU and Vietnam has increased threefold over the past decade to €28 billion annually, the commissioner said.

"Over 31 million jobs in Europe depend on exports, so having easier access to a growing and fast-developing market like Vietnam, with its 90 million consumers, is great news," she said.

The negotiating teams will now settle some remaining technical issues and finalize the legal text, which needs to be approved by national EU governments and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Parliament. It is likely to enter into force in late 2017 or 2018.

The EU is pursuing several other major trade deals in Asia, including with India and Japan. Ms. Malmströ m said she was "very committed" to concluding talks with Tokyo, but that it was too early to say if a deal would be reached by year-end. Senior EU negotiators are also due to meet with their Indian counterparts in September to decide whether to restart talks, which were opened in 2007 but have since stalled.

Ms. Malmströ m was asked about efforts by U.S. negotiators to complete a major Pacific trade agreement, which ended Friday without resolution amid deep differences over trade in dairy and other products. U.S. and other officials had hoped to wrap up the final contours of the 12-nation Trans-Pacific Partnership last week.

Ms. Malmströ m said she expected that deal to be concluded soon despite "some stumbling blocks."

"It's not a competition," she added of comparisons between U.S. and EU trade deals in Asia.

The EU and U.S. are also working on their own deal to create the world's biggest free-trade zone. Negotiators held a 10th round of talks in Brussels last month toward the so-called trans-Atlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, or TTIP, but were unable to make "a big break-though," Ms. Malmströ m said. Further rounds are now expected in October and probably December.

"We will do everything [to] try to wrap this up in 2016," she said.

