HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO voices concern with slow progress in Doha round of trade negotiations
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO Doha Talks Halt as Agriculture Impasse Stalls Ambitions to Conclude 2001 Round
·         HYPERLINK \l "Japan Ratifies WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement
·         HYPERLINK \l "GSA whips up interest in trade facilitation
·         HYPERLINK \l "S. Korea agrees to begin WTO consultations with Japan on import ban
·         HYPERLINK \l "Vietnam takes Indonesia to WTO over steel imports
·         HYPERLINK \l "Etihad Airways rejects subsidy claims, attacks U.S. airline 'oligopoly'
·         HYPERLINK \l "Backers Of CVD Currency Bill Reject IMF Assessment That Yuan Is Not Undervalued
·         HYPERLINK \l "We are not under pressure from the US on IPR: Nirmala Sitharaman
·         HYPERLINK \l "China slashes tariffs on range of consumer goods
·         HYPERLINK \l "Vietnam, EEU countries sign free trade agreement
·         HYPERLINK \l "Costly Bet on Big Cargo Ships Comes Up Short
·         HYPERLINK \l "OECD, 'rich nations' club' turns into 'do-tank'
·         HYPERLINK \l "A reinvigorated trade agenda necessary for all the countries
 
WTO voices concern with slow progress in Doha round of trade negotiations 
 
GENEVA, June 1 (Xinhua) -- WTO's Director-General Roberto Azevedo on Monday expressed concern over the slow progress of negotiations on the remaining issues of the Doha Development Agenda.

"On the basis of the discussions I have had over recent weeks, I am becoming increasingly concerned that we are not making the progress that is needed in the key areas of agriculture, industrial products and services," said Azevedo.

A meeting of all WTO members was convened Monday in Geneva to discuss the current development in negotiations on the work program for concluding the Doha round.

The WTO chief gave a detailed briefing to members on recent consultations, covering a range of Doha issues, noting "agreeing on a work program was never going to be an easy task".

He warned the WTO members "are still waiting for the necessary convergence on key issues in order to deliver the outcome we need by July and to help us build towards a successful ministerial meeting in Nairobi in December".

Azevedo outlined, as he had on previous occasions, that this work will continue over the coming weeks in the WTO's various Negotiating Groups.

He reiterated his commitment to the transparency and inclusiveness of the negotiating process, which was a crucial element of the success in Bali in 2013.

Commenting on the forward process, Azevedo said he would ensure that members are fully briefed on all aspects of the negotiations, affirming this would be essential to ensure that the necessary political calls can be taken in due course.

The Doha Round is the latest round of trade negotiations among the WTO members. Its aim is to achieve major reform of the international trading system through the introduction of lower trade barriers and revised trade rules.

WTO members agreed in November 2014 to agree a work program by July as a springboard towards the WTO's 10th Ministerial Conference in Nairobi in December.

 
WTO Doha Talks Halt as Agriculture Impasse Stalls Ambitions to Conclude 2001 Round
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, June 2, 2015
 
June 1 – International trade ministers will confront some of the lingering decisions that have plagued Doha round negotiations for the past decade when they convene in Paris June 4 for the Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) ministerial meeting.
 
In recent weeks, World Trade Organization members have said any Doha agreement will include significantly decreased tariff reduction terms for industrial and farm goods. It is also questionable whether members can agree to any new disciplines regarding domestic support before the end of the year.
 
Combined with a renewed flare-up between the U.S. and Indian delegations regarding terms for a special safeguard mechanism proposal, the WTO's latest effort to conclude Doha negotiations appears firmly stuck (103 WTO, 5/29/15). The office of the U.S. Trade Representative (USTR) confirmed to Bloomberg BNA that USTR Michael Froman has decided not to attend the June 4 ministerial meeting.
 
Absent any further progress in the WTO's agriculture negotiations over the next two months, it is becoming increasingly likely that members will fail to advance before July 31 an ambitious work program for concluding the 2001 Doha round.
 
July Work Program
 
The success of the WTO's agreement to approve a Trade Facilitation Agreement in 2014 offered hope for a new wave of multilateral trade rules, but mid-year expectations have waned as members continue to strongly disagree on the same issues that sunk negotiations in 2008.
 
In a June 1 heads of delegation meeting in Geneva, WTO Director-General Roberto Azevedo said he was “increasingly concerned that we are not making the progress that is needed in the key areas of agriculture, industrial products and services.”
 
“Agreeing on a work program was never going to be an easy task. But as of today we are still waiting for the necessary convergence on key issues in order to deliver the outcome we need by July and to help us build towards a successful ministerial meeting in Nairobi in December,” Azevedo said.
 
Azevedo's dour assessment came only weeks after he promised an intensified effort to address issues across the three primary negotiating pillars of agriculture, non-agricultural market access (NAMA) and services.
 
NAMA Talks Falter
 
Efforts to reduce tariffs on industrial goods stalled as WTO members broadly acknowledged the deep impasse that has mired talks to modernize members' agricultural commitments.
 
Remigi Winzap, the chairman of the WTO's non-agricultural market access negotiating group (NAMA), told members June 1 that the group's negotiations had not progressed over the past few weeks and he urged them to consider new ways to achieve the goals of the Doha Development agenda.
 
Members like the U.S. and Brazil said any ambition in NAMA must be balanced with ambition in agriculture, which has notably decreased this year due to stark disagreements over the need to recalibrate negotiating terms from 2008.
 
Large, developing nations—like China and India—have opposed any new trade disciplines that would require them to reduce their domestic farm subsidies in excess of terms established in a 2008 proposal known as Rev. 4.
 
Other members of the group of 33 developing nations also have resisted efforts to depart from Rev. 4's market access formulas and other terms that provide them with special exclusions and flexibilities.
 
Their perspective continues to clash with those of U.S. trade officials who argue that emerging countries like China and India must agree to curb policies that distort international trade if the U.S. is to modify its own agricultural policies.
 
 
Japan Ratifies WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement
WTO Reporter, June 2, 2015

June 1 — Japan ratified the Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA) after submitting its instrument of acceptance on May 27.
 
The TFA instructs World Trade Organization members to improve their customs procedures and expedite the movement, release and clearance of goods, among other commitments.
 
TFA proponents said the agreement would generate hundreds of billions of dollars in global trade efficiencies and provide a significant boost to the global economy.
 
After two-thirds of the WTO's 161 members submit their instruments of acceptance, the TFA will be ratified and enter into force.
 
Hong Kong, Malaysia, Mauritius, Singapore and the U.S. have ratified the agreement.
 
 
GSA whips up interest in trade facilitation 
1 June 2015
Business and Financial Times
 
The Chief Executive Officer of the Ghana Shippers Authority, Dr. Kofi Mbiah, has called for the simplification, harmonisation, standardisation and modification of procedures in the trade, transport and logistics industry.

He said the need for change is vital in this era of globalization, wherein there is a need to be constantly updated on new developments within the existing multilateral arrangements which have an impact on the country’s economic development.

Our time for trade facilitation is now; therefore players in the industry need to adopt effective policies and put in place the necessary schemes, structures and systems that build confidence and predictability in the business community.

Players must also strive for creditability and transparency in their decision-making processes, and by doing so they can experience the growth they crave,” he said.

Dr. Mbiah made the call at a consultative forum on the World Trade Organisation (WTO) Agreement of Trade Facilitation and the clearance process in Ghana, a programme well-attended by stakeholders, jointly organised by the Ghana Shippers Authority and the Ghana Community Network (GCNet).

The WTO has recognised the need for this change, and its recent multilateral arrangements with respect to trade facilitation signed in Bali, Indonesia, in December 2013 are geared toward effecting the necessary changes for global development and prosperity.

He noted for instance that in 2013 the port of Singapore with a population of 5 million handled 32 million Twenty Equivalent Units (TEUs) of containers, while Ghana with a population of 25 million handled one million TEUs in the same year.

The WTO agreements called for change in the way we conduct our trade, and if Ghana is to increase its trade and throughput at the ports then it is imperative we take congnisance of the WTO agreement and adopt the necessary changes in the way we conduct our business.

We cannot continue to do things the way we have done in the past and expect different results. To achieve high growth rates we need to accelerate the pace of job-creation, and our economic diversification.

We must give true meaning to trade facilitation and not pay lip-service to same,” he added.

Dr. Mbiah said all over the world, trade has been known to be the economic driver of progress and prosperity, and that Ghana must appreciate the contribution of logistics and trade facilitation to our development efforts.

He said trade facilitation will enhance an efficient logistics chain, impact the manufacturing and agro base industry which creates real jobs, impact trading relationships, impact our mining and oil and gas businesses, and livelihoods.

Our effort to trade facilitation must be geared toward attainment of the blue economy; it must be underpinned by an economic paradigm that is geared toward generating more revenue, creating jobs and being competitive in the global market.”

Adding her voice, Deputy Minister of Transport, Joyce Mogtari Bawa, disclosed that a Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA) is essentially meant to reduce the time and cost associated with clearing goods for imports and exports, thus ensuring competitiveness for shippers and their countries.

Inefficient clearance procedures add to cost; over-zealous inspection can actually delay revenue collection, and when authorities are intent on maximising revenue from import duties and other border taxes by checking every consignment that is to be cleared, they cause queues, congestion, and increase costs to shippers and consumers alike.

As a result of delayed clearance of goods at the countries seaports, importers pay in excess of US$70million annually in demurrage charges and another GH¢30million in rent charges.

There are also costs associated with the movement of containers from the ports to the off-dock terminals, and sending them back to the port for scanning as a result of lacking pre-arrival shipment information to select their appropriate risk channels.

Importers pay a huge estimated cost of GH¢160million annually associated with the opening of every container at the port, because Customs officers still want to undertake physical inspection as they do not trust the information provided by importers,” she said.

Deputy Minister of Transport underscored the need to look at simple measures in the agreement that will maximise benefits for stakeholders.

Patrick Opoku, Director of Trade Facilitation at the Ministry of Trade and Industry, said the benefits of improved trade facilitation and clearance procedures cannot be overemphasised, as simplified and transparent procedures are a key component of good trade policy, and vital for economic growth.

He explained the trade facilitation agreement is divided into two sections, and section-one deals with the technical aspects and details necessary to improve the agreement.

With regard to section-two of the agreement, WTO members are required to undertake commitments under three categories of provisions consistent with individual development and financial capabilities to implement them. Source: Evelyn Arthur | B&FT Online | Ghana
 
 
S. Korea agrees to begin WTO consultations with Japan on import ban 
Kyodo News
 
TOKYO, June 2 -- South Korea has agreed to discuss with Japan under an international trade dispute settlement system its import restrictions on Japanese fishery products following the 2011 Fukushima nuclear disaster, Japanese farm minister Yoshimasa Hayashi said Tuesday.

"We received a response (from South Korea) on Friday in Geneva saying it will respond to our country's request for consultations," the agriculture, forestry and fisheries minister said, referring to the first step in the World Trade Organization's dispute settlement process.

Following the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant disaster, which resulted in massive radiation leakage, South Korea banned imports of 50 kinds of marine products from Fukushima Prefecture and seven other nearby prefectures. In September 2013, Seoul expanded the restrictions to bar all fishery products from the eight prefectures.

Japan, which believes there is no scientific justification for the import restrictions and is calling for the removal of the ban, requested consultations with South Korea on May 21.

It is the first time that the Japanese government has taken procedures with a view to asking the Geneva-based WTO to establish a panel to rule on its complaint regarding import restrictions introduced by other countries in the wake of the nuclear crisis.

The WTO rules in principle require consultations to start within a period of no more than 30 days after the date of receipt of the request for consultations.

Hayashi said the schedule for the bilateral talks will "be arranged with the South Korean government hereafter."

If the two countries fail to resolve the matter through consultations within 60 days, Japan is expected to request a trade dispute panel be set up.

The South Korean government has said the ban is necessary to ensure the safety of its people.

Among other Japanese trading partners, Taiwan imposed tougher rules on Japanese food imports in May, requiring certificates of origin for all products. The Japanese government is considering also taking that case to the WTO.

 
Vietnam takes Indonesia to WTO over steel imports 
 
GENEVA, June 1 (Reuters) - Vietnam has filed a complaint at the World Trade Organization to challenge Indonesia's use of emergency "safeguard" tariffs on imports of flat rolled products of iron or non-alloy steel, the WTO said in a statement on Monday.

Safeguard tariffs can be imposed temporarily to protect a nation's producers against a sudden and damaging surge of imports. By launching the complaint, Vietnam has triggered a 60-day period for Indonesia to settle the matter. After that Vietnam could ask the WTO to adjudicate. (Reporting by Tom Miles) 
 
 
Etihad Airways rejects subsidy claims, attacks U.S. airline 'oligopoly'
By Jeffrey Dastin

June 1 (Reuters) - Etihad Airways on Monday issued it strongest response yet to claims that it received market-distorting subsidies, saying it is required to repay loans and that its U.S. competitors have a "condescending" view of non-U.S. law.

The comments by the Abu Dhabi-based carrier mark its latest move to deter the Obama administration from revisiting aviation agreements with the United Arab Emirates and Qatar. U.S. airlines say more than $40 billion in subsidies from the countries have allowed Etihad, Emirates airline and Qatar Airways to begin driving down prices and push competitors out of certain markets, contrary to "Open Skies" agreements negotiated by the United States.

In a 60-page submission to the U.S. government Sunday made publicly available Monday, Etihad said U.S. Open Skies policy did not prohibit airlines from receiving shareholders loans. Etihad's sole shareholder, the government of Abu Dhabi, gave it $5.2 billion with "the express requirement that such loans be repaid by Etihad."

No international trade rules or precedent by the United States exists for addressing airline subsidy claims, complicating the U.S. government review of the matter.

Etihad said Open Skies policy does not define subsidy, but its main concern is to stop subsidies from lowering airfare artificially.

Citing a study it commissioned, Etihad said its published fares from April 2013 to March 2015 fell "generally" within the range of the fares of its opponents: namely, Delta Air Lines Inc , United Continental Holdings Inc and American Airlines Group Inc.

Other complaints by these airlines "take a very condescending view of non-U.S. law," Etihad added.

The U.S. airlines say Etihad has received a $501 million benefit because the UAE does not tax travelers connecting through its airports. Etihad said the rule applies to all carriers.

Etihad also said it funded its sponsorship of the Manchester City football club from its own liquidity, countering claims that Abu Dhabi covered the reportedly $640 million deal.

It summed the allegations as "little more than a regulatory attempt to further cement [U.S. airlines'] oligopoly."

Jill Zuckman, spokeswoman for the U.S airline-union Partnership for Open & Fair Skies, said in a statement, "Government to government consultations are entirely appropriate given that Etihad has taken billions of dollars in subsidies." (Reporting by Jeffrey Dastin in Los Angeles; Editing by Bernard Orr) 
 
 
Backers Of CVD Currency Bill Reject IMF Assessment That Yuan Is Not Undervalued
World Trade Online
Posted: May 29, 2015 
Proponents of a bill that would address foreign currency manipulation through U.S. trade remedy law are rejecting the assessment issued May 26 by International Monetary Fund officials that China's currency is no longer undervalued, although some are arguing that even if the IMF's position were correct, it bolsters the case for the bill.
 
In separate statements emailed to Inside U.S. Trade on May 29, the Alliance for American Manufacturing (AAM) and House Ways & Means Committee Ranking Member Sander Levin (D-MI) both slammed the IMF determination and pointed out that the U.S. Treasury Department has said it still believes China's yuan is undervalued.
 
Treasury made that finding again in its latest biannual report on international exchange rate policies, issued April 9. The report said the yuan remains “significantly undervalued” since China still maintains a large and growing trade surplus and large internal imbalances. At the same time, it added that China had made “real progress” through a meaningful appreciation of the real effective exchange rate over the previous six months.
 
But Levin also argued that, even if the IMF's latest assessment were true, that would support his position of passing the currency legislation and including disciplines to guard against currency manipulation in free trade agreements. This, he indicated, is because China or other countries that have previously manipulated their currency would no longer have grounds to oppose those disciplines.
 
“The goal is to deter future currency manipulation -- without legislation and provisions in trade agreements, countries can manipulate their currencies when they want. If countries don’t have plans to manipulate their currency, they shouldn’t have any issue accepting those disciplines,” Levin said in the statement.
 
AAM President Scott Paul did not make that particular argument, although he did call on the IMF, Treasury and Congress to keep up the pressure on China to stop manipulating its currency. AAM was formed by the United Steelworkers union and some U.S. manufacturers.
 
Paul rattled off a list of reasons to support his claim that the yuan -- also called the renminbi -- is still manipulated, first pointing to the fact that the Central Bank of China “regularly intervenes” to alter the market price for the currency. “Second, the symptoms of undervaluation remain in place: persistently high Chinese current account surpluses and $4 trillion in foreign-exchange reserves. Third, the yuan is still not freely traded,” Paul said.
 
“So we agree with Treasury Secretary Jack Lew and other independent analysis that suggests the yuan is still undervalued. Is China still manipulating its currency? There is no doubt. And unless the IMF, Treasury, and Congress continue to apply vigorous pressure, the yuan will stay manipulated," he added.
 
Paul in his statement did not explicitly urge enactment of the currency legislation -- pushed by Sen. Charles Schumer (D-NY), Levin and other lawmakers -- that would put pressure on the Commerce Department to investigate undervalued currency as a countervailable subsidy under U.S. trade remedy law. But AAM has consistently backed such legislation.
 
That currency legislation was included in a broader customs and enforcement bill that the Senate passed by a vote of 78-20 on May 14. House Republicans oppose the currency provision but have nevertheless pledged to pass their own version of the customs bill and subsequently hold a conference with the Senate, with the goal of sending compromise legislation to the president by the end of June.
 
The IMF assessment came in a statement issued by fund officials who traveled to China May 14-17 to conduct an annual review of the Chinese economy.
 
“While undervaluation of the Renminbi was a major factor causing the large imbalances in the past, our assessment now is that the substantial real effective appreciation over the past year has brought the exchange rate to a level that is no longer undervalued,” the statement said.
 
But the statement also urged the Chinese government to “make rapid progress toward greater exchange rate flexibility.” It said such flexibility is essential for a large economy like China’s that aims for market-based pricing and is integrating rapidly in global financial markets.
 
“Greater flexibility, with intervention limited to avoiding disorderly market conditions or excessive volatility, will also be key to prevent the exchange rate from moving away from equilibrium in the future. We believe that China should aim to achieve an effectively floating exchange rate within two--three years,” the statement added.
 
It noted that the exchange rate is only one factor that affects a country's overall current account balance. The statement said China has made “good progress” in recent years by reducing its large current account surplus and its accumulation of foreign currency reserves, but still needs to implement additional reforms to reduce excess savings and achieve a “sustained external balance.”
 
 
We are not under pressure from the US on IPR: Nirmala Sitharaman 
Asit Ranjan Mishra 
2 June 2015
Mint
 
New Delhi, June 2 -- Commerce and industry minister Nirmala Sitharaman has won accolades for her apt handling of the food security issue at the World Trade Organization (WTO) soon after she took charge. She has a crucial role to play in Prime Minister Narendra Modi's effort to make India a manufacturing hub through the Make in India initiative. Ahead of her visit to Paris, where she will engage with other trade ministers to talk on WTO's post-Bali work programme, Sitharaman says the developmental spirit of the Doha negotiations need to be upheld and differential treatment for developing countries cannot be ignored. Edited excerpts:

You have completed one year in the commerce ministry. What are your two major achievements?

Most certainly, the World Trade Organization course correction to the Bali agreement. With the prime minister taking the lead and, at various levels, handling it and trying to convince people that we are not asking for any favour but it is our sovereign right to protect our farmers through the minimum support price and the poorest of the poor who need the public distribution system. Second, the Make in India initiative, in which both the centre and the states are involved, along with entrepreneurs and manufacturers, so that the country facilitates entrepreneurship and makes sure it is a good place to invest and work. We cannot be seen as regressive.

Are you worried that exports have been contracting for five months in a row?

I would like exports to improve, but I would add a caveat. Exports have not contracted across the board, but overall, it gives such an impression. Monetary value of exports have come down because the crude oil prices have fallen. There are sectors where both in quantum and in value terms, exports have gone up, such as engineering and ready-made garments.

In such a scenario, how confident are you of the target of doubling exports to $900 billion by 2020?

It is absolutely achievable, because we need to understand that it is not because of fall in quantum of exports that the value has fallen. The quantum remains the same, or in some sectors, it has gone up. So, if international crude oil prices are determining the total value of exports, then we must be seized of the reality.

India has already crossed the threshold of 3.25% of world trade in textiles, after which it should stop providing export subsidies to the sector. It will soon cross the threshold of $1,000 per capita income, after which it has to stop all kinds of export subsidies. Do you think that will further erode our competitiveness in international markets?

I don't think it will erode our competitiveness, particularly if you are referring to textiles, because, like in bulk drugs, Indian textile manufacturers have set high standards for themselves. And they have become globally competitive both in terms of pricing, variety and the quality they offer. It will certainly help if they are able to get some assistance because these are sectors where there are many small and medium-sized companies. But if WTO rules have told us that and we have to follow it, it might make many of them feel the pinch, but I am sure they will overcome these difficulties with the strength of the industry.

So, are we going to withdraw these subsidies anytime soon?

Well, at this stage, we are doing very many things for different sectors. We are definitely going to comply with the WTO, but many of them also need handholding. The ministry is working on how and in what way we do that in compliance with WTO rules.

Many countries keep a tab on the number of jobs created by the export sector because they also provide subsidies. Do you plan to collect such data in India?

India's approach to mining and keeping data and constantly monitoring to get real-time data is a very big and right investment to make. With digitization, we are now in a position to ensure that such data are collected and maintained. But it will take a while for us to get the complete picture.

We are also making sure that the ministry itself has a better real-time data collection process, linking with customs and ensuring that the registration forms and the forms that are filed have such data which we don't need to ask exporters to refile. So, there is also a question of simplification, alignment of all the forms and collection of data. We are working on that.

You talked about Make in India as an achievement of your ministry. But by only focusing on manufacturing through the Make in India campaign, are you not neglecting services sector where we have the advantage at present?

We are not confining ourselves only to merchandise manufacturers. In fact, we held a special conclave to show we are focusing on services, and there also, we are not confining ourselves to IT (information technology) and IT-enabled services (ITeS) only. With the prime minister placing emphasis on trade, tourism and culture, we are talking about yoga, wellness industry, hospitality industry, and activities under that also count as Make in India. Because they would want equipment, machinery, their demand will also influence manufacturing.

But the Make in India logo was nowhere to be seen in the Global Services Conclave you referred to.

Thanks for the observation. But there is a lot of give and take.

Does this government have a different approach to signing new free trade agreements (FTAs) than the previous one?

I will not describe it as a different approach. We are ensuring to leverage our advantages in services; for instance, ensuring that certain sectors are treated differently. For example, in agriculture, you cannot open dairy to countries which for centuries have given advantages to their own people. In India, the sector is very diversified. One person with one cow would still be contributing to Amul. His livelihood depends on milk from that one cow. So, while negotiating, we are sensitive to some sectors that the large bulk of the poorest of the poor depend for their livelihood.

Now there are a few mega regional trade agreements being negotiated such as Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) and Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP), which are expected to set up higher standards in goods, services, investment and intellectual property rights (IPR). Do you think India not being part of such agreements will limit our export markets and erode our competitiveness? What we should do?

We may not be part of TTIP or TPP because, geographically, we are not placed in such a position. But we are there in the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP), negotiating and finding our own space. At the same time, when we are talking with the EU (European Union) for the FTA, we are asking them if they are so keen to go ahead with the plurilateral trade agreement with the US, will they see any benefit in going for an FTA with us, and they have said overwhelmingly yes. So, India has not lost out on large markets. I think it is an ideal mix. We are neither overexposed nor isolated.

Cracking the Chinese market has been another big challenge for Indian exporters. Where do you see the real problem?

Trade balance with China is definitely adverse and it is growing. It is not as if we are not conscious of it. The bilateral negotiations that we had with China, we have underlined that this imbalance cannot be sustained. It is not as if we have nothing to export to China. Because they deny access to us, we are unable to get into their market.

China needs many of the things we produce-for example, bulk drugs. Chinese society is ageing. Their regions are far flung, distant and remote. Chinese healthcare is completely governmental healthcare. For them to have bulk drugs at affordable prices is a very important thing. World over, we have established that we produce bulk drugs at affordable prices and of highest quality.

Similarly, on IT and ITeS sector, our companies are approaching, registering. It is very cumbersome. For Indian IT companies, it takes three years to even get registered. So, there are clearly sectors where India has lead advantage which can serve the Chinese market and it will be a win-win situation for both countries. But the Chinese will have to be a lot more open-minded. We are talking to them.

What do they tell you when you raise these concerns?

That they will definitely look into it and come back. (smiles) I hope they move faster.

Recent reports suggest the US has rejected a demand for a special safeguard mechanism (SSM) that aims to protect resource-poor farmers in developing countries from unforeseen surges of agricultural imports to be made a part of the post-Bali work programme which needs to be finalized by July-end. Will India support an agreement without SSM? Where do you think the Doha round is moving?

India hopes that WTO, completing its 20th year this year, will understand the importance India gives to multilateralism. The facilities that have extended to the least developed countries should prove that we are keeping the Doha Development Agenda alive in letter and spirit. I would expect that WTO preparing for its ministerial conference will ensure that justice is done and that Doha does not get forgotten as a developmental round. Trade alone does not bring development. Special and differential treatment is still necessary because countries may grow faster, but within them, there are regions whose per capita income is worrisome. I think the spirit of WTO in the context of the Doha Development Agenda is kept up. I will insist on that.

So, are you saying a deal without SSM will not be acceptable to India?

Yes, absolutely.

Your government came to power with the promise of providing a rule-based system. Don't you think allowing FDI (foreign direct investment) in retail on paper but insisting that we won't welcome it is against the very concept of a rule-based system?

But has there been any application which is either entertained or not? No. So, the compendium recording 51% is stating what is existing on paper. And because I am asked about it, I am stating the party's position.

On IPR, the prime minister made a statement at the Global Services Conclave which now the US has also quoted in its reports, that India needs to bring its patent laws on par with global parameters.

The prime minister is absolutely right in saying that. It is a statement as a matter of fact that we have to be consistent with the international standards on it. And we are.

So if we are, then what is the need to make such a statement?

The prime minister did not say we are not, and we should be. He very clearly said we should be. That's a reminder of what we are.

But is there pressure from the US to make changes in our IPR policy and give concessions on data exclusivity and compulsory licensing?

On the contrary, in each one of my meetings with the US authorities, I have upfront said that we have formed a think tank which is forming the IPR policy, every one of the decisions that are being taken is put in the public domain. I myself told the US team, if you are keen to know about our position, please meet up with the think tank, and they have sent their representative also and have given their views. That's where it ends. So, where do you find any pressure on me? And if at all, where do you find me yielding to it? If anything, I am putting pressure on them, asking them to please go and study our scheme of things. So let's be clear.
 
 
China slashes tariffs on range of consumer goods
Tom Mitchell in Beijing
Financial Times 
June 1, 2015 10:15 am
 
China slashed tariffs on selected consumer goods by half on Monday, its latest attempt to spur consumption and rebalance the economy from its traditional reliance on debt-funded investment.

The cuts, first flagged by the State Council in April, will reduce average import duties on clothing from 18.5 per cent to 8.5 per cent, shoes from 23 per cent to 12 per cent and skincare products from 5 per cent to 2 per cent.
 
Analysts, however, cautioned that its immediate effect would be modest. “This policy may have a positive impact on China’s merchandise import levels, although it will be marginal in the short term,” said Brian Jackson, China economist for IHS Global Insight. 
 
The products benefiting from the reductions account for less than 10 per cent of China’s total imports.

Chinese consumers have complained that they pay prices that are high even by European standards for everything from cups of coffee to premium cars. Foreign multinationals say high import tariffs are responsible for much of the price differential, but many also take advantage of strong demand to charge high mark-ups in the country.

To address public anger, the government this year allowed previously illegal “parallel” imports of premium cars, which can now be shipped from the US by unauthorised dealers and cost far less than the equivalent vehicles sold through official dealership channels.

The resulting arbitrage opportunities have contributed to the hordes of Chinese tourists who descend on American, European and Japanese shopping districts to snap up coveted consumer goods. 
 
In Hong Kong, a Chinese territory with far lower taxes because of its status as a free port, the influx of cross-border shoppers has become a major policy challenge for its government.

As a result, Hong Kong has had to impose purchase restrictions on infant formula, which Chinese parents prefer to buy from foreign suppliers after a series of safety scandals involving domestic companies. One of the biggest tariff reductions announced on Monday affected imported nappies, with rates cut from 7.5 per cent to 2 per cent.

“The real goal of this programme is to ‘onshore’ the value added associated with existing retail purchases abroad, as well as generate and capture new domestic consumer demand,” Mr Jackson said.

Analysts at Liberum agreed. “Duty cuts will reduce price gaps between Chinese and international markets, especially for luxury products, reduce local grey markets and convert a portion of Chinese consumers’ travel spend into domestic consumption,” they said in a note.
 
February 2015: Anger at visitors from mainland China has bubbled back to the surface as Hong Kong residents protested against Chinese shoppers buying up goods to sell over the border and blocking public transport

Beijing’s stated policy objective of increasing consumption is in line with recommendations from the International Monetary Fund, which is considering the renminbi for inclusion in its reserve unit, known as Special Drawing Rights.

The IMF recently declared that the renminbi was “no longer undervalued” but also warned Beijing that it expected the currency to continue to appreciate and said China’s current account surplus needed to come down further.

“China’s external position is still moderately stronger than consistent with medium-term fundamentals,” David Lipton, the IMF’s first deputy managing director, said at a briefing in Beijing last week. 
 
“The still too-strong external position highlights the need for other policy reforms to reduce excess savings.”
 
 
Vietnam, EEU countries sign free trade agreement 
 
BURABAI, Kazakhstan. June 1 (Interfax) - The Eurasian Economic Union (EEU) member states and Vietnam have signed a free trade agreement.

Russian Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev and Vietnamese Prime Minister Nguyen Tan Dung have also signed two protocols to the agreement, an Interfax correspondent has reported.

In addition, the premiers signed a Russian-Vietnamese agreement whereby Vietnam will grant most-favored-nation treatment to Russian suppliers and investors.

Andrei Slepnev, a trade minister at the Eurasian Economic Commission (EEC), told reporters that this was the first such agreement with a non-CIS country for all the EEU members.

"It shows that we are moving within the trend of global trade processes. If all initiatives currently existing worldwide get implemented, in five or six years up to 60%, and some experts even think up to 80%, of all global trade will be conducted as free trade against the current 25%. Thus, WTO [World Trade Organization] becomes a necessary but insufficient condition: most parts of global trade will be conducted as free trade. This is a completely new challenge. We spent 18 years trying to join the WTO but now we realize that our export ambitions can only be realized if we stick to the concept of a new international-trade model," the minister said.

The free trade area (FTA) agreement with Vietnam will take effect 60 days after being ratified by all EEU members and Vietnam in accordance with their respective national laws, Slepnev said. "We hope all countries will ratify this agreement during the fall session," he said.

The agreement will open to EEU entrepreneurs "favorable opportunities to start supplies to the Vietnamese market with a capacity of around 90 million people, and, as well as that, by developing joint production in Vietnam, to enter other markets in the ASEAN [Association of Southeast Asian Nations] and the Asian region as a whole," the trade minister said.

"By our estimates, overall the creation of an FTA between the EEU and Vietnam could increase trade from the current $4 billion to $10 billion by 2020," Slepnev said.

Concurrently, the countries are working to launch joint projects, he said.

Vietnam's lifting or reduction of import duties will not affect about 12% of tariff lines which are of no particular interest to EEU exporters, the EEU said in a statement.

The Eurasian Union will also lift import duties on 88% of the tariff lines in the goods nomenclature: those on 59% will be lifted as soon as the agreement takes effect, the remaining 29% will be lifted over transitional periods of five to ten years.

"The Eurasian Union will keep customs duties on the most sensitive groups of products, namely: meat, milk, tea, coffee, sugar, instant drinks, pipes, aircraft, cars and so on. Vietnam will keep duties on certain groups of ready meat products, pastry and sweets, salt, industrial waste, precious metal products, special-purpose vehicles and so on, which are largely of no export interest to manufacturers in the EEU countries," the EEC said.

The EEU has received proposals to sign an FTA agreement from over 30 countries and regional associations, Slepnev said.

Joint groups are already working with Egypt, Israel and India, he said. An investigative group with Israel is completing its work and preparing a final report; work with Egypt and India is still in the early stages.

As well as studying the expediency of signing such agreements with Egypt, Israel and India, the EEU now has two lines of negotiations (currently "frozen" at the partners' initiative): with New Zealand and the European Free Trade Association (Iceland, Norway, Switzerland and Lichtenstein).

 
Costly Bet on Big Cargo Ships Comes Up Short 
By Costas Paris 
2 June 2015
Dow Jones Newswires Chinese (English)
 
The world's biggest container-shipping operators are making an expensive bet by committing billions of dollars in giant vessel orders. So far, that bet is a losing one as freight rates hover around record lows and demand for ocean shipping is weak.

Container shipping is a $6 trillion industry that moves more than 95% of the world's manufactured goods. It is controlled by about 15 European and Asian operators that have pooled their operations through alliances, sharing networks and port calls and using ultra-large container ships that redraw the scale of international shipping. With the capability to carry nearly 19,000 containers, these ships are more than a third larger than the largest ships of a decade ago, and the largest eclipse their surroundings at ports.

Stood straight up, the 1,309-foot-long Maersk McKinney Møller would be taller than any building in Europe and stretch 15 feet beyond the Empire State Building.

The already big operators are looking to grow and expect their smaller rivals, that can't afford such vessels, eventually to abandon the most lucrative ocean routes, leaving freight rates to move upward as cargo owners find fewer choices to ship their products. For now, at least, it is turning into a very costly plan.

The glut of massive ships is adding to the overcapacity on the world's busiest trade lanes, particularly the benchmark Asia-to-Europe route, pushing the cost of shipping a container from Shanghai to Rotterdam down to a record low of $342 per 20-foot container last week. The year-to-date average is $742 a container, down 36% from the $1,151 average for the first five months of 2014.

Container-ship operators say they lose money in the long run on the Asia-to-Europe trade lanes if freight rates stay below $1,300 per container. Analysts estimate capacity in the route at around 30% above annual demand, which is expected to grow between 3% and 5% this year.

"Ordering ships that take years to build is always something of a gamble. As things stand, the roulette wheel has landed on red when all the carriers had put their chips on black," shipping-data provider Drewry said in a recent research note.

Both carriers and shipyards were hoping to jump-start investment after the steep decline in trade in 2009. The recovery has been sluggish, however. The World Trade Organization says global trade averaged only 2.4% annual growth from 2012 to 2014, and the WTO is forecasting only modest 3.3% expansion this year.

"The rush to order the biggest containerships might pay off in the long run, (but) at present, that gamble has backfired and carriers are faced with overcapacity in Asia-Europe, making it very difficult to see how rates will become sustainable," the Drewry analysts wrote.

A.P. Møller-Maersk A/S's Maersk Line of Denmark kicked off the race of the big ships in 2011, ordering 20 behemoths that carry in excess of 18,000 containers, upping the ante from the largest 14,000-container-capacity ships Maersk had been operating. At the time, shipping analysts and competitors doubted the ships, which cost about $185 million each, could be filled to generate profit, but since then all major operators have rushed to put in their own orders.

Mediterranean Shipping Co. this year took ownership of two ships it says are capable of carrying more than 19,000 20-foot containers, and the Switzerland-based carrier will take six more of the vessels by the end of 2015.

London-based Braemar ACM Shipbroking estimates that investment in the ultra-large container ships, or ULCSs, amounted to 500,000 containers in additional container capacity in this year's first quarter, representing nearly half the 1 million boxes contracted for all of 2014.

The carriers are pooling space on the ships in alliances that add up to enormous market forces on major trade routes. The world's two biggest alliances are the 2M and Ocean Three.

The 2M consists of Maersk Line and MSC, the world's top two container lines by capacity. The 2M moves around 35% of all goods between Asia and Europe and controls a market share of 15% and 37% of goods moved on the trans-Pacific and trans-Atlantic routes, respectively.

Ocean Three, consisting France's CMA CGM, China Shipping Container Lines Co. and Middle East shipping major United Arab Shipping Co., controls a 20% slice of all cargo between Asia and Europe and 13% and 7% across the Pacific and Atlantic oceans, respectively.

"We have just only finalized the implementation of 2M and our expectations to the benefits remain the same. We are confident the 2M will deliver," said Maersk Line spokesman Michael Storgaard said. "The alliances have added much more capacity than demand warranted. That is the issue."

CMA CGM, MSC and UASC said they couldn't immediately respond on whether their investments in big ships is backfiring.

Basil Karatzas, a New York-based maritime consultant, who advises some of the world's biggest shipping players, says the drive by container-shipping operators to build ever-larger vessels is reminiscent of tanker owners whose ships grew from carrying around a million barrels of oil in the 1950s and 1960s to more than 4 million barrels in the 1980s.

"The supertankers offered the best economics on paper, but it proved a mistake. When demand for oil softened, they could not find charterers to fill them and at the end they became commercially nonviable," he said. "Tankers scaled back to the modern VLCC size of two million barrels and container ships may have to go through the same process before operators come up with the optimal size that meets demand."

The freight rates took their toll on the majority of carriers in the first quarter with only a handful staying in the black and that was mostly due to the lower fuel cost from the dramatic fall in oil prices last year.

"The lower fuel cost was a significant factor in our earnings," Maersk Group CEO Nils Andersen said in a recent interview.

Meanwhile, the shipping lines have tried to reverse the slide in container-shipping rates with general rate increases, or GRIs, that carriers have said would kick in on June 1. Analysts expect those increases to be short-lived.

"The bitter truth is that with so much extra tonnage in the water the GRIs are meaningless," said a senior executive of a major Asian carrier who asked not to be named. "A number of operators in Asia-Europe are already offering rates at around $300 per box and the price war will continue. The choice to invest so heavily in ULCSs is increasingly being questioned."

 
OECD, 'rich nations' club' turns into 'do-tank' 
Aurélia END 
2 June 2015
Agence France Presse
 
The Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, derided as a "rich nations' club" that vegetated in its Parisian chateau for decades, has redefined itself as the go-to resource for economic analysis.

"When I started my career (at the French finance ministry) in 1996, they sent me to visit the OECD. I said to myself, 'God, I hope I don't end up here!'" said Pascal Saint-Amans, recalling his impression of the institution as "second tier".

But Saint-Amans, a graduate of France's top administration school, did indeed wind up at the think-tank, joining in 2007 after the group had, in his words, "taken off".

Today he heads one of the body's biggest units, the crime-busting Centre for Tax Policy and Administration.

Many attribute the turnaround to Angel Gurria, who took over as OECD secretary general in 2005.

The worldly Mexican economist has just embarked on his third six-year mandate after the OECD's 34 member states unanimously re-elected him last week.

He plays host Tuesday and Wednesday to the OECD Forum, an annual get-together with an A-list of guests who will include French President Francois Hollande.

When Gurria took the helm, the OECD was a stodgy consultative body, an outgrowth of the Marshall Plan for the reconstruction of Europe after World War II and strongly associated with the Western side of the Iron Curtain.

Gurria, Mexico's finance minister from 1998 to 2000, had made a name for himself by ably renegotiating his country's debt with support from Washington, by far the biggest financial contributor to the OECD.

A decade later, he joined in with the ministers of the Group of 20 leading economies to tackle the 2008 financial crisis.

Jovial, multi-lingual and tenacious, Gurria has criss-crossed the world, toting all manner of reports -- evaluations of national school systems known as PISAs, studies on binge drinking among young people, black lists of tax havens, analyses of income inequality, economic growth forecasts...

"Today the OECD is more relevant and has a greater impact, perhaps because we have better identified the subjects that interest our members," Gurria told AFP.

"We are not a think-tank, we are a 'do-tank', which means that the research we do is aimed at public policy-makers, not seminars or political debates," he said.

Governments have become keen consumers of Gurria's recommendations, always delivered with a smile and no obligation.

When things got especially tense in Greece late last summer, its bailout creditors took refuge at the OECD's elegant headquarters in western Paris for their deliberations.

In February, when the radical left Syriza government came to power in Athens, it consulted with the OECD.

Greek Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras said he felt comfortable with the institution, even if it favours business-friendly policies such as a flexible job market, budgetary rigour and competition.

"The organisation has not become a Trotskyist lair," joked Saint-Amans. "The basics remain liberal, but there is an acknowledgement of issues such as tax fairness and inequalities."

The institution, which had a budget of 357 million euros ($389 million) in 2014, has become a virtual recruiting agency for consultants.

It offers lucrative short-term projects such as a stint for an energy policy analyst with three years' experience paid at up to 6,800 euros per month -- tax free.

The OECD, champion of tax fairness, itself enjoys tax-exempt status like other international organisations.

It is not secretive about its salary scale, revealing that it pays its boss a base salary of 200,000 euros.

It has also begun opening up to modest and emerging economies, welcoming the likes of Estonia, Chile, Israel and Slovenia into its membership.

Colombia will join soon, while Brazil, China and India enjoy "enhanced engagement".

But the "world according to the OECD" is not everyone's oyster.

Its Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) evaluations are controversial, for example. Last year, academics from around the world signed an open letter in the British daily The Guardian saying that the tests are too quantitative and utilitarian.

"We fail to understand how your organisation has become the global arbiter of the means and ends of education around the world," rather than the United Nations or its children's agency UNICEF, they wrote.

The OECD's spearheading of international negotiations against tax fraud and evasion has also been called into question.

"The process is biased" in favour of wealthy countries, said Manon Aubry of Oxfam France. "Developing countries are not involved in the negotiations, and when you are not seated at the table you wind up on the menu."
 
 
A reinvigorated trade agenda necessary for all the countries 
2 June 2015
Pretoria News
 
SOUTH Africa and the other Brics (Brazil, Russia, India, China) nations need jobs, growth and greater competitiveness. Europe needs jobs, growth and greater competitiveness. The USA needs much the same. Better trading terms are a key way to secure these goals for businesses and for consumers. They can act too through a multiplier effect in a complex set of value chains and SME (small and medium enterprises) supply systems.

The World Trade Organisation (WTO) plays a key role in the adjudication of multilateral trade agreements and their implementation and enforcement, but has been left playing a less dynamic role in recent years - with the failure so far of the Doha Round - in the negotiation of major multilateral deals. It secured the Bali trade facilitation deal recently with helpful customs progress but even that was a somewhat tortuous process.

Bilateral, plurilateral and issue-specific deals are therefore filling the negotiations void left by the WTO. These are aimed at driving progress and at helping prevent any nascent protectionism. The EU and US have both concluded deals with Korea. And the EU with Canada and with Singapore and, on goods for example, with the East Africa Community (EAC).

The EU has embarked on a major bilateral programme including with the US (TTIP - a potentially landmark agreement in going beyond tariffs into the depth of regulatory coherence and convergence), with Japan, with some Asean and Latin American nations, and potentially with India.

It has also started an investment agreement dialogue with China, and is now looking to overhaul its free-trade deal with Mexico. The USA has done likewise including its flagship Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) with 12 nations including Japan.

The Chinese are looking too at regional East Asian Partnerships, have signed a modest trade deal with Switzerland, and have a very active infrastructure investment approach in Africa. Other dialogues include the 50-plus nation Trade in Services Agreement (TiSA) dialogue, and those on information technology and on procurement.

Trade deals

This is a very complex web of very complex agreements. The WTO might usefully play a role as repository, and as interpreter and adviser of how all this fits together. The trading system needs too to get to grips with effectively enshrining the principle of free and open trans-border data flows, underpinned by balanced data protection regimes. This is vital for commerce and society generally and globally, not just for companies in the ICT (Information and Communication Technology), and cloud services sectors.

There are signs in some nations of nascent "data localisation" laws which run counter to the global trading system and which could slow trade expansion, and hence could impact jobs and growth detrimentally.

But where is South Africa in this torrent of trade dialogue? It seems to be taking something of a cautious approach, particularly to bilateral dialogue. It has not joined the TiSA dialogue in Geneva, and has seemed to put less emphasis on pursuing free trade agreements than some major emerging economy nations.

The current difficulty in achieving progress via the Doha Round may mean that South Africa needs to devote more resources to trade outreach, as do other Brics and MINT nations. Its economic growth at 4 percent in 2008 has slowed to about half that now. South Africa has intellectual capital and resources potential, some of which is being realised via innovative business models (including business process outsourcing) and some of which needs further support or market reform.

South Africa is a net importer of goods and services with, for example, a net trade deficit in 2014 of e5 billion (R67bn) with the EU. EU-South Africa trade growth has been good since the 1999 Trade Development & Co-operation Agreement at more than 120 percent growth in goods trade and with foreign direct investment increasing over fivefold.

Benefits shopping

But more could be done especially in services market access and reform and via a more ambitious trade agenda, beyond the good progress on a plurilateral Southern Africa Development Community (SADC).

There is good scope to grow. For instance, the UK is a large bilateral trading partner for South Africa at £10bn (R186bn) a year but there are dialogues to extend this further. The UK also accounts for a very significant proportion of all South African foreign direct investment.

Look at the EU. I think an ambitious TTIP - and other EU free trade deals such as with Japan and India and the US drive in TPP - have the potential to give jobs and growth a real boost, including helping the desperately worrying southern European youth unemployment situation with levels in some areas at 50 percent plus.

More mutually beneficial trade measures will help stop the rise of extremist parties in democracies playing on fears of immigration and so-called "benefits shopping". The headline numbers are compelling, whatever you think of the various studies of the percentage points on gross domestic product (GDP) or multi-billion dollar uplift on annual trade and investment flows deliverable for example via TTIP.

Another very optimistic report even sees gains as high as 13 percent of GDP for the US and 5 percent for the EU. It states: "With both economies facing a long-term need for fiscal consolidation alongside persistently high unemployment, these gains are considerable, all the more so because no additional spending or borrowing will be needed to achieve them.

"None of these estimates captures the potential dynamic effects of trade and investment liberalisation and resulting productivity growth. Many commentators believe that these are, in fact, the most important potential gains, but they have not been captured in any of the studies done so far."

In this broad context, there is an important summit on June 10, where representatives from 27 member countries of Africa's three regional trade blocs - the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa, the EAC and the SADC - will meet in Egypt, to sign the long-awaited tripartite free trade area agreement.

Once endorsed by members this free-trade agreement will stretch from Cairo to Cape Town, covering a combined population of over 600 million people with a GDP of $1.3 trillion (R16 trillion), almost 60 percent of the continent's total GDP.

It would be the largest economic bloc on the continent, and could be transformative in terms of ramping up intra-Africa trade, and thereby, the continent's share of global trade. This may also give Africa more clout during trade negotiations with the US, China and the EU.

Net benefits

The net benefits for South Africa, through trade outreach within Africa, within the Brics structure and through a stronger |reinvigoration of trade dialogues with the US and EU, would be potentially of immense value. They could offer a multiplier effect also given the nature of intra-firm trading flows and the chain of value-added services and SME support services, potentially extending the benefits more broadly into communities.

The US-South African agreement on April 21 to try to strengthen bilateral trade and investment ties, may be an additional step forward on the process to deeper and faster trade engagement. The EU and others might wish to follow suit quickly.

Sir Michael Rake is chairman of BT Group. He is also co-chair of the World Economic Forum on Africa in Cape Town June 3-5. Follow WEF Africa on Twitter: #AF15 and via Business Report's Twitter stream: @busrep. Independent Media, publisher of Business Report, is a media partner for WEF Africa 2015 (#IndyAF15).
END


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.