Headlines:
Canada warns US over voluntary meat labelling plan.
U.S. Trade Gap Expands 7%
UNITED WE STAND Edu parliament protests 'WTO offers'
Protest against commercialisation of education
Trans-Pacific divisions come to the fore
Trade treaty under time pressure: Clock ticks as TPP talks pushed to September.
Commerce extérieur : 20 ans de descente aux enfers
Algérie-OMC - l'évolution des négociations n'est pas "remarquable"
Reclaman decisión del Ejecutivo sobre la franja de precios
 
Details:
Canada warns US over voluntary meat labelling plan.
Dean Best 
5 August 2015
Just-Food
Canada's Agriculture Minister, Gerry Ritz, has warned the US an introduction of a voluntary scheme for country-of-origin labels on meat would be met with tariffs on imports.
After seeing plans for mandatory labels thrown out by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization for breaking trade rules, two US senators have tabled a bill for a voluntary programme. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" The US Senate is mulling the move, introduced last month by Democrat Senator for Michigan, Debbie Stabenow, and the Republican representative for North Dakota, John Hoeven.
However, the move was drawn criticism from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Canadian government, which, alongside Mexico, had turned to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO to block the US's original move. "Senators Hoeven and Stabenow's proposal in no way reflects Canada’s voluntary labelling regime – any suggestion of this is blatantly false. ‎A voluntary regime as they propose does not require legislation. Should the United States move forward with their short-sighted proposal, Canada will have no choice but to impose billions of dollars of retaliatory tariffs on United States exports," Ritz said.
Tabling the bill, Stabenow said the US would be able to satisfy its international trade arrangements and also "empower" consumers by providing them with access to meats labelled "product of the US". These labels would be applied to beef, pork, chicken and ground meat products that are from animals born, raised and harvested in the US.
Ritz said US consumers would feel the impact if the measure does become law. "By continuing the segregation of and discrimination against Canadian cattle and hogs, Senators Hoeven and Stabenow's proposed measure will continue to harm farmers, ranchers, packers, retailers and consumers. It will cost American families thousands of jobs, and guarantee Canadian retaliation," he said.
"The only way for the United States to avoid retaliation is for the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" United States Senate to follow the lead of the House of Representatives and Senator Roberts and put forward legislation that repeals COOL once and for all."
In June, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" US House of Representatives repealed the existing mandatory COOL regulations after Canada and Mexico threatened US$3bn in retaliatory sanctions.
The full repeal gained the support of US meat industry body the North American Meat Institute, which praised the "full and simple repeal". Speaking at the time, president and CEO HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Barry Carpenter insisted regulators could not "waste precious time debating proposals other than full and simple repeal" given the threat of trade sanctions. "Anything else jeopardises important segments of the US economy and ultimately our consumers," he insisted.
Aroq Limited
U.S. Trade Gap Expands 7%
By Josh Mitchell 
5 August 2015
Dow Jones Institutional News
WASHINGTON--The strong dollar is tamping down demand for American-made goods overseas while giving foreign manufacturers an edge in the U.S., creating another hurdle for the U.S. economy.
The U.S. trade gap with other countries grew 7% in June to $43.8 billion, as imports climbed steadily while exports continued to slip, the Commerce Department said Wednesday. Economists surveyed by The Wall Street Journal had predicted a $43.5 billion deficit.
Exports, which helped propel the economy coming out of the recession, are down nearly 3% this year compared with last, reflecting factors tied to the weak global economy. Demand has softened around the globe amid turbulence in Europe and moderating growth in China.
Meanwhile, central banks in Europe and Japan have been buying bonds and taking other steps to stimulate their economies, resulting in their currencies weakening against the U.S. dollar. The net effect has been to raise the cost of American goods in the global market while pushing down the price of foreign products that flow into the U.S.
U.S. economic growth could be restrained in coming months if the trend continues. It's one reason many economists don't expect growth in the summer and fall to pick up much from the 2.3% annualized expansion the economy registered in the second quarter.
"Trade will be a small drag on growth in the second half of the year, because of the strong dollar and slower growth overseas, particularly in China," PNC senior economist Gus Faucher said in a note to clients. "There is some upside potential from Europe, however, as that economy appears to be strengthening now that the turmoil in Greece is largely resolved."
Ready Seafood Co., a Maine-based exporter of live and processed lobster, has seen slightly slower growth in sales this year in Asia relative to last year, co-owner John Ready said. "You're having to work a little harder to get those sales than you would in a year before this," Mr. Ready said. "I wouldn't say it's drastic. I would say I notice."
He said that the sales hit hasn't been huge but that he is paying close attention.
Details in Wednesday's report showed the effects of a stronger dollar and weak global growth. The U.S. trade gap with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union reached an all-time high in June as imports from Europe rose. The trade gap with Mexico also set a record.
There was some cause for optimism. The rise in imports hinted at the relative health of American consumers, who stepped up purchases of foreign items like cars. "On net, this report provides some encouragement on the domestic demand side, reinforcing the current narrative of firming domestic economic activity," HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" TD Securities economist Millan Mulraine said in a note to clients.
The trade gap also carries political implications.
The deficit has fuelled opposition to a sweeping free-trade deal known as the Trans-Pacific Partnership, involving the U.S. and Asian nations. Representatives of the 12 TPP countries failed to reach a deal last week, though talks could continue in August or September.
Some U.S. industries and unions are concerned the agreement could open up the U.S. market to further competition from companies in other nations, such as Japan, and hurt exports. The Obama administration and its supporters contend the trade pact would expand the U.S.'s influence globally, counteracting China.
The U.S. trade deficit with China grew 9.8% in the first six months of 2015 compared with the same period last year, Wednesday's report showed. The deficit with Japan grew 4.1%.
Wednesday's report showed the rise in U.S. imports was due to higher demand for consumer goods, particularly pharmaceutical items, and industrial supplies, including crude oil. Auto imports were the highest on record.
The import figures may still be distorted by a labour strike that closed West Coast ports last winter. Resolution of the dispute led to a temporary surge in imports in the spring.
Exports slipped in June largely because of lower demand for capital goods, such as telecommunications equipment, and industrial supplies.
Dow Jones Newswires
UNITED WE STAND Edu parliament protests 'WTO offers'
6 August 2015
The Times of India - Delhi Edition
There are many universities faring much worse than HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Delhi University .
An Education Parliament, organized at Jantar Mantar by JNU students' union, has brought together hundreds of students and teachers from as far as Pune, Patna, Allahabad and Lucknow. It's much the same story everywhere --vacant teaching posts, insufficient infrastructure, dodgy appointments and a general curtailing of democratic spaces.
But the main bone of contention right now is the "offers in market access" to higher education that the government has made to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization. This coming-together, said Sucheta De of All India Students' Association, is the begin ning of a movement against the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO offers that will run right till the meeting in Nairobi, Kenya in December. The meeting had representation from Lalit Narayan Mithila, Tilka Manjhi Bhagalpur, Patna, Savitri Bai Phule Pune, Panjab, Haryana Central and Andhra universities. University reforms, argue students and teachers, are being pushed through after and along with a systematic dismantling of students' and teachers' movements on campuses. The Lyngdoh committee recommendations have filled students' unions with relatively inexperienced leaders; at many campuses, including Delhi's Jamia Millia Islamia Universi y and Varanasi's HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Banaras Hindu University , there's no union at all. The centralization of control--through a common syllabus--has raised fears of "saffronization". Historian Harbans Mukhiya said the government and its supporters were encouraging a return to a form of historiography that was abandoned years ago--the practice of regard ng history through the lens of religion. But the chief fight now is against the "offers" to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO. "It means to make any aw for the country , we'll need permission from them; it means there'll be an Independent Regulatory Authority--a single window clearance--for higher education hat'll be answerable only to the PM and finally, natural treatment," said education st Anil Sadgopal.
Bennett, Coleman & Co., Ltd. 
Protest against commercialisation of education
Hindustan Times 
6 August 2015
Hindustan Times
New Delhi, Aug. 6 -- Students, teachers and academicians cutting across universities on Wednesday took part in a student parliament at Jantar Mantar to protest against the government's decision to regulate higher education through HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation -General Agreement on Trade in Services (WTO-GATS).
The event was organised by Jawaharlal Nehru Students Union and saw well known academics participating in it, all of who said bringing in WTO-GATS would lead to commercialization of education.
"As per the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO, education and health are treated as services. As per the revised offer of August 2005, Indian government has shown that it is ready to allow education traders from the 160 member-nations of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO to establish colleges, universities, professional institutions as commercial ventures in India," said Anil Sadgopal, an eminent educationist. HTC
Published by HT Syndication with permission from Hindustan Times. 
Trans-Pacific divisions come to the fore
Dan Steinbock 
6 August 2015
China Daily-US Edition
Last week, trade ministers of 12 Pacific Rim countries, 650 officials, lobby groups and other stakeholders met in Hawaii to conclude the Trans-Pacific Partnership agreement. But the talks failed.
The disagreements in Hawaii do not suggest traditional horse-trading that's typical to all trade bargaining. Rather, the divisions reflect extensive disagreements not only between a dozen TPP countries, but within the US as well.
In the White House, the TPP agreement has been seen as a linchpin of the administration's pivot to Asia, which seeks to embed the US more deeply in the world's most dynamic region, while preventing a "regional vacuum" to be filled by emerging China. The problem is that the first objective is undermined by the second.
During Barack Obama's term in the White House, the US administration has strengthened political and security alliances with Japan, the Republic of Korea and the Philippines. Indirectly, these strategic moves have led to the relaxation of the arms embargo on Vietnam, greater attention to the South China Sea, expansion of counterterrorism cooperation with Indonesia and the upgrading of Malaysia's checks to stop human trafficking. The US has also normalized relations with Myanmar, a pivotal nation at the crossroads of South, East and Southeast Asia.
And yet the South China Sea has seen more friction, terrorist activities have increased, and human trafficking, and division and refugee flows in Myanmar have continued. Add to that the increasing assertiveness of countries, and you get a picture of overall destabilization in the region.
The US' objectives share a common denominator to extend current alliance arrangements in (non-China) East Asia to South and Southeast Asia. These efforts are not easily achievable because of regional and national policies.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Association of Southeast Asian Nations seeks to hedge between declining US influence and rising Chinese participation. It does not favour the exclusive primacy of one or another large economy. The same goes for India.
First, national policies work against containment policies. While the ROK supports the TPP, it has strong ties with China, an independent foreign policy and historical friction with Japan. In turn, Vietnam's regional stance relies on US clout but is counterbalanced by the desire to sustain expansive economic ties with China.
Second, the TPP bloc is not inclusive. It excludes the three largest emerging economies of the 21st century: China, India and Indonesia. That does not serve the future of the TPP, the region or the US.
Third, the TPP represents preferential rather than free trade and it is punitive to non-members. It may entrench protection in certain key areas, especially agriculture. And thanks to defensive geopolitical stances, current sheltered sectors - Japanese rice, US sugar - may prove even more resistant to change.
As the TPP imposes standards and rules that are inappropriate to the stage of development of emerging economies, it has potential to freeze rather than speed up their development.
So what are China's TPP options in the near future?
China is internationalizing via huge regional initiatives (for instance, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" BRICS New Development Bank and the "Belt and Road Initiative") and bilateral free trade agreements with TPP members Singapore, Chile, Peru, New Zealand and, most recently, Australia. There are also overlaps between TPP and the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership, which is led by China with half a dozen TPP members, including Japan.
China may join the TPP at a later point but only when it makes economic and strategic sense.
What about Washington's TPP options? Before the Hawaii meeting, the Obama administration touted it as a make-or-break moment. But that was not to be given the nature of the TPP.
The optimistic TPP scenario is now history. While the agreement could still materialize in some form, it is about to be trumped (all puns intended) by the US presidential politics; the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Federal Reserve's impending rate hike, which has potential to further divide US allies (especially emerging economies); and the expected rise of the Chinese yuan to a major reserve currency, heralding de-dollarization in the future.
When and if the TPP will be completed, economic gains will be moderate. But a TPP without China would have substantial geopolitical implications.
Truly inclusive, free trade is a different story. But that's not what the TPP is about.
The author is research director of International Business at India China and America Institute (US) and visiting fellow at Shanghai Institutes for International Studies (China) and the EU Center (Singapore). China Daily Information Company
Trade treaty under time pressure: Clock ticks as TPP talks pushed to September.
6 August 2015
Nikkei Report
TOKYO -- Trade ministers from 12 countries negotiating the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade pact are unlikely to hold talks this month, making the year-end target to strike a broad agreement harder to achieve.
After the last minister-level meeting concluded at the end of July in Hawaii, Akira Amari, Japan's minister for economic and fiscal policy, said the ministers had "a shared understanding that the next meeting will be held around the end of August," thereby suggesting that a basic agreement could be within reach.
But sources familiar with the Japan-U.S. talks have confirmed this scenario is increasingly unrealistic, given that issues like dairy market access and intellectual property protection remain sticking points.
In addition, some U.S. officials are taking summer vacations now, making it practically impossible for Japanese negotiators to work with them behind the scenes.
Time is running out if the countries seek to seal the pact within the year. The U.S. must notify Congress of the finalized trade deal 90 days before signing. With the presidential election coming up next year, the U.S. administration hopes to sign the agreement by the end of 2015. The Japanese government also seeks to obtain approval from the Diet during its autumn extraordinary session.
The meeting in Hawaii failed to come to an agreement as New Zealand pushed to increase its dairy exports, which the U.S., Canada, Japan and others were not ready to accept. Separately, the U.S. is demanding 12 years of protection for development data on new drugs while Australia and others see five years as the maximum.
The U.S. had maintained that a specific time frame should not be set for the next meeting when Japan sought to target August. The Japanese government now aims for the next meeting in September at the earliest.
Nikkei Digital Media Inc.
Commerce extérieur : 20 ans de descente aux enfers
Xerfi Canal 
6 August 2015
La Tribune
La Tribune publie chaque jour des extraits issus des analyses diffusées sur Xerfi Canal. Aujourd'hui, retour sur 20 ans de descente au enfers pour le commerce extérieur
On l'a oublié, mais le commerce extérieur français n'a pas toujours été déficitaire. La preuve. Si le début des années 90 commence mal, le solde se redresse rapidement, atteint l'équilibre en 1992, et redevient positif en 1993. Il faut remonter avant le premier choc pétrolier de 1973 pour trouver un tel niveau ! Ce rétablissement spectaculaire de 1993 est justement lié au contrechoc pétrolier qui contracte le déficit énergétique de 20% en deux ans. La panne de la demande intérieure entraine aussi celle des importations, qui reculent de 12% : cela contribue au redressement du solde extérieur. Il faut ajouter à ce tableau la reconquête des marchés extérieurs : encore déficitaire de 5 milliards d'euros en 1991, le solde des produits manufacturés passe au vert en 1993 (+2 milliards).
Des premières digues se fissurent déjà
L'habillement en équilibre précaire depuis le milieu des années 80 chute et devient déficitaire. Après la crise, la courbe poursuit son ascension, les excédents s'accumulent pour atteindre le record absolu de 24 milliards d'euros en 1997. C'est un record, qui passe inaperçu à l'époque, mais c'est un record qui tient toujours aujourd'hui. Et ce sont les excédents industriels qui explosent tous les compteurs : 25,2 milliards d'euros.
La France est alors triomphante dans l'automobile tandis que l'excédent de la branche « matériel de transport terrestre » est multiplié par deux en un an pour se propulser à plus de 10 milliards d'euros. Succès d'Airbus aidant, les résultats du secteur des « biens d'équipements professionnels » s'envolent eux aussi et atteignent quasiment 15 milliards d'euros.
Même le déficit de l'électronique grand public se réduit et repasse sous la barre du milliard d'euros. Le couple agriculture-agroalimentaire parachève ce succès général du « made in France ». Une ombre à ce tableau, la déconfiture de la filière textile qui plonge à plus de 8 milliards de déficit.
Dès 1998, c'est le recul
Le millésime 98 ne sera pas un aussi bon cru. A l'époque, les économistes accusent la crise asiatique. Le hic c'est que ce décrochage va se poursuivre jusqu'à l'an 2000. Le solde commercial redevient déficitaire pour la 1ère fois depuis 8 ans. Le bref sursaut des 2001-2002 ne sera rémission. Ensuite, c'est la dégringolade sans fin du solde du commerce extérieur jusqu'à 2011. C'est un véritable précipice, avec un déficit record de 75 milliards d'euros. Alors quelle explication ? Il y a d'abord un choc exogène. Le déficit pétrolier est multiplié par 2,5 avec la flambée du cours du brut qui passe de 25 à 111$ le baril. La facture est lourde : 50 milliards d'euros Il y a ensuite un choix politique constant de tous les gouvernements, qu'ils soient de gauche ou de droite : cajoler à tout prix le consommateur, mais aussi les distributeurs. Le revers de la médaille, c'est que l'on sacrifie les industriels.
La folie du low-cost
Bienvenue donc aux produits à bas prix, et vive les prix écrasés ! Le textile, l'habillement, le cuir et la chaussure deviennent un champ de ruine avec un trou de 18 milliards. Déjà déstabilisée dans les années 90, le secteur subit l'assaut décisif de la Chine après son entrée dans l'OMC en décembre 2001.
L'électronique grand public est elle aussi emportée et perd 3 milliards d'euros à l'extérieur en 2011. Notre champion Thomson va ainsi être balayé. Mais ce sont aussi les choix stratégiques de plusieurs grands groupes qui sont en cause.
Dans l'automobile, Renault rate le haut de gamme et s'oriente vers le low-cost : pas seulement pour les émergents, mais aussi pour réimporter vers la France et l'Europe occidentale. En 2007, la production auto française bascule, et devient déficitaire. En 2011 le trou s'est creusé à 6 milliards.
D'autres bastions tombent
C'est le cas de l'industrie alimentaire qui subit les coups de boutoir des industriels allemands. L'alimentaire, le fameux pétrole vert de la France passe dans le rouge. Mais la descente aux enfers a heureusement une fin. Le déficit s'allège peu à peu à partir de 2012. Des mécanismes plus favorables se mettent peu à peu en place. D'abord le ralentissement de la demande intérieure qui limite les importations. Et puis en 2014, la divine surprise du contre-choc pétrolier et de la baisse de l'euro. Quant aux effets réels du CICE, les experts de savent pas trop. Mais la compétitive générale se redresse lentement, on devrait dire poussivement. Alors que reste-t-il de nos métiers d'excellence à l'export en 2015 : l'aéronautique bien sûr, les vins et spiritueux, la pharmacie, la chimie fine, parfums et cosmétique, la navigation de plaisance, et bien sûr les industries du luxe et de l'armement.
La Tribune Nouvelle SAS
Algérie-OMC - l'évolution des négociations n'est pas "remarquable"
5 August 2015
All Africa
Alger, Aug 05, 2015 (Algerie Presse Service/AllAfrica Global Media via COMTEX) -- Le processus de négociations entre l'Algérie et l'Organisation mondiale du Commerce (OMC) n'a pas évolué de manière remarquable, a estimé, mercredi à Alger, le ministre du Commerce, Bakhti Belaïb, en prônant une "vision claire" sur les droits que le pays doit revendiquer.
"J'ai tenté, depuis quelques semaines, de faire le point sur ce dossier (adhésion de l'Algérie à l'OMC) et de faire un comparatif entre l'état où je l'ai laissé il y a plus 16 ans et celui d'aujourd'hui: les évolutions ne sont pas remarquables", a-t-il souligné lors d'un atelier sur les Accords de l'OMC relatifs aux mesures sanitaires et phytosanitaires et aux obstacles techniques au commerce .
M. Belaïb, qui a été installé à la tête du département du Commerce en juillet dernier, avait déjà occupé ce poste ministériel entre 1996 et 1999, lui ayant permis de conduire, en 1998, la délégation algérienne pour la première réunion du groupe du travail de l'accession de l'Algérie à l'OMC, rappelle-t-on.
"A l'époque, quand j'avais la mission d'expliquer les accords de l'OMC et l'enjeu pour l'Algérie d'y adhérer, mon langage était incompréhensible car nous ne maîtrisions pas ce dossier", a-t-il ajouté, soulignant la nécessité d'intensifier les actions d'informations et de vulgarisation dans ce sens.
Par ailleurs, dans sa déclaration à la presse en marge de cet atelier, le ministre s'est dit "satisfait" de voir l'Algérie ne pas vouloir adhérer "n'importe comment" à cette organisation mondiale, en considérant que le dossier de négociations doit encore être consolidé.
Questionné sur la lenteur de ces négociations et leur non aboutissement, le ministre a indiqué que ce dossier ne concerne pas le gouvernement seul mais aussi le peuple algérien.
"Il faudrait qu'à un moment, nous, entre Algériens, fassions un comparatif entre le coût de la non-adhésion et celui de l'adhésion. Je pense que c'est un travail que nous n'avons pas encore fait", selon lui.
Interrogé sur la date du prochain round de négociations avec l'OMC, M. Belaïb, ne voulant pas donner de précisions, s'est contenté de dire: "Avant la prochaine réunion du travail, nous devrions d'abord avoir une vision claire sur notre façon de négocier et les droits que nous devrions revendiquer".
Il a indiqué, dans ce sens, que son département ministériel avait prévu l'organisation d'ateliers et de séminaires pour former les cadres algériens à mieux cerner les Accords de l'OMC et à mieux négocier.
A ce propos, il a fait savoir que le groupe de travail algérien chargé des négociations pour l'accession à l'OMC allait être renforcé pour mieux mener ce processus et mieux défendre les droits de l'Algérie même après son accession à cette organisation mondiale.
Présente à cet atelier, qui se tient mercredi et jeudi, Mme Gretchen Stanton, conseillère principale à la Division de l'agriculture du secrétariat de l'OMC, a relevé la longueur des négociations entre l'Algérie et cette organisation tout en saluant les efforts consentis jusque-là.
"Je vois que le processus de négociations a fait de grands pas mais à chaque fois il s'arrête. Il y a des périodes de silence", a-t-elle déclaré, en précisant que deux volets restaient encore à finaliser.
Il s'agit, selon elle, de la révision de la réglementation nationale du commerce et des questions bilatérales avec les pays membre de l'OMC auxquelles l'Algérie continue à apporter ses réponses.
Pour sa part, le directeur général des relations économiques et de la coopération internationale au ministère des Affaires étrangères, Merzak Belhimeur, a estimé qu'il n'était pas compréhensible que l'Algérie n'ait toujours pas accédé à l'OMC depuis toutes ces années de négociations. "Je ne vois pas pourquoi nous voyons cette organisation avec frilosité.
Il faut y aller de manière dynamique et défensive. Nous avons l'encadrement et les capacités de défendre nos intérêts", a-t-il soutenu.
Selon lui, ce retard dans les négociations est dû à la méconnaissance de l'OMC et des enjeux de son adhésion ainsi qu'à la "culture de fermeture".
"Mais ne pouvons plus nous enfermer sur nous-même. C'est l'ère de la mondialisation et de l'ouverture, et l'Algérie ne peut pas faire exception", a-t-il insisté, estimant que l'Algérie doit s'adapter aux règles mondiales.
A souligner que cet atelier sur l'OMC est destiné aux cadres des différents ministères concernés par l'application des Accords de cette organisation, tels ceux des affaires étrangères, de la santé, du commerce et de l'Autorité de régulation des postes et télécommunications (ARPT). 
All Africa Global Media
Reclaman decisión del Ejecutivo sobre la franja de precios
El Comercio 
4 August 2015
Lima.-- Los principales productores de azúcar y el gremio que agrupa a los de granos y cereales han solicitado información al Poder Ejecutivo sobre el destino final que tendrá la franja de precios, luego de la resolución de la Organización Mundial de Comercio contra este mecanismo que fija una sobretasa arancelaria a un grupo de productos agrícolas.
Las empresas azucareras Paramonga (familia Wong), Chucarapi, Laredo (Manuelita) y Coazucar (Grupo Gloria) solicitaron una cita a los ministerios de Agricultura y de Comercio Exterior para discutir el tema. La posición de este grupo empresarial va en la línea de buscar una adaptación de la franja más que una eliminación definitiva.
Rebajas
Igualmente, la Asociación Peruana de Granos y Cereales (Apegrace) resaltó que el fallo de Guatemala no pide una eliminación de la franja.
El fallo del órgano de apelación de la OMC al que hacen referencia en efecto no ha pedido la eliminación de la franja. Sin embargo, está pendiente la decisión final antes de fin de agosto del órgano de solución de controversia que podría plantear la alternativa de la eliminación.
En todo caso, el Ministerio de Economía y Finanzas junto al Minagri y Mincetur vendrían estudiando una salida al tema. © NoticiasFinancieras - © GDA - El Comercio – 
END
 
Josep Bosch, Information Officer
Information and External Relations Division
+41227395681
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.