EU risks China solar power row flare-up
U.S. cane refiners challenge U.S.-Mexico sugar pact
India considering higher subsidies for raw sugar exports
Pékin remplace ses quotas d’exportation de terres rares par des licences
Few casualties after rare earths trade war peters out
U.S. decides to levy punitive duties on China's calcium hypochlorite
Vietnam Appeals Ruling in U.S. Shrimp Duties Case to World Trade Organization
Vietnam to import 81,000 tons of sugar this year
Merkel sets high bar for lifting of Russia sanctions
Return of Buddha to help seal India-Australia free-trade agreement
Secretary-General Appoints Reiter Of Sweden As Deputy Secretary-General Of UNCTAD
IT sector to defy China slowdown with 8pc growth
US export economy fails to import jobs
Obama must grasp the chance for deals on trade; New Congress offers narrow window to push Pacific and Europe pacts
Why is China acting like a responsible stakeholder?
 
EU risks China solar power row flare-up 
8 January 2015
Agence France Presse
 
The EU risked reopening a bitter feud with China over solar panel manufacturing after confirming Thursday it had launched a fresh trade probe into a key part of the sector.

Confirming media reports, European Commission spokesman Daniel Rosario said EU trade authorities opened an investigation last month into alleged price dumping by China on solar glass, a key component of solar panels.

A 2013 trade row over solar panels sparked the EU's biggest-ever trade probe covering a market worth some 21 billion euros ($25 billion) at its zenith.

But last July, Brussels and China came to a hard-won agreement, ending heated rounds of tit-for-tat measures that included a Chinese probe into European wine imports.

Estimated at about 210 million euros, solar glass manufacturing is just a small component of the panel market in Europe.

Launched on December 19, the EU has nine months to gather information on the solar glass case and decide whether to move forward with an official complaint.

Rosario insisted the probe was unrelated and much narrower than the now resolved feud over solar panels.

"This is a stand-alone investigation concerning a clearly distinct product and analysing imports during a different period," Rosario told AFP.

But EU manufacturers argue illegally low pricing by China of solar glass is killing European jobs.

"The prices are absurdly low," said Ulrich Frei, president of the EU ProSun lobby group that spearheaded the original campaign against the Chinese solar panel industry.

"The prices are under the manufacturing costs, even when (import) duties are included," he added.

EU ProSun has been a fierce critic of Chinese manufacturers which it says have put Europe's solar panel industry in the shade by dumping their products below cost on the European market.

 
U.S. cane refiners challenge U.S.-Mexico sugar pact 
By Chris Prentice

NEW YORK, Jan 8 (Reuters) - Louis Dreyfus Commodities' Imperial Sugar Co and AmCane Sugar LLC have challenged the U.S.-Mexico trade deal, warning that the pact potentially harms domestic sugar refiners and prolonging a long-running dispute between the two countries.

In a filing on Thursday, Imperial asked the U.S. International Trade Commission (ITC) to review suspension agreements hammered out last month aimed at ending a spat that has roiled trade between the two countries, cut off crucial raw sugar supplies from Mexico, and elevated tensions between those countries for almost a year.

Fellow refiner AmCane Sugar LLC has joined the review, according to the company's lawyer, who confirmed that the group filed its own "official challenge."

In March, the U.S. sugar industry accused Mexico of dumping cheap subsidized sugar in the heavily protected U.S. market.

The recent deal that set quotas and minimum sales prices rather than impose heavy antidumping and other penalties for Mexican imports into the United States, does not go far enough to prevent injury to the U.S. refiners, Imperial's counsel said in the Jan. 8 document filed to the U.S. Department of Commerce.

"The stakes are high" for Imperial Sugar, other cane refiners, and their customers, the company letter said.

"If these agreements enter into force, domestic production of cane sugar and related jobs would be at risk."

A spokeswoman for Louis Dreyfus could not immediately be reached for comment because of the late hour in Geneva.

The requests for review could prolong the sugar dispute that has roiled prices and trade flows between the two countries for nearly a year.

Imperial Sugar and other cane refiners worry that the so-called suspension agreements would curb imports of raw sugar to feed their plants.

At the same time, they face greater competition from bumper refined sugar output, which Mexican mills sell direct to food manufacturers and other sugar processors. Under NAFTA, Mexico has had unfettered access to the coveted U.S. sugar market in 2008.

"Not only do the suspension agreements not eliminate the injury, they actually augment that injury to cane refiners," John Magnus, AmCane's counsel, told Reuters in a phone interview.

ITC is reviewing the requests and determining next steps, as this is the first time the review statute has been invoked since being written into law in 1979, said an agency spokeswoman. (Reporting by Chris Prentice; Editing by Chris Reese, Diane Craft and Gunna Dickson) 
 
 
India considering higher subsidies for raw sugar exports 
By Mayank Bhardwaj 
 
NEW DELHI, Jan 8 (Reuters) - India's cabinet could soon approve an increase in the raw sugar subsidy paid to mills to about 4,000 rupees ($64) per tonne as it looks to cut large stockpiles, two government sources with direct knowledge of the matter told Reuters.

India, the world's biggest producer behind Brazil, paid a subsidy of 3,300 rupees to produce and export raw sugar in the season that ended in September.

The subsidy proposal will soon go for approval to Prime Minister Narendra Modi's cabinet, the sources said.

The country is sitting on massive mounds of the sweetener due to the fifth straight year of surplus output, which has depressed local prices and strained mills' finances.

Additionally India, which is also the world's biggest sugar consumer, has failed to export because of weak global prices. New York raw sugar futures, the global benchmark, are trading near a more than four year low hit in the third quarter of 2014.

With the help of the incentives, mills say they will be able to sell raw sugar to standalone refineries in Asia and Africa.

"Looking at the current global trade dynamics, merely extending last year's export subsidy will not be of any help," said one of the sources.

Export incentives and rising global prices may finally help Indian sugar mills clinch export deals in the 2014/15 season.

New York sugar futures are up slightly so far this year, after four consecutive years of falls. Reversing weeks of losses, Indian sugar prices gained 2.5 percent to $461 a tonne in the week to Thursday.

Indian sugar mills produced 7.5 million tonnes of the sweetener between Oct. 1 and Dec. 31, more than a quarter higher than a year earlier, as crushing in the biggest cane producing state of Uttar Pradesh started a week in advance, a producers' body said on Monday. (Editing by Michael Urquhart) 
 
 
Pékin remplace ses quotas d’exportation de terres rares par des licences
Mise sous pression depuis Genève, la Chine se refuse à abandonner le contrôle de ses métaux stratégiques
D. N. 
9 January 2015
Le Temps
 
Sous la contrainte, Pékin a mis fin ces derniers jours à ses quotas à l’exportation sur les terres rares. En vigueur depuis dix ans, ce système avait fait l’objet d’une plainte en 2012 des Etats-Unis, de l’Union européenne et du Japon devant l’Organisation mondiale du commerce (OMC).

L’entité basée à Genève a condamné la Chine – qui concentre plus de 90% de la production mondiale de cette famille de ­métaux stratégiques – en août dernier. Pékin avait commencé à semer la panique il y a dix ans en réduisant entre 40 et 70% ses ­quotas d’exportation, alors que ses ventes à l’étranger de terres rares n’avaient jamais atteint les niveaux d’engagements qu’il s’était lui-même fixés à l’OMC. Ces mesures protectionnistes avaient fait grimper en flèche – jusqu’à 2000% – les prix de certaines terres rares, indispensables à de nombreuses industries (high-tech, automobile, nucléaire, etc.).

La décision des autorités chinoises d’abolir ces quotas était prévisible. D’autant plus que, selon les experts, ils n’étaient plus efficaces, la moitié des terres rares chinoises partant en contrebande. En revanche, le fait que Pékin remplace ce dispositif par un régime de licence à l’exportation était moins attendu.

Pékin n’abandonne donc pas le contrôle de métaux aussi indispensables pour ses propres industries vertes. Il n’accordera des licences d’exportation qu’aux opérateurs agréés. De quoi faciliter la constitution de stocks, et donc d’orienter les prix sans subir les foudres de l’OMC, dénoncent certains observateurs.

Face à ces restrictions, plusieurs pays ont réinvesti dans le secteur abandonné des terres rares. Des mines ont rouvert par exemple aux Etats-Unis. Et l’exploration relancée. Ailleurs, on cherche des alternatives à ces métaux ou l’on tente d’améliorer leur recyclage.
 
 
Few casualties after rare earths trade war peters out
By Alan BeattIe in London 
9 January 2015
Financial Times
 
This week, a trade war that was supposed to tear the world of high-tech manufacturing apart ended peacefully, quietly and with few casualties.

China announced plans that would comply with a World Trade Organisation decision from last year by removing export quotas and other restrictions on rare earth elements, the minerals used widely in the manufacture of electronics, computers and cars. It was another success for the US, which has not only chalked up impressive wins against China in the WTO's dispute settlement process but also (by no means a given) often succeeded in getting Beijing to implement the decisions.

So, a big victory for global governance? Sort of. In reality, it was the free market as much as trade rules that did for China's attempt to corner global commerce in rare earths. Moreover, in a rather choice irony, Chinese companies employed the very tricks that they use to sidestep trade restrictions by other governments to sabotage the export quotas set by their own.

By 2010, China produced 97 per cent of the world's basic rare earth oxide production and much of the processing business. In its submission to the WTO, Beijing laughably argued that a complex system of export restrictions it had placed on its rare earth companies since the mid-2000s was aimed at protecting the environment by controlling mining. In reality, as the WTO dispute panel swiftly twigged, it was an attempt to give its domestic electronics and other manufacturing industries a competitive advantage by ensuring a cheap captive supply of raw materials.

This is a familiar pattern among commodity-producing emerging markets trying to develop their own manufacturing industry. When first Ukraine and then Russia joined the WTO in 2008 and 2012 respectively, for example, the EU insisted they make binding pledges not to restrict raw material exports, particularly metals.

China's policy seemed to have some success. The rocketing price of the minerals in the late 2000s disadvantaged users across the world. As Eugene Gholz at the University of Texas says, some Japanese manufacturers that use rare earths as an input did relocate to China to take advantage of cheap and reliable supply. And just to provide the nonspecialist media with a nice story, in 2010 China reportedly used the threat of more export restrictions to force Japan into returning a Chinese fishing-boat captain it had arrested sailing worryingly close to disputed islands in the South China Sea.

Accordingly, the state-capitalism-here-we-come crowd concluded that the Chinese were, once again, proving themselves strategic geniuses.

But, to adapt a saying in the oil markets, the best cure for high rare earth prices is high rare earth prices. Production in Australia, Japan and Malaysia was expanded; other sources of rare earths were exploited; manufacturers rapidly found ways to economise or substitute, as it were, a less rare rare earth for a rarer one. Happily, the US government, rather than resort to retaliatory trade restrictions of its own, found a way to help this process along by funding research into diversification. The global price of the minerals fell and economic Armageddon was avoided.

 
U.S. decides to levy punitive duties on China's calcium hypochlorite 
 
WASHINGTON, Jan. 8 (Xinhua) -- The U.S. trade authority ruled Thursday that a U.S. industry is "injured" by imports of Chinese calcium hypochlorite, which means the U.S. government will impose punitive duties on the products.

The United States International Trade Commission (USITC) complained that imports of calcium hypochlorite from China are subsidized and sold in the United States at less than fair value.

As a result of the commission's affirmative determinations, the U.S. Commerce Department will issue anti-dumping and countervailing duty orders on imports of this product from China.

The anti-dumping duty rate is 210.52 percent and the countervailing duty rate is 65.85 percent, according to the department's final determination in December 2014.

The Commerce Department launched the anti-dumping and countervailing duties probes over Chinese calcium hypochlorite products in January 2014 at the request of Arch Chemicals based in the U.S. state of Georgia.

Calcium hypochlorite is often used in the chlorination of water in residential and commercial swimming pools. Imports of these products from China were estimated at 8.1 million U.S. dollars in 2013, according to U.S. official data.

Beijing has repeatedly urged Washington to abide by its commitment against protectionism and work with China to maintain a free, open and just trade environment.

 
Vietnam Appeals Ruling in U.S. Shrimp Duties Case to World Trade Organization
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, January 8, 2015
 
Jan. 7 — Vietnam appealed a November 2014 World Trade Organization decision that declared U.S. antidumping duty measures on imports of Vietnamese frozen warmwater shrimp to be in violation of international obligations.
Vietnam's Jan. 7 appeal said the WTO's Dispute Settlement Body (DSB) failed to make an objective assessment in its analysis of U.S.
law regarding the Department of Commerce's implementation of adverse WTO rulings.
Specifically, Vietnam contested the panel's conclusion that it had failed to argue that Section 129 of the Uruguay Round Agreements Act precludes implementation of DSB recommendations by the U.S. with respect to prior unliquidated entries.
Typically, the WTO Appellate Body has 90 days to issue a subsequent report following an appeal from the DSB.
 
U.S. ‘Zeroing’ Methodology
 
Vietnam had previously challenged Commerce's application of “zeroing” methodologies in its administrative reviews of the antidumping duty order regarding Vietnamese shrimp.
On Nov. 17, 2014, the DSB said such methods violated U.S. obligations under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and the Anti-Dumping Agreement.
The WTO panel found that Commerce had used “zeroing” methods to calculate the dumping margins of individually examined Vietnamese producers and exporters in three antidumping administrative reviews.
The case echoes a 2011 WTO decision that ruled against Commerce's use of zeroing in earlier administrative reviews. U.S. trade officials did not immediately comment.
 
 
Vietnam to import 81,000 tons of sugar this year 
By Thuy Dung The Saigon Times Daily 
9 January 2015
The Saigon Times Daily
 
HANOI – The ministries of industry-trade and agriculture-rural development have agreed on a sugar import quota of 81,000 tons this year and will select competent enterprises to implement this quota.

In his a recent document sent to the trade ministry, the agriculture ministry insists a transparent mechanism for importing the allowable volume of sugar to ensure fair competition among local enterprises.

Previously, the Vietnam Sugar and Sugarcane Association (VSSA) proposed the ministries select importers via public and transparent auctions when the country imports at least 70,000 tons of sugar a year as committed to the global trade club WTO.

Nguyen Thanh Long, chairman of VSSA, said around 77,200 tons of sugar was shipped to the country last year, and 40,000 tons of which was assigned by the trade ministry to local sugar processing firms, such as Bien Hoa Sugar JSC with 15,000 tons, Thanh Thanh Cong Tay Ninh Co. with 10,000 tons and Lam Son Sugar JSC with 5,000 tons.

Long said the ‘ask-give’ mechanism caused unfair competition among local sugar enterprises as the firms with large quotas would earn much profit thanks to the big gap between domestic and global prices.

However, the association has yet to receive an official announcement of the ministries on a new sugar import mechanism as requested by Deputy Prime Minister Hoang Trung Hai, said Ha Huu Phai, chief representative of VSSA in Hanoi.

Data of VSSA showed sugar inventories at factories nationwide had surged to 250,000 tons as of mid-December while local purchasing power still remained low.

In addition to sugar, the ministries have approved imports of around 102,000 tons of salt, 46,300 dozens of poultry eggs this year.

 
Merkel sets high bar for lifting of Russia sanctions 
 
* German leader says progress on Minsk not enough
* Merkel praises Kiev for "ambitious" reform plans 
 
By Andreas Rinke

BERLIN, Jan 8 (Reuters) - German Chancellor Angela Merkel said on Thursday that Europe could not consider lifting sanctions against Russia until all elements of a 12-point peace agreement signed in September between Ukraine and pro-Russian rebels were fully implemented.

In her clearest comments yet on the sanctions issue, the German leader adopted a more hawkish stance than that set out by senior politicians from her coalition partner, the Social Democrats (SPD), and European leaders like French President Francois Hollande in recent days.

Worried about a deterioration of the Russian economy, they have suggested that progress on the so-called Minsk protocol agreed in September, rather than full implementation, would be sufficient to consider easing the sanctions.

Speaking at a news conference in Berlin with visiting Ukrainian Prime Minister Arseny Yatseniuk, Merkel said she had "little hope" that a first round of sanctions introduced in response to Russia's annexation of Crimea could be lifted.

And she placed a high bar for easing a second round of punitive EU measures tied to Russia's intervention in eastern Ukraine. Moscow denies backing the separatist rebels in the conflict, which has killed more than 4,700 people, despite what Ukraine and Western governments say is overwhelming evidence to the contrary.

"The entire Minsk agreement must be implemented before we can say these sanctions can be lifted," she said, specifically ruling out a step-by-step easing based on progress on the 12 points, which include a ceasefire, monitoring of the Ukraine-Russia border, security zones and the release of hostages.

Top SPD politicians have sounded a more dovish note in recent weeks, with Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier expressing concern that Russia could be destabilised if EU sanctions were not eased.

In an interview with Reuters on Wednesday, senior SPD lawmaker Gernot Erler, the government's coordinator for relations with Russia, said Berlin should think about easing sanctions "if we see progress on the 12 points of the Minsk accord".

France's Hollande told French radio on Monday: "I think the sanctions must stop now. They must be lifted if there is progress." EU foreign policy chief Federica Mogherini said on Wednesday there were "some limited" signs that Russia may be changing its approach.

But Merkel made clear that a meeting of leaders from Ukraine, Russia, France and Germany, which had been planned for mid-January in the Kazakh capital of Astana, would only take place if there was progress on the peace front in the coming days.

She also praised Yatseniuk for his government's reform programme, including the austerity budget pushed through in late December. The budget was a condition for the disbursement of cash under an International Monetary Fund (IMF) aid package that totals $17 billion.

"The prime minister gave a very impressive report on the reforms planned in Ukraine," Merkel said. "It is ambitious, it is determined. And I believe it was a huge success to finalise a budget before Christmas that was anything but easy and that includes a number of new measures." (Additional reporting by Alexandra Hudson and Erik Kirschbaum; Writing by Noah Barkin; Editing by Mark Trevelyan) 
 
 
Return of Buddha to help seal India-Australia free-trade agreement
eter Martin 
The Age
Published: January 9, 2015 - 3:44PM 
 
The return of 2000-year-old stone statue of Buddha is expected to help smooth the way for a free trade agreement with India by the end of the year.
 
The Australian National Gallery said this week it would return the stolen statue to India, where it will join two other statues, including the Dancing Shiva, a 900-year old bronze deity that had been stolen from an Indian temple.
 
The seated stone Buddha was given to the National Gallery in 2007 by Roslyn Packer, the widow of the late Kerry Packer.
 
It was bought from a New York antiquities dealer for more than $1 million, and was found later to have been looted from an Indian archaeological site.
 
Before leaving for Australia's biggest trade mission to India on Friday, Trade Minister Andrew Robb said India could be "China all over again".
 
Over the past 12 months he has sealed free-trade agreements with China, Japan and South Korea. The Korea agreement is already in place and the Japan agreement comes into force next week. 
 
"Our assessment is that India is on the cusp, especially under the leadership of Prime Minister Modi, of realising so much of their potential," Mr Robb said said.
 
An obstacle to progress until now has been Australia's refusal to sell uranium to India while it refused to sign the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
 
Prime Minister Tony Abbott removed the ban during a visit to India in September, saying he trusted India "to do the right thing".
 
Uranium shipments are likely within five years.
 
Mr Robb said with a population of 1.2 billion people and an emerging middle class, India was a country of enormous opportunity.
 
"India sees Australia as a major partner in every area of its national priorities," he said. "The Australian government and Australian businesses and institutions are ready and willing to work with India to help its transformation into one of the world's great economic powers."
 
Attending Australian Business Week in India will be a record delegation of 450 Australian business figures and politicians, including NSW premier Mike Baird, South Australian minister Martin Hamilton-Smith, and Assistant Infrastructure Minister Jamie Briggs.
 
India is Australia's seventh-biggest customer, predominantly buying coal, gold, copper and education services. As China's demand for Australian coal slips, India will become an increasingly important customer. With a much younger population than China's it is also well placed to become a source of offshore and temporary workers. China's working-age population has been falling since 2012.
 
 
Secretary-General Appoints Reiter Of Sweden As Deputy Secretary-General Of UNCTAD
8 January 2015
US Fed News
 
UNITED NATIONS, Jan. 8 -- The United Nations issued the following press release:

United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, in consultation with the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), has decided to appoint Joakim Reiter of Sweden as Deputy Secretary-General of UNCTAD at the Assistant Secretary-General level. Mr. Reiter will succeed Petko Draganov to whom the Secretary-General is grateful for his dedicated service and commitment to UNCTAD.

Mr. Reiter brings to the position a wealth of international experience at the senior level, including in the trade and development field dealing with multilateral organizations, senior political experience as a representative of his country, hands-on expertise on technical cooperation and donor relations, and highly relevant negotiations skills within the intergovernmental machinery.

He is currently Deputy Director-General, heading the Department for International Trade Policy within the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Sweden, which is responsible for the interaction with UNCTAD, World Trade Organization (WTO) and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). From 2011 to 2014, he was Ambassador and Permanent Representative of Sweden to the WTO, Switzerland, where he also served as chair for the WTO bodies on services, goods and trade policy reviews.

From 2008 to 2011, Mr. Reiter was Minister Counsellor and Head of Trade Section at the Representation of Sweden to the European Union, Belgium. He served at the European Union Directorate General for Trade in European Commission from 2004 to 2008. Prior to that, he held various positions within the Swedish National Board of Trade, Ministry for Foreign Affairs and the Ministry for Industry, including as Special Advisor to the Minister for Industry and Trade.

Born in Sweden in 1974, Mr. Reiter holds a Master of Science from the London School of Economics and a Master of Arts from University of Lund, Sweden. He is married and has two children.
 
 
IT sector to defy China slowdown with 8pc growth 
Bien Perez
 
 bien.perez@scmp.com 
 
 
 
9 January 2015
South China Morning Post
 
Government and SOE spending this year will see mainland growth No 2 behind India, says report

China is poised to record the second-fastest growth, behind India, in the US$2.3 trillion global information technology market this year, despite concerns about the mainland’s economy and speculation that the central government wants less foreign technology.

Total government and enterprise spending in information technology goods and services on the mainland is estimated to reach 807 billion yuan (HK$1.02 trillion), up 8 per cent from last year, according to the latest industry forecast published yesterday by Forrester Research.

That prediction puts the mainland strongly entrenched as the world’s third-largest information technology market, behind the United States and Japan.

The report, which excluded consumer and corporate telecommunications services spending, projected the US market to reach US$862.8 billion this year, followed by Japan at 19.9 trillion yen (HK$1.3 trillion).

India’s enterprise technology market is expected be worth 1.97 billion rupees (HK$240.3 million) this year, advancing 9.1 per cent from last year.

Research firm IDC on Tuesday released a bigger estimate for the mainland’s overall information and communications technology market, which included consumer and telecommunications services purchases. It calculated this market to be worth US$465.6 billion this year, an 11.4 per cent increase over last year.

Forrester analyst Charlie Dai said yesterday the mainland’s economic growth may be slowing down but technology investments of the government, the state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and the country’s aggressive internet firms continue to rise.

“Premier Li Keqiang has been stressing the importance of innovation through big data and cloud computing technologies, which has helped drive adoption in the country,” Dai said.

IDC predicted that domestic hi-tech manufacturers will pursue more co-operation and joint-venture deals with foreign companies.

Reports last month, however, suggested that Beijing was keen to ramp up efforts to remove all foreign technology from its financial services industry, SOEs, the military and key government agencies.

“They can, but they will pay a cost in terms of higher-priced systems with less functionality, interoperability and security,” Robert Atkinson, the president of US think tank The Information Technology & Innovation Foundation, told the South China Morning Post.

“This [initiative] would violate the spirit, if not the letter of the law, under the WTO. The Chinese government wants all the perks of being part of a global trading system, but does not want to be a responsible partner,” he said.
 
 
US export economy fails to import jobs
Gillian Tett
Financial Times
January 8, 2015 6:10 pm
 
American businesses are now so efficient they require fewer workers
 
This month, brace yourself to hear plenty of rhetoric coming out of Washington about “exports” and “jobs”. As a new Republican-dominated Congress starts work, energy companies are lobbying to drop a decades-old ban on exports of crude oil, arguing that such sales will create thousands of American jobs.

As pitches go, it is a powerful one. But there is another question about exports and jobs that Congress should be debating more urgently: the fact that US businesses are becoming so efficient that they require fewer workers than ever before to deliver growth, even — or especially — for exports.

Take a look at some fascinating data compiled by the Commerce Department, and quietly released last year. This shows that in the past few years, the number of American jobs supported by exports has risen as overseas sales have grown. In 2009, exports created 9.7m jobs; by 2013 the tally was 11.3m. 
 
This is cheering. And since overseas sales rose further in 2014, amid a wider economic recovery, there is every reason to think that when the commerce department publishes the 2014 tally the number of export-linked jobs will have grown again.

But there is a billion dollar catch. Look at how many jobs are being generated per dollar of sales and the graph steadily slopes down. Back in 2009, each billion dollar’s worth of exports was creating 6,763 jobs. In 2013, it was 5,590 jobs. That is a fall of 17 per cent — in just four years.

There are two ways to interpret this trend. If members of Congress want to feel cheery at the start of a new year, they could celebrate the fact that American companies are becoming more innovative and competitive on the world stage. This partly reflects lower energy costs. But another factor is that as recovery has taken hold in the US, levels of automation and digitisation are rising sharply too.

That is prompting more US companies to develop production inside America, since it holds down labour costs. While Chinese workers might be cheaper than their American counterparts, robots are more cost effective than both — and often more competent.

Take Alcoa, the world’s third-largest aluminium company. Having previously expanded production in places such as Mexico and Asia, it is now focusing heavily on the US. This winter, for example, it is remodelling a plant in Savannah, Georgia, that uses pioneering processes to forge metal to withstand ultra-high temperatures.

A decade ago, such work might have been placed outside America. But Klaus Kleinfeld, Alcoa chief executive, says that it now makes sense to keep it in Savannah, to be closer to customers and research units. “The pressure to automate is huge,” he says. “We are not doing it for cost, but for innovation reasons?.?.?.?a precision is required that no human hand or eye can deliver.”

Companies such as Whirlpool, General Electric and Ford are taking similar steps. Even clothing companies are doing the same. Levi Strauss, for example, still makes its jeans outside America. But it recently brought its innovation centre — and those jobs — from Turkey to San Francisco. Boston Consulting Group reckons that over half of all large US manufacturing companies are either actively re-shoring activity, or considering this, as America becomes a more competitive destination. 
 
There is a more pessimistic twist to all this: what will the surplus workers do? An optimistic answer is that the economy will eventually adapt to generate new jobs, as it did 150 years ago when farm workers were forced off the land. A downbeat scenario is that this trend will exacerbate the bifurcation that has developed in the jobs market in the past decade, as mid-tier manufacturing jobs have disappeared. In a world of hyper-efficient companies there is swelling demand for a highly trained elite; indeed, Thursday’s jobless claims data suggest that companies are actually finding it hard to hire enough skilled workers. Alcoa needs plenty of computer programmers. But what it does not need (as much) are traditional metal-bashers. Exports can boom — but with fewer blue-collar workers. 
 
Mr Kleinfeld has recently started working with community colleges on retraining programmes, in a bid to help workers to adapt. Other companies are doing the same. But what is lamentably missing is any coherent policy from Washington to support such endeavour. Indeed, Congress seems to be paying woefully little attention to the issue, compared with the focus it is devoting to other topics, such as those energy exports. That needs to change — well before the current recovery loses steam.
 
 
LEADER
Obama must grasp the chance for deals on trade; New Congress offers narrow window to push Pacific and Europe pacts
9 January 2015
Financial Times
 
A year ago President Barack Obama called on the US Congress to give him fast track authority to negotiate big trade deals in the Pacific and Atlantic. Harry Reid, then Senate majority leader, scuttled Mr Obama's request saying it would be unwise to agree to it in an election year. Mr Reid's caution was scant help to his fellow Democrats who went on to lose the Senate in last November's midterm elections.

This week, Republicans took formal control of both chambers of Congress. Working with them to enact Trade Promotion Authority is Mr Obama's only real hope of securing his ambitious trade agenda. Doing so would help America's economic resurgence and cement Mr Obama's legacy . He should push for TPA's passage at the earliest opportunity.

The political logic for acting now is compelling. Unlike the Democrats, who are deeply riven over trade - even more so than 20 years ago, when only a minority voted for Bill Clinton's North American Free Trade Agreement. The Republicans remain an instinctively pro-trade party.

There is a loud group of dissenters within the Tea Party caucus, which would be loath to give the White House executive discretion, particularly since Mr Obama issued a stay on the deportation of illegal immigrants late last year. But they are a minority. Moreover, some hardline conservatives, such as Ted Cruz, the Texas senator, would almost certainly be in favour of the two trade deals. In other words, trade is a rare issue on which Mr Obama and most Republicans agree. The president must exploit that opportunity as quickly as he can.

The economic timing is auspicious. US growth is picking up speed. Indeed, 2015 could be the first year since the Great Recession when the US economy breaks through the 3 per cent growth barrier. Growth oils the wheels of politics, which ought to make it easier for Mr Obama to make the case to the US public.

Last month, the US trade deficit dropped to its lowest level in a year. That should also help America to discharge its responsibility to take measures to boost growth in the rest of the world, most of which is slowing just as the US is picking up. Growth in Japan, which is America's biggest interlocutor in the 13-nation Transpacific Partnership, and in the European Union, which is the other half of the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, is close to stalling. By embracing TPA, Mr Obama could embolden counterparts in Asia and Europe to sell the necessary compromises to their electorates.

Finally, the geopolitical moment is ripe. Concluding the TPP would be an integral part of Mr Obama's "pivot to Asia". The deal would encompass roughly 40 per cent of the world's economy. China is not a part of it. But TTP's conclusion would give Beijing a strong incentive to work with its neighbours to meet their standards. The same applies to TTIP, whose advocates in Brussels and Washington see as a potential gold standard for trade and investment.

It is hard to imagine that Mr Obama could pull off either deal unless he first secured leeway from Congress. Michael Froman, Mr Obama's able trade representative, believes he could conclude a TPP deal first and then persuade Congress to enact fast-track authority. If so, then good luck to him. But it would reverse the sequence on all previous big trade deals, including Nafta.

More likely is that Mr Obama will first have to cobble together a majority of Republicans and a sufficient minority of Democrats to pass TPA. That could take months. It would also be rancorous. There is no time to lose.
 
 
Why is China acting like a responsible stakeholder? 
By Daniel W. Drezner 
9 January 2015
Washington Post.com
 
Earlier this week China announced that, on rare earth exports, it would now play by the rules of the global game. The Wall Street Journal's Chuin-Wei Yap explains:

China has dropped decade-old quotas limiting exports of strategically important minerals that sparked an global trade dispute and led some countries to reduce their reliance on Chinese supplies….

Now the excerpted portion of the WSJ story seems like pretty strong evidence for the argument I made in "The System Worked." Contrary to conventional wisdom, China has acted like a responsible supporter of the rules of the global economic game and not like a revisionist bound and determined to undercut the U.S.-created system. Changing its domestic rules to comply with its international obligations is an example of China coordinating its policies to maintain greater economic openness. Chalk up a victory for global economic governance, and walk away.

Of course, neither life nor the global political economy are really that simple. As Ed Crooks cogently explains in the Financial Times, there's another reason China is cooperating:

China is unlikely to retain control of the global market for rare earths, because users have become more efficient in their consumption and found alternative sources, according to a former adviser at the US Department of Defense.

You can read Gholz's CFR paper here (full disclosure: I refereed this paper for CFR). The story Gholz tells is a combination of market and policy responses — but mostly the former. In essence, however, three major factors kicked in as the market response to China's 2010 informal rare earth embargo:

* Mines based in other countries naturally ramped up production, particularly for the more abundant "lighter" rare earths.

* In response to higher prices, Developed country producers in Japan, Europe and the US got much better at reducing, reusing, and recycling rare earths. Which means that demand started to slacken.

* Private Chinese producers, tempted by the higher post-2010 prices, busted the government embargo.

So, in other words, China's 2010 rare earth gambit resulted in an adverse WTO judgment and a market response that caused prices to fall and badly eroded China's market dominance of rare earths. China acquiescing to the WTO judgment suddenly seems like less of a concession.

This ties into a point I made last year — the most powerful kinds of economic statecraft are the kinds where market forces and policy responses work in tandem. That has happened in the case of Russian economic sanctions, for example — and they're happening now for rare earths.

This is still a case of the system working — China could choose to react like Russia, but it has chosen a more neoliberal-friendly path. But the rare earths case also demonstrates that the reason for the system's resiliency is not only due to global governance structures, or great power policy responses. The system's resiliency is hard-wired into the inherently market-friendly nature of the open global economy.

China has observed what happens to countries *COUGH* Russia *COUGH* Venezuela *COUGH* that try to defy that system when their primary export commodity's price crashes. Beijing is willing to subsidize some of these countries to advance its own national interest. When it comes to the global economy, however, China values the benefits it receives from the system a heck of a lot more than they resent it.

Which is why China continues to be a responsible stakeholder.

Am I missing anything?
