Headlines:
- IMF chief urges US to act on free trade deals
- Waning Trade
- TPP deal urgent with US election year nearing: PM
- REPORTS TOUT VALUE OF GLOBAL TRADE DEALS
- FREE TRADE; Rage Against the Economy
- No Rise in Smuggling When Cigarette Branding Is Removed
- Comment les lobbies prennent le pouvoir en Europe

 IMF chief urges US to act on free trade deals 
The Straits Times
It could lose out on investments with failure to reach agreement
THE United States has much to lose if it fails to reach agreement on two landmark free trade deals, International Monetary Fund (IMF) chief Christine Lagarde has warned, while raising concerns that global trade growth continues to underperform.
Speaking at the Atlantic Council on Thursday ahead of the IMF and World Bank spring meetings in Washington next week, she told the audience that this year is set to be the fourth consecutive year in which growth in trade around the world will fall below the long-term average.
"There are potentially huge global gains to be had from further trade reform and integration... Yes, the political economy of these reforms is difficult. Yes, they involve tough choices and trade-offs, and short-run winners and losers. But in the long run, everybody wins," said Ms Lagarde.
The World Trade Organisation said last September that trade was likely to grow just 4 per cent this year, well short of the 20-year average of 5.3 per cent.
Ms Lagarde, turning her attention to the US, warned that the world's largest economy could end up losing out on investments if it continues to dally on the Trans-Pacific Partnership deal with 11 countries in the Asia-Pacific and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership with the European Union.
"If I'm a big US corporate and I want to invest and I know there is a big market out there in the east... if there is no facilitation of trade, if there are no better tariff arrangements and no alignment of standards around the world, instead of investing in the US, I'm going to look at other investment opportunities and probably invest where there are very serious growing markets," she said.
"To those who say it is going to reduce employment, it's going to be bad for labour, I don't think so. I really don't."
The IMF managing director sees trade as one of the key areas which governments could focus on to try to help the global economy break out of sluggish growth.
While noting that the global economy is in better shape today than during the IMF's last meeting in October last year, thanks to a strong US economic performance and low oil prices, she said the growth figures are not good enough.
"So the global recovery continues, but it is moderate and uneven. In too many parts of the world, it is not strong enough...
"Six months ago, I warned about the risk of a 'new mediocre' - low growth for a long time. Today, we must prevent that new mediocre from becoming the new reality."
And while macroeconomic risks have gone down, financial and geopolitical risks are rising. For instance, Ms Lagarde said, sharp recent swings in foreign exchange rates coupled with an impending rise in US interest rates could be a source of instability.
In a wide-ranging speech that traditionally gives a glimpse into the agenda of the coming meetings, Ms Lagarde repeated her call for the US to ratify the 2010 IMF quota reforms.
She stressed that at a time when some in the US are concerned that the rise of institutions like the Chinese-led Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank is eroding the US' role in the global economic system, it cannot continue to clog up IMF reforms.
The reforms increase the total mandatory contributions to the fund and adjust contributors' share to better reflect the growing importance of emerging economies. But some US lawmakers oppose the increase in America's contribution and worry that the changes would dilute US influence.
Without US ratification, the fund has had to rely on ad hoc loans for its programmes. "We now wait for only one ratification by the US Congress. It is overdue. So if you meet any of them, tell them," said Ms Lagarde.
 
Waning Trade
 Forbes Asia
Asia's "trade" news of late has focused on a China-driven Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB), supposedly a trump to U.S. and Japanese efforts to keep the Asian Development Bank (ADB) as the primary such funder in the region. American allies have peeled away to join in the Chinese effort. This may have less economic than political meaning--the ADB has had rather little to do with the region's remarkable advances in recent decades, and the AIIB may struggle with similar practices.
Meantime, a more significant setback for the U.S. and for real trade progress is shaping up in the likely stall and possible demise of the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), a trade zone of 12 or more countries that could have had meaningful effect. We know that because of the concerted campaign that labor unionists and other nativists have mounted against the pact, in the U.S. particularly. The "fast track" authority being sought by President Barack Obama, a procedural device necessary to gain congressional approval of complex trade pacts, is running afoul of his own Democratic Party as well as a bloc of Republican yahoos who don't like him or don't like international law or don't like foreign competition.
TPP was earlier seen as an anti-China ploy, as its terms were thought designed to keep the world's second-biggest economy out of the new trade regime. The AIIB was in some sense a reaction. But it now is apparent that the Americans are quite able to undercut their own initiative, thank you.
Trade in general is suffering a lapse as global economies struggle and currencies gyrate in a depreciation contest. TPP's gasps only add to the funk. Perversely, one sort of commerce thriving of late in much of Asia is armaments.
In summarizing Lee Kuan Yew's significance for Singapore and Asia, I defer to Steve Forbes on page 10. I'll add that it's useful to hold opposed ideas in mind at the same time, per F. Scott Fitzgerald. Consider the paradox of the growth period that began near the time our 1968 cover photo was taken: This was not liberal democracy or laissez-faire capitalism in action--far from it. And yet Lee's Singapore was embraced by many adherents of both ideals as a model for its region. What safely could be said is that his legacy is a society that can and will evolve fruitfully. That meets his fundamental standard: It works.
 
TPP deal urgent with US election year nearing: PM
Business Times Singapore

THE 12 countries involved in the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) have a duty to convince their respective populations that this proposed free trade agreement (FTA) is beneficial to them, said Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong on Friday.
The TPP negotiations, which started back in 2008, are led by the United States and involves 11 other Pacific Rim nations: Singapore, Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru and Vietnam.
Although talks are deep into the final stretch, there is growing concern that the mega-deal - covering nearly 800 million people and a combined gross domestic product of US$27.7 trillion - could still stall because of domestic politics in the US.
Speaking during a dialogue at the opening of the inaugural Singapore Forum, Mr Lee noted the urgency to reach a deal, especially with the US gearing up for presidential elections next year.
"It's not the sort of time when people are very focused on subjects other than the elections, and the (election) campaign has already begun," he told an audience of about 250 people, including many diplomats, policymakers and business leaders, at the Shangri-la Hotel.
"But I hope that, in the midst of these preoccupations, there will be time to put in a good word for Asia-Pacific, for free trade, and for the TPP," he said.
Analysts say that the TPP's success is likely to hinge on whether the US Congress can pass the trade promotion authority legislation, which allows US lawmakers to set objectives for trade deals in exchange for a yes-or-no vote.
Mr Lee noted that while US Trade Representative Michael Froman had the full backing of President Barack Obama on the TPP, the talks could run into trouble unless congressmen and senators were fully sold on the merits of the deal.
"Having spent 4-5 years of intense effort, that would be a great pity, and not just from an economic point of view," said Mr Lee.
"The TPP is about linking the two sides of the Pacific closer together, stitching them together, and giving substance to the idea of the US being a Pacific power."
As the audience peppered the prime minister with questions during the lively 40-minute session, one diplomat asked for his views on the future of the relationship between Europe and Southeast Asia.
Mr Lee, whose last visit to Europe was in February when he spent a week in Germany and Spain, said he hoped the economic links between the two regions would grow.
He noted that Europe was preoccupied with a very large domestic agenda, with many of its economies having various difficulties or issues to sort out. One plus, however, is that many European companies have a global reach and are well-known in Asia.
"Singapore is small, but Asia is a big and vibrant market. The European companies have to be here," said Mr Lee, adding that they were welcome to invest in Asia.
"Be it Siemens, Bosch, Santander or Shell, European companies are global names, and you can't be a global name unless you are fully engaged in this part of the world," he said.
In his opening remarks earlier, the prime minister said that Asia was on the uptrend in terms of economic development and growth.
The continued prosperity of the region, however, would depend on three non-economic factors - nationalism, territorial disputes, and security - and how countries deal with each of them.
On nationalism, he stressed that while it is a positive force, it could also be a possible reason for conflict between countries.
"You're not arguing over resources, but over historical issues, which are very difficult to resolve and to come to a single consensus upon," he said.
"It's the response to globalisation uncertainty - the stresses and strains of trying to improve your life in a very uncertain world - and these similar stresses and strains affect us, and I think that's one of the reasons why you see that in Asian countries too. That's one factor we have to watch carefully."
The Singapore Forum is organised by the S Rajaratnam Endowment, a non-profit philanthropic organisation set up to honour Singapore's first foreign minister, and continues on Saturday with a full-day conference.
Former Indonesian president Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono will deliver a keynote in the morning, and Singapore's Deputy Prime Minister and Finance Minister Tharman Shanmugaratnam will speak at a lunch dialogue
 
REPORTS TOUT VALUE OF GLOBAL TRADE DEALS
Herald News
The battle over whether President Obama will get authority to quickly make trade agreements, in particular deals that cover the Far East and Europe, turned to focus on the impact of trade on New Jersey and other states Thursday.
A state-by-state report, titled "The United States of Trade" and released by the U.S. Department of Commerce, said 166,000 New Jersey jobs were supported by exports last year, when the state exported goods worth $36.8 billion.
The report's release, and that of a related economic brief, "Jobs Supported by State Exports 2014," were part of a White House effort to step up pressure on Congress to grant the president authority to make deals, known as "fast track" or "trade promotion authority."
While Republican congressional leaders say they are willing to support the measure depending on the final plan, unions and some liberal Democrats have fiercely opposed the effort, contending it will enable trade deals costing American jobs and forcing down wages.
Federal officials said a vote on a bill giving the president the authority -- meaning Congress could approve or reject a trade deal but not amend it -- could come as early as next week.
Rep. Bill Pascrell Jr., D-Paterson, said he opposed a similar bill in 2002, believing it gave too much authority to President George W. Bush, and he may do so now.
"Before I could support a new fast-track approval process, I must know that the underlying agreement is a fair trade deal for the American worker," he said.
If given the authority, Obama wants to strike two trade agreements, the Trans-Pacific Partnership, with Japan and 10 other Pacific Rim countries, and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, with European Union countries.
U.S. Commerce Secretary Penny Pritzker and U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman, in a telephone news conference Thursday, touted the benefits of trade to states, including creating jobs, investment and sales.
"This new report demonstrates how trade continues to create good-paying jobs across the country," Pritzker said. "These numbers make it clear that in today's global economy American prosperity and job creation are directly tied to our ability to reach new markets and new customers beyond our borders."
The reports says that New Jersey in 2014 was ranked 13th in the nation in jobs supported by exports. Texas, with 1.1 million export-supported jobs, was top ranked, and New York was fourth, with 390,000 jobs.
However, New Jersey's position has worsened in recent years, the economic brief released Thursday shows. The number of state jobs supported by exports peaked in 2011 at 177,158, and has since fallen by 6.5 percent. The state in 2014 had fewer export-supported jobs than in 2010, according to the report.
Pascrell said he is concerned the Trans-Pacific Partnership contained dispute settlement procedures that could undermine key labor, environmental and consumer protections. In December, he voiced similar concerns about the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership.
Charles Wowkanech, head of the New Jersey branch of the AFL-CIO, said the fast-track authority would limit debate on the merits of trade agreements that could hurt workers. "We need trade deals that are fair rather than flawed," he wrote in an Op Ed piece in The Record in February.
The national branch of the AFL-CIO has vigorously opposed the bill, and says it has organized 400 events in recent months involving thousands of workers.
The organization, in a March letter to congressional representatives signed by 60 unions, said fast-track deals such as the North American Free Trade Agreement, signed in 1994, are "written largely by and for the world's largest corporations [that] don't create jobs: their main purpose isn't even related to trade, it's to enshrine rules that make it easier for firms to invest offshore and increase corporate influence over the global economy."
Froman, in a release, said the reports made public Thursday show that small businesses will get a boost from trade agreements.
"American small businesses ... will benefit from tearing down trade barriers in markets around the globe, this is where we see a lot of opportunity for growth and more trade supported jobs," he said. "With the Trans-Pacific Partnership we have a once-in-a-generation chance to unleash the economic potential of American small businesses and to level the playing field for our workers," he said.
 
FREE TRADE; Rage Against the Economy
Handelsblatt Global Edition
Many are taking to the streets to protest the Trans-Atlantic Trade and Investment Partnership or TTIP. The amount of debate over the agreement is normal, but the widespread doubts over free markets are not, writes Handelsblatt's co-editor in chief.
Freedom is a big word: People yearn for it.
The term "trade" also has positive connotations. Goods are exchanged, parties reach agreements and a win-win situation is the rule.
So how could it have happened that "free trade" is becoming a negative term for millions of Germans, a symbol of the mass protests against "those at the top," against the elites in politics and business?
All of this is happening in a country that has gained prosperity and respect – and sometimes the envy of others – partly through exports, that is, with as much free trade as possible. Or, as British economist David Ricardo, the great thinker of free trade, put it almost 200 years ago with his examples for cloth and wine, with as much benefit as possible from the international division of labor.
The anti-free trade mood is only one of many mysteries in an increasingly complicated situation, one in which the clunky acronym TTIP has made its way into the daily vocabulary of Germans, who now easily identify it as the Trans-Atlantic Trade and Investment Partnership.
Four letters are suddenly at the top of everyone's agenda. Four letters that represent the biggest social conflict of the day, a rebellion of the masses against the power of the few who have dared to take an important and giant undertaking. Four letters that stand for a government project of the highest quality, for secret negotiations between the European Union and the United States, and for an agreement that would provide 820 million people with nothing less than an economic bridge across the Atlantic, and create new entrepreneurial spirit and booming business.
"A culture struggle over the sort of life we want to lead has taken shape, largely unnoticed by the ministers, managers and makers in their well-tempered headquarters."
But this is precisely what makes people suspicious, and precisely what raises the question of power.
Us or them? Money or mindset? Markets or morals? The dollar or the euro? Private or public sector? Free trade or subjugation?
These are the kinds of contrasts that are at issue.
A culture struggle over the sort of life we want to lead has taken shape, largely unnoticed by the ministers, managers and makers in their well-tempered headquarters. Some are preaching new growth, which will create jobs in an embattled world of products and sees China as a champion and India and other emerging markets as future stars.
Others reject this as the master plan of mammon, even as evidence of a pervasive "economism," for the alleged domination of life by the business world – preferably by multinationals that create their own laws and whose managers and shareholders are filling their own pockets. Allegedly. And there is also a little anti-Americanism mixed in, a little "Yankee Go Home" sentiment.
The TTIP battle is – as unbelievable as it may seem – as big in Germany as the former controversy over nuclear power, the military buildup or the 1987 census.
Since mid-2013, representatives of the European Union and the United States have attended negotiations in Brussels, Washington and other locations, always accompanied by lobbyists and eyed by anti-lobbyists, and public opinion of the negotiations has worsened by the month.
At first, a clear majority of Germans favored a new major international treaty, one that would revive trade between the Old Continent and the New World, but now only 39 percent support the agreement. And when the next round of TTIP negotiations begins at the end of the month, public approval could drop to as low as 37 or 36 percent.
And where will it be by the end of 2015? Where will it be when the talks are expected to be over, so as not to conflict with the American presidential election campaign and German Chancellor Angela Merkel's re-election two years later – all "German Angst" aside.
Something is getting out of hand in Germany.
A project in the market economy that is in fact logical and praiseworthy is becoming a proxy war between civil society and "corporate capitalism," between government and non-government, between the street and the salon – with the term "street," in the digital age, meaning the hundreds of thousands of people who use Facebook and Twitter to organize their protest activities, while the others, the representatives of the grand plan, buy advertising, issue press releases and give interviews.
Some have their official timetable, their top-down delights, their fact sheets of mediated reason. They predict that trade between the European Union and the United States, currently worth about half a trillion euros, will increase, and that the roughly $1 billion in tariffs paid by German automakers will be eliminated.
Others have their emotions, their resistance and their doubts – and are often armed with better questions, because so much remains unresolved.
In almost two years, the individuals involved in hammering out TTIP have failed to successfully communicate their important project. Their figures have occasionally been suspect, sometimes they have avoided questions and at times they have sought to justify the project by claiming that it represents the interests of the state.
In a media society, this sort of thing inevitably leads to disaster. The most positive example, one that proponents have repeatedly praised, was that TTIP would make it possible to standardize rear car blinkers, which are red in the United States and orange in Europe.
The more urgently governments warn against a failure of trans-Atlantic free trade, the more they appear to lose their power over public opinion of the trade agreement, that is, the power of interpretation.
All of a sudden, things are no longer what they are but what they appear to be. And the new countervailing power is suddenly more appealing to many people than the official power, even if Chancellor Merkel praised TTIP two years ago as a project for the future and now, with some annoyance, is calling for faster results.
Or when German Economy Minister Sigmar Gabriel predicts: "Our children will curse us if we get this thing wrong." He should be more concerned about the curses of his fellow left-wing politicians, whom he aims to convert to supporters of free trade at a small convention of his center-left Social Democrats in June.
The countervailing power bears the friendly face of a native of the Bavarian, Thilo Bode, who likes North Africa and did his docterate on a foreign trade topic at the Kiel Institute for the World Economy, who once ran Greenpeace Germany and has been the head of Foodwatch for the past 13 years. Mr. Bode and his team have their offices in part of a former textile factory in Berlin's Mitte district. He has filled a niche in the market with his bestseller "Die Freihandelslüge" (The Free Trade Lie).
Mr. Bode understands that every solution needs a problem, and because the TTIP problem is getting bigger by the day, he and Foodwatch are planning their attack in France, a key European country. His organization has teamed up with several others, including Attac, Campact and German Watch. Their mission is to "stop TTIP," and it's also the heart of a campaign.
"Experience has shown that the United States has often understood harmonization as adaptation to U.S. standards."– Stefan Heidbreder, Managing Director of the Foundation for Family Business
Mr. Bode forced the Federation of German Industries, or BDI, to recently revise its optimistic predictions on how TTIP could affect growth. The free trade agreement, he argued, would only lead to a 0.05 percent annual increase in growth, and eventually perhaps 400,000 new jobs in the E.U. These figures were calculated by an institute in London and the Institute for Economic Research in Munich.
But econometric models are not an effective means of obtaining the truth about free trade. There is no way to tell whether trade will be diverted, that is, whether companies will no longer send their orders to China but the promised TTIP land instead, as some strategists for the People's Republic fear.
The term "free-trade lie" or, alternatively, "free-trade trap," is catchier.
The best thing now is to dispense with numbers altogether, because this is all "abstract and far away," said Michael Hüther, director of the Cologne Institute for Economic Research. The shared values of the West are the most important thing, he said, as evidenced by TTIP.
Mr. Hüther points to the 1980s, the pre-euro period, when there were also no valid prognoses on the expected effects on affluence. The difference is that then-Chancellor Helmut Kohl was a strong and decisive leader. Mr. Kohl had behaved "like a dictator" and knew that he would have lost a referendum on the euro, he later confessed. Representative democracy can only be successful, he added, if someone stands there and says: "This is the way it works."
The Merkel administration will submit TTIP to the lower house of German parliament, the Bundestag, unless the whole thing collapses. And although it is a "mixed treaty," Berlin should still support it.
Anti-TTIP activists are unconvinced by the economic view that free-trade zones are emerging all over the world and that this is why the Europeans could perhaps use a strong partner. Their arguments are often tinged with basic ideological principles.
Franz Kotteder, author of "The Big Sellout," sees the negotiators' efforts as nothing less than a plot, even an "economic coup d'état."
The attempt by the delegations representing U.S. President Barack Obama and the European Commission to reduce bureaucratic hurdles through TTIP, harmonize standards and eliminate tariffs altogether is creating a major stir. Although some critics wouldn't call it a "coup," many fear TTIP could lead to special rights for corporations, which could sue for billions in private arbitration courts. They suspect that Americans could stand in the way of tougher European laws relating to consumer, employee and environmental protection by arguing that U.S. corporations could suffer losses as a result.
Mistrust is the prevailing sentiment, mistrust over a partnership that should in fact be based on mutual trust. German small and mid-sized companies, which could sell their products more cheaply in the United States thanks to TTIP, will have to remain patient for longer than expected.
"We are leaving all controversial issues for the time being and postponing them until later," said Arndt Kirchhoff, chief executive of an automotive supplier by the same name that serves the U.S. market. Otherwise, he added, the United States will do business with China first and then Europe. It annoys Mr. Kirchhoff to have to do everything twice for the U.S. market, and he notes that his company expends a fifth of its capacity on designing the same machine twice.
Lawmakers should establish the rules of free trade, while industry should attend to the details, said Luitwin Mallmannthe, president of the North Rhine-Westphalia Association of the Metal and Electronics Industry.
But not everything is sunny in the corporate camp. It is important to prevent abuses with arbitration courts, said Stefan Heidbreder, managing director of the Foundation for Family Business. He argues that they should only be permitted for direct investments in the real economy, but not for financial transactions.
The trade agreement, Mr. Heidbreder said, could be important to family businesses in the high-tech market, but he also warned: "Experience has shown that the United States has often understood harmonization as adaptation to U.S. standards."
Mr. Heidbreder hopes that the E.U. negotiators will recognize this problem and proceed with maximum transparency. "The secretiveness at the beginning of the negotiations caused serious damage and cost a great deal of trust," he said.
"We are all part of the economy, including those in the anti-TTIP camp."
That is now the consensus. Some mistakes have minimized the opportunities.
It was the time when E.U. Trade Commissioner Karel De Gucht defiantly responded to protesters who had proudly presented 470,000 signatures by saying: "And I speak for 500 million."
His successor, Cecilia Malmström, has been striving to achieve transparency, even if such negotiations must, of course, be confidential. She occasionally posts TTIP documents online and has published a brochure describing the 10 biggest myths about the agreement.
But after the many days of arrogance, perhaps this more accommodating approach is too late. The strategists in Brussels have stubbornly refused to accept the 130 protest groups from 21 countries as a European citizens' initiative.
No matter how the dispute over TTIP ends, the debates over details, chicken treated with chlorine and perks for carmakers, are not alarming. This is normal for such propositions and is part of democracy.
What is alarming is the large grassroots opposition to business in general, apparently fed by the failure of banks in 2008, which pulled the entire system into the biggest crisis since the Great Depression of the 1930s and, for the most part, had to be bailed out by the government.
This has taken away the halo. Merely the desire to turn a profit has become suspect. There are neoliberals everywhere.
But we are all part of the economy, including those in the anti-TTIP camp. Corporate capitalism? Companies have employees who support families and consume goods and services. They have suppliers who will do better in a tariff-free world. They have customers who value price reductions and want innovations, stimulated by demand from abroad. And companies pay taxes (unless they're called Google or Apple), which the government can use to build universities and roads, or to support the weaker members of society.
TTIP – a project that helps the economy and others as well. We could simply try it out, with the option of withdrawing from the agreement in a few years. The rest is politics. Gross domestic product is more the result of courage than of fear.
"We should not tire of emphasizing the advantages of TTIP," said Airbus CEO Tom Enders.
 
No Rise in Smuggling When Cigarette Branding Is Removed
All Africa
Research conducted in Sydney and recently presented at the Annual Scientific Meeting of the Thoracic Society for Australia and New Zealand found no increase in the proportion of illegal cigarettes since 2012 when Australia became the first country to introduce plain packaging on all tobacco products.
Australia's move to plain packaging mandated that branding be removed from tobacco packaging and be replaced by uniform packaging that displayed brand names in a standardised form. This new packaging also bore large, graphic picture warnings covering most of the pack.
"There have been repeated claims that the introduction of cigarette plain packaging leads to contraband, illegal cigarettes flooding the local market," said lead researcher Macquarie University professor Matthew Peters in a statement. "What is clear from our survey is that there has been no increase in illegal tobacco use in Sydney."
"Governments overseas have no reason to fear a flood of illicit sales as they progress (to) plain packaging legislation," said Peters.
According to National Council Against Smoking Executive Director Dr Yussuf Salooyee, the findings counter many of the tobacco industry arguments opposing the introduction of similar legislation in South Africa.
"These findings debunk tobacco industry propaganda which claims that plain packaging will increase smuggling," Salooyee told Health-e News.
Industry has opposed similar moves at home
Minister of Health Dr Aaron Motsoaledi's announcement to introduce similar regulation in this country was met with opposition from the tobacco industry, which warned that the move would increase the trade in illegal cigarettes.
The Tobacco Institute of Southern Africa (TISA) expressed concern about Motsoaledi's suggestion to introduce plain packaging. TISA argued that Austrailia's move to plain packaging had not reduced the rate of smoking in the country but had led to an "alarming" increase in illicit trade in the country.
"There is a risk that plain packaging legislation will create further advantages and opportunities for illegal traders," TISA's CEO Mr Francois van der Merwe, said. "Plain packaging legislation will destroy the trademark and make it impossible for consumers to differentiate between legal and counterfeited tobacco products."
However, the Australian Department of Health has reported a steady decline in smoking following the introduction of plain packaging.
Salooyee said that TISA's arguments were to be expected.
"A standard industry response to any new measure designed to reduce tobacco use is to falsely claim that smuggling will increase," Salooyee said.
"The industry expects the customs authority's fears of increased crime to override health concerns and defeat the measure," he added. "This study shows that when governments stand up for health, the industry's claims will be exposed as nothing more than fear mongering."
 
Comment les lobbies prennent le pouvoir en Europe
Le Nouveau Marianne. 
Bénéficiant d'un accès privilégié aux travaux de la Commission et d'une opacité délibérée, lobbies et multinationales orientent à leur guise les négociations sur les accords de libre-échange transatlantique.
Comme le pétrolier qui ne dévie jamais de sa route ni ne s'arrête, les négociations sur le traité commercial transatlantique (Tafta), lancées il y maintenant dix-huit mois, suivent leur chemin. Bruxelles et Washington veulent conclure en 2015 dans l'intermède entre élections européennes (2014) et américaines (2016). Chaque mois, les négociateurs se rencontrent dans la plus grande opacité. Tout juste la Commission européenne a-t-elle accepté de consulter les citoyens sur l'opportunité d'instituer des tribunaux privés pour juger des différends entre les Etats et les firmes privées. Malgré un raz-de-marée d'opposition citoyenne (90 % de contre sur 150 000 réponses !), Bruxelles a passé outre. On ne renonce pas si facilement au goût du secret des fonctionnaires européens et à des décennies de rabaissement de la démocratie vivante organisé par les traités de l'Union. Les Naufragés du libre-échange, coordonné par Attac, nous révèle les nouvelles dérives antidémocratiques de l'UE au travers des méandres du projet de traité transatlantique, qui met en péril les consensus sociaux des pays membres. Extraits. H.N.
Extraits
Un Parlement sous pression
En théorie, le contrôle démocratique des négociations est effectué par le Parlement européen : en plus d'être associé au suivi des négociations au même titre que les Etats membres, il disposerait, en définitive, du dernier mot sur la ratification des accords. Le Parlement européen est en effet associé au suivi des négociations commerciales, par l'intermédiaire de sa commission du Commerce international (Inta), garante de la «transparence» des négociations. Les députés de la commission Inta disposent en théorie d'un accès aux documents de négociation équivalent à celui du Conseil. En fait, seuls sept d'entre eux, les coordinateurs des groupes politiques, sont habilités. La consultation de ces documents se fait en «salle de lecture», dans des conditions ne permettant pas une analyse sérieuse des textes. Jusqu'au 30 septembre 2014, les députés n'avaient même pas le droit d'y apporter un stylo pour prendre des notes !
Pour compliquer encore l'exercice, les membres de cette commission du Parlement européen sont chargés du suivi de dizaines de projets d'accords en parallèle. A l'heure actuelle, l'UE négocie avec le Japon, les Etats-Unis, l'Inde, le Maroc, la Tunisie, la Jordanie, le Vietnam, la Thaïlande, la Malaisie, le Myanmar et avec des dizaines de pays de la zone Afrique, Caraïbe, Pacifique (ACP). A cela s'ajoutent les négociations multilatérales au sein de l'Organisation mondiale du commerce (OMC), la négociation plurilatérale sur les services du Tisa et plusieurs accords bilatéraux centrés sur le secteur de l'énergie (avec le Kazakhstan, l'Azerbaïdjan, l'Algérie, la Russie). Sans compter la masse des documents auxquels ils n'ont pas accès, la cinquantaine de députés membres de la commission Inta du Parlement européen reçoivent entre 500 et 1 000 pages de documents, d'importance inégale, par semaine. Un suivi exhaustif et précis de la masse de ces documents étant impossible, la transparence affichée est de façade.
[...] Lors de la ratification de l'accord, les parlementaires européens sont contraints à s'exprimer sur un texte négocié pendant des mois, ou des années, par les services de la Commission européenne et qui est bien souvent présenté comme ne pouvant plus être amendé. «Take it or leave it», «C'est à prendre ou à laisser».
La feuille de route du business
Les représentants des lobbies disposent d'une place de choix dans les instances consultatives et jouissent d'une proximité inégalée avec les négociateurs de la Commission européenne. Ils jouent un rôle déterminant dans l'ouverture des négociations ou la définition de leur périmètre.
David O'Sullivan, directeur de la DG Commerce, admettait ainsi en 2009 que, bien que sa porte soit ouverte aux ONG, il rencontrait «majoritairement des représentants de l'industrie», car «c'est ainsi que cela fonctionne». La Commission européenne ne s'en cache pas : en matière de politique commerciale, l'intérêt des multinationales européennes prime le reste. D'après l'ancien commissaire au Commerce Karel De Gucht, son travail consistait à «ouvrir de nouveaux marchés pour l'industrie européenne et le secteur des services». Cette orientation favorable aux secteurs économiques se traduit dans l'association directe des multinationales européennes aux négociations commerciales et parfois même dans les textes négociés, où l'on retrouve telles quelles des propositions de la Chambre américaine de commerce à Bruxelles ou du lobby BusinessEurope.
Les grands groupes européens sont ainsi associés, en amont, aux équipes de la Commission chargées d'identifier les «barrières au commerce» [...] «les plus importantes aux yeux des entreprises européennes», selon les termes de l'ancienne commissaire au Commerce Catherine Ashton, qui ajoute : «Nous travaillons en partenariat pour les supprimer au moyen des accords de libre-échange.» La préparation des négociations du traité transatlantique donne un exemple particulièrement significatif du poids relatif des lobbies économiques dans les consultations de la Commission. Sur les 560 rencontres préalables aux négociations organisées par la Commission, 520 se sont tenues avec des lobbies et des multinationales (soit 92 % des rencontres). Lorsque des ONG le lui demandent, la Commission ne transmet qu'au compte-gouttes, et avec beaucoup de délai, les comptes rendus de ces rencontres, en masquant de nombreux passages. L'opacité règne.
L'accès privilégié des lobbies aux négociateurs de la Commission se poursuit pendant les négociations. Ils sont régulièrement invités à des «briefings» où leur sont fournies des informations sensibles sur les négociations en cours, les positions et stratégies défendues par l'UE. Ce sont autant d'informations auxquelles les ONG, les autres organisations de la société civile ou le grand public n'ont pas accès !
Le dialogue économique transatlantique (Transatlantic Business Dialogue - Tabd) a été créé en 1995 par plus d'une centaine de dirigeants industriels européens et américains, et il rassemble les plus grandes multinationales européennes et américaines. Il a pour objectif d'aboutir à «un vrai marché transatlantique» par la suppression des «obstacles opposés au commerce et à la libre circulation des investissements à travers l'Atlantique». Ce qui est très révélateur, c'est que la Commission européenne est à l'origine de la création du Tabd. «Avec le gouvernement américain, nous avions demandé aux hommes d'affaires des deux côtés de l'Atlantique de se rassembler pour voir s'ils pouvaient parvenir à un accord sur les prochaines actions à entreprendre», expliquait l'ancien commissaire au Commerce Leon Brittan en 1996. «S'ils y parvenaient, les gouvernements auraient du mal à justifier leurs réticences. Le résultat fut spectaculaire. Dirigeants industriels européens et américains demandèrent d'une seule voix une plus grande et plus rapide libéralisation du commerce. Et cela a eu un effet immédiat.»
Dès sa création, le dialogue transatlantique offre aux entreprises multinationales un véritable rôle institutionnel. Ses coprésidents assistent aux sommets UE - Etats-Unis, et remettent aux dirigeants européens des «feuilles de route» répertoriant les «priorités» que les gouvernements devraient suivre, fournissant même des dates limites pour leur réalisation. Outre ces réunions au sommet, les industriels bénéficient d'entrées privilégiées à la Commission. Ils ont avec elle «un contact presque quotidien», explique un lobbyiste du dialogue sur le commerce transatlantique.
De sommet en sommet, le Tabd a contribué à façonner l'agenda des négociations, jusqu'à leur début officiel. En 2013, il a fusionné avec le Conseil des entreprises américaines et européennes, lobby basé à Washington, pour devenir le Conseil des entreprises transatlantiques (CET). Le CET est un des lobbies qui ont été le plus consultés par la Commission et il continue à intervenir activement dans les négociations. L'exemple du Tabd montre combien l'influence des entreprises multinationales est institutionnalisée, à tous les niveaux de discussion, dans les négociations commerciales. Depuis vingt ans, il œuvre à la mise en place d'un marché transatlantique : «A l'ère des grandes entreprises multinationales et d'une intégration économique mondiale accélérée, explique un des représentants du Tabd, le système de réglementations strictement national n'est plus ni rationnel ni efficace.» La nouvelle génération d'accords de libre-échange et d'investissement tels que le Ceta (avec le Canada) et le Tafta (avec les Etats-Unis) est perçue par ces lobbies comme une occasion unique pour démanteler les normes nationales et imposer de nouvelles régulations, qui leur soient plus favorables, communes aux deux côtés de l'Atlantique.
Pour Bruxelles, il faut "maximiser les gains"
La politique commerciale extérieure est depuis longtemps une politique de l'Union européenne. Il a toujours été considéré comme essentiel de concentrer le pouvoir de négociation entre les mains d'un petit nombre de personnes. L'objectif est d'accélérer les négociations internationales et de «maximiser les gains» en évitant de «longs débats intérieurs sur les détails de la négociation». La Commission européenne sera ainsi mandatée pour participer aux négociations commerciales internationales et négocier «d'une seule voix» les tarifs douaniers communs aux Etats membres. Le traité de Lisbonne, entré en vigueur le 1er janvier 2009, a étendu la compétence exclusive de la Commission européenne - les décisions peuvent donc être adoptées à la majorité qualifiée et non à l'unanimité - à tous les principaux aspects du commerce extérieur, [permettant de] négocier des accords complets couvrant le commerce et l'investissement. [...]
Des questions se posent cependant sur la capacité du Conseil européen à encadrer les négociateurs de la DG Commerce. Les ressources et la compétence de la DG Commerce sont supérieures à celles du Conseil, et elle dispose d'une certaine marge de manœuvre dans son obligation de tenir les Etats informés des négociations. Confrontés à des versions communiquées illicitement des textes de négociations de l'accord entre l'UE et le Canada (Ceta), des représentants des Etats membres ont admis qu'ils n'y avaient jamais eu accès, et que la Commission avait de loin outrepassé son mandat de négociation.
Les Naufragés du libre-échange, de l'OMC au Tafta, de Maxime Combes, Thomas Coutrot, Frédéric Lemaire, Dominique Plihon, Aurélie Trouvé, coordonné par Attac, Les liens qui libèrent. En librairies le 15 avril.
 