HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "Trade, environmental policies must work together, says WTO Chief
·         HYPERLINK \l "MORE TRADE THE RECIPE FOR GREATER GROWTH - BY ROBERTO AZEVEDO, DIRECTOR-GENERAL OF THE WORLD TRADE ORGANIZATION
·         HYPERLINK \l "Least Developed Countries Seek Action on WTO Guidelines for Rules of Origin
·         HYPERLINK \l "World Bank Official Says Donor Assistance Important for Trade Facilitation Agreement
·         HYPERLINK \l "Brazil takes aim at U.S. farm subsidies as Rousseff readies visit
·         HYPERLINK \l "Debate About Farmers' Insurance Heightens --- Some say subsidized crop payments are necessary; others contend they should end
·         HYPERLINK \l "China to give $9 bln to support grain farmers
·         HYPERLINK \l "Import Tax Sop Fails to Warm Rubber Heartland
·         HYPERLINK \l "Lawmakers ask Obama administration to address alleged Gulf airline subsidies
·         HYPERLINK \l "China, India, on U.S. list for intellectual property concerns
·         HYPERLINK \l "US tech faces wider probe as EU eyes tighter web regulation; Targets range from retail to telecoms in push for 'digital single market'
·         HYPERLINK \l "EU opens investigation into Chinese steel rebar imports
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S. Officials Announce Philippines TPP Ministerial, CN Meeting In Guam
·         HYPERLINK \l "Talks on India-EFTA free trade pact stuck over IPR issues
·         HYPERLINK \l "India, Japan vow to conclude FTA talks by 2015-end
·         HYPERLINK \l "Les stagiaires non-payés de l’ONU vont manifester
·         HYPERLINK \l "OECD Trade Leader Joins Lincoln Team
 
Trade, environmental policies must work together, says WTO Chief
WTO members have been discussing ways to achieve fewer and lower trade barriers on key environmental goods and services — which is part of the Doha Development Agenda.

The Dollar Business Bureau
30 April 2015 
 
“Trade will continue to be a key engine of growth in the coming years. Without trade, it is difficult to see how the world can provide for the additional 2 billion people expected by 2050, and respond to the urgent need to improve living standards, particularly for the poorest,” said Roberto Azevêdo, Director-General, WTO (World Trade Organisation).

Speaking at a joint WTO-UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme) event “20 Years of Building Pathways to Sustainable Development” on April 28 at the WTO headquarters, the DG said, “The world has to devise practical and realistic ways to make trade and environmental policies work together, both at national and international levels,”
and added, “WTO is taking steps to tackle this through our negotiating agenda.”

WTO members have been discussing ways to achieve fewer and lower trade barriers on key environmental goods and services — which is part of the Doha Development Agenda. Independently a group of members, who together account for the majority of global environmental goods trade, launched a process to eliminate tariffs on these goods last July, the DG said.

These talks on an ‘Environmental Goods Agreement’ would include technologies like solar panels and hydropower turbines. It is a welcome endeavour, which could bring major economic gains. And, crucially, although it is being taken forward by a group of members, the benefits would apply to the whole WTO membership.

The elimination or reduction of trade barriers here would provide WTO members with greater access to a variety of imported goods involving environment-friendly technologies and some of the services which support them. “It could also help to stimulate innovation and facilitate the development of green industries,” Azevêdo said.

The Doha agenda also focuses on the relationship between the WTO and the multilateral environmental agreements (MEAs). The WTO and MEA secretariats, including the UNFCCC (United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change), have been engaged in fruitful collaboration for some years.

“A successful outcome to our negotiations would formalize this cooperation,” the Director General said, adding that it would establish concrete means to avoid potential conflicts between WTO and MEA rules, for example by strengthening national cooperation between government agencies which deal with trade and environment.

 
MORE TRADE THE RECIPE FOR GREATER GROWTH - BY ROBERTO AZEVEDO, DIRECTOR-GENERAL OF THE WORLD TRADE ORGANIZATION
30 April 2015
Bulletin Quotidien Europe

For many decades trade liberalization was the oil which allowed the engine of the global economy to run ever faster and more efficiently. It helped to fuel the long boom that followed the Second World War. Exports have grown thirty-five fold since then, thanks largely to a reduction in average tariffs from around 40% to 4% negotiated through the multilateral trading system, now embodied in the WTO. Despite this, some now question whether trade's role in supporting economic growth is beginning to fade.

For 50 years trade grew on average almost twice the rate of GDP, but over the last decade the ratio has declined. This has led to the suggestion that the relentless increase in trade's share of world GDP (around 30% today) is coming to an end. Indeed, 2015 is likely to mark the fourth consecutive year of below average trade growth. However, a closer look at the reasons behind these figures shows that fears of a decline in trade's power to leverage global growth are unjustified.

It has been argued that the change in trade growth is due to structural factors. For example, the rapid spread of production chains across borders which began in the 1990s appears to be decelerating. Similarly, the gains from containerization and new communications technology are stabilizing. But such structural shifts are only part of the picture; there are also major cyclical factors. Demand has been dampened by slow growth or recession in the US and EU, the continued sluggish performance of Japan and the moderation of growth in emerging economies. The EU is particularly important here. It accounts for a third of world trade, but only a quarter of GDP - so any slowdown in Europe automatically has a more pronounced impact on trade.

It is also possible that we are not seeing the true picture because our methods of measuring trade need to be updated. For example, trade in software and services is not fully captured statistically so growth in these areas (which is quite obvious to everyone from the M-PESA user in Mombasa to the Uber customer in London) is not fully reflected. There is also the question of how to measure trade in components: should they be counted every time they cross a border, or should the value they add to the final product be captured just once? It is clear that double-counting doesn't reflect the real contribution that trade provides to global growth. We are working with other international organizations to improve this analysis - to ensure we hear the signal rather than the noise.

Given these factors, any talk of 'peak trade' or even 'deglobalisation' is rather hasty. But there is a more significant reason why fears of a decline in trade growth are unjustified, which is that it is within our control. I have been reminded recently of a line attributed to the French writer Chamfort: "Sans moi, je me porterais à merveille" - or, "if it wasn't for me, I would do brilliantly". We are worrying about a problem that we have the power to solve.

Since the crisis, policymakers have tested to the limit options to spark economic growth. Interest rates are at historic lows, room for manoeuvre on fiscal policy is tight, and quantitative easing has largely run its course. But we have not yet fully explored trade's potential as a stimulant of global demand. Some positive steps have been taken. WTO members struck an historic deal in Bali in 2013 which will dramatically cut trade costs and deliver an economic boost of up to $1 trillion annually. Negotiators are also working to expand the WTO's Information Technology Agreement and liberalize trade in environmental goods, and many countries are pursuing regional trade agreements. All these efforts are very welcome, but we need to be more ambitious.

The last major global trade agreement is now 20 years old. Global deals deliver far more than any other approach. Rather than simply deepening existing trade connections, multilateral reforms allow new trading relationships to be established. Moreover, evidence shows that bringing developing countries into the world economy in a fair and progressive way is the best way to foster development, and maximize the contribution of trade to global growth. Despite this, we are still living off the reforms made by the last generation. New agreements on trade in agricultural produce, industrial goods and services could lower barriers to business and sharply reduce longstanding distortions in the trading system, thereby supporting growth and development around the world.

The WTO's Bali deal provided momentum to our broader global trade talks. Our next major negotiating meeting is in December in Nairobi - the first such meeting ever held in Africa. This is the time to act. Instead of talking about trade's capacity to leverage growth as mere observers, I think we should recognize that we can take control - and that this may be the policy option for which we have long been searching.
 
 
Least Developed Countries Seek Action on WTO Guidelines for Rules of Origin
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, May 1, 2015
 
April 30 — The World Trade Organization's least developed countries (LDCs) urged members to increase access to LDC goods and adopt a set of guidelines for preferential rules of origin.
 
WTO members have long sought to harmonize each other's rules of origin, which distinguish the sourcing of a product and are often used to determine trade duties and restrictions.
 
In 2013 trade ministers in Bali agreed to offer duty-free and quota-free market access for products originating from LDCs as a means to increase market access for these countries, which represent the 34 poorest members of the WTO.
 
LDCs noted that little had been done since 2013 to implement the Bali Ministerial decision on rules of origin and urged members to increase their efforts, during an April 30 meeting of the WTO's Committee on Rules of Origin.
 
Bangladesh Discussion Paper
 
Bangladesh, which spoke on behalf of the LDC group at WTO meeting, encouraged members to identify possible measures that would increase market access for these countries.
 
Bangladesh offered a discussion paper that asked non-LDCs about the details of their current rules of origin policies and what measures they would consider implementing in favor of LDCs.
 
Many of the WTO's developed members offer duty-free and quota-free market access to LDC products, though several developing-country members have not completed their efforts to broaden market access to these countries, according to the WTO.
 
There is “unequivocal evidence” that, under certain conditions, modernizing rules of origin to reflect global value chains and commercial realities can generate positive outcomes for LDCs, Bangladesh said.
 
Revised rules of origin from the European Union and Canada resulted in increased use of preferences, relocation of factories to LDCs, increased manufacturing capacity and more skilled jobs creation, Bangladesh said.
 
U.S. GSP Legislation
 
U.S. trade officials explained that U.S.-bound LDC exports receiving trade preference had declined in recent years because its generalized system of preferences (GSP) program expired in July 2013, among other factors. The GSP program offers duty-free treatment to imports of certain products from over 100 eligible countries.
 
A 2014 LDC paper revealed that the value of U.S.-bound LDC imports receiving GSP benefits declined from $3 billion in 2008 to $137 million in 2013. The paper also criticized the U.S. for failing to modify its GSP rules since 1974.
 
U.S. trade officials said the Senate Finance Committee and House Ways and Means Committee recently approved legislation (S. 1009 and H.R. 1891) to renew the generalized system of preferences program through 2017 and provide retroactive benefits to when the program expired in 2013.
 
 
World Bank Official Says Donor Assistance Important for Trade Facilitation Agreement
By Brian Flood
WTO Reporter, May 1, 2015
 
April 30 — World Trade Organization members working toward implementing the Trade Facilitation Agreement will face challenges, including the need for significant capacity building and technical assistance, according to Gerard McLinden, senior trade facilitation specialist for the World Bank Group.
 
McLinden said the World Bank would offer support in this area. The World Bank established a Trade Facilitation Support Program in 2014 to help developing countries reform their trade facilitation practices.
 
However, many of the necessary implementation measures will depend not on the level of technical assistance that countries receive, but rather on the amount of domestic political will, said McLinden.
 
WTO members must coordinate donor support based upon comprehensive implementation plans, said McLinden. “In many places, donors compete with each other, and that's a problem,” he said. Donor coordination works best at the national level rather than organized through Geneva, he said.
 
While it's recognized that regional economic communities have a role in implementing the TFA, McLinden said, developing countries are somewhat cynical about what these groups can accomplish.
 
Finally, the sequencing by which countries implement their TFA commitments will be critical. For example, under Article X of the agreement, it makes sense for governments to implement their documentation requirements before finalizing their single window cross-border trading system.
 
Implementation will require strong interagency coordination, he said. A good first step would be establishing national trade committees on trade facilitation.
 
The agreement will enter into force when two-thirds of WTO members, or 108 countries, domestically ratify the agreement. To date, only four countries have filed their instrument of acceptance to the WTO.
 
 
Brazil takes aim at U.S. farm subsidies as Rousseff readies visit 
 
* Brazil will question U.S. farm policy at WTO committee
* Brazilian officials say they are at information gathering stage
* Brazil's Rousseff to visit Washington in June
* US says farm program complies with global trade rules

By Alonso Soto

BRASILIA, April 30 (Reuters) - After finally turning the page on a dispute over spying that hampered attempts to deepen trade ties, Brazil and the United States may be headed for another clash, this time over U.S. farm subsidies.

Brasilia is gathering evidence to show that the United States is increasing subsidies for soy and corn farmers, which threatens to further push down prices for the key crops grown in the South American country and hurt its already sputtering economy, four Brazilian officials told Reuters.

Although it is too early to launch a full-out trade dispute, Brazil plans to apply pressure on Washington by questioning its farm program at the World Trade Organization's agriculture committee and by rallying support among other commodities exporters, officials said.

Brazil's growing concerns over U.S. farm subsidies comes as President Dilma Rousseff prepares to visit Washington in June, a trip aimed at bolstering trade between the hemisphere's two largest economies.

It took more than a year of intense negotiations for Rousseff to reschedule the trip, which was originally set to take place in 2013 but was scrapped following revelations that Washington spied on her personal communications.

Although Rousseff will not address the concerns about farm subsidies directly with U.S. President Barack Obama, her aides plan to bring it up in meetings with U.S. officials ahead of the visit, one of the Brazilian officials said. They all spoke on condition of anonymity to discuss the plans candidly.

"We are certain that U.S. subsidies will rise, but we need to gather evidence during the next harvest to build our case," said another official involved in trade policymaking. "We don't rule out a trade dispute, but we are in the early stages."

The U.S. government says its farm programs are transparent and fair and do not distort commodity markets.

"The new farm bill programs have minimal effects on production and trade and, as such, we are confident that the programs are in compliance with our WTO commitments," Cullen Schwarz, a U.S. Department of Agriculture spokesman, said in email response to questions from Reuters. He was referring to the 2014 U.S. farm bill.

A farming powerhouse, Brazil is an experienced player in agriculture disputes. It won a landmark WTO case in 2004 against U.S. cotton subsidies, a dispute that finally ended last September with a $300 million settlement for Brazilian producers.

The concerns over subsidies show how difficult it is for the regional powers to deepen economic ties after decades of disagreements over trade policy and other issues.

On her trip to Washington, Rousseff wants to attract more U.S. investment and technology to Brazil, which is one of the world's most closed economies because of high import tariffs and other trade barriers. But officials say both countries will struggle to deliver on key topics such as ending double taxation.

CONCERN OVER FALLING GRAIN PRICES

Brazilian officials worry that the drop in global grains prices will prompt the United States to release more subsidies to its farmers through crop insurance schemes in the 2014 farm bill.

In a presentation last year when she led Brazil's farm lobby group CNA, Katia Abreu, now agriculture minister, warned that Brazil could lose up to $500 million a year in revenues from soy exports due to price distortions caused by U.S. subsidies.

The estimates are from a study by consultancy Agroicone, which expects those subsidies to drag down world corn and soy prices by 4 percent and 3 percent, respectively.

"If prices remain at this level that will trigger more subsidies to U.S. farmers, leaving Brazilian producers at a disadvantage," said Alinne Oliveira, head of international affairs at CNA, which set up a group to monitor the subsidies.

Soy prices on world markets have plunged around 35 percent over the last year while the value of corn fell nearly 60 percent since its record high in late 2012, according to benchmark CME futures.

Brazilian authorities expect to have more evidence of the distortions by early next year to challenge the United States. In the meantime, officials say Brasilia will seek to press the United States to be more transparent about its subsidies.

Brazil comes a close second to the United States as the world's largest producer of soy, which makes up about 10 percent of its total exports. The fall in soy prices helped explain Brazil's first trade deficit in 14 years in 2014.

"We need to act multilaterally at the WTO to reduce those subsidies," said another Brazilian official. "At a time when economic growth is low, every major exporter is fighting for every little piece of the market." (Editing by Todd Benson and Frances Kerry) 
 
 
Debate About Farmers' Insurance Heightens --- Some say subsidized crop payments are necessary; others contend they should end
By Tennille Tracy 
1 May 2015
The Wall Street Journal
 
Years of drenching rainstorms in several northern farm-belt states have caused payments under a popular type of government-subsidized crop insurance to nearly triple in the past decade, heightening debate about whether farmers should be compensated when they can't plant their fields.

Payments for "prevented plantings" exceeded $2 billion annually in both 2011 and 2013 and are nearing $1 billion for 2014, with some claims still being processed.

While these payments are available to farmers nationwide, the lion's share of the 2014 payouts, as in previous years, went to farmers in the Prairie Pothole Region -- which includes parts of North and South Dakota, Minnesota, Iowa and Montana. This area contains pockets of wetlands that some say are largely unsuitable to farming.

Craig Cox, an agricultural expert at the Environmental Working Group, said the payments encourage farmers in the region to take risks they wouldn't normally take.

"These seasonal wetlands are called seasonal because they're wet in the spring" when planting often takes place, he said. "If farmers didn't have that sort of risk protection -- and they actually lost money -- I don't think we'd see the same sort of behavior."

Mark Formo, president of the North Dakota Grain Growers Association, said it is unfair to use recent history to judge the effectiveness of the prevented-plantings system.

"A lot of the land that's farmed now has been farmed for generations, [but] normal just hasn't been normal," he said. "My dad is 75 and he's always saying this is the wettest he's ever seen it."

A report released this week by the Environmental Working Group, a frequent critic of agricultural subsidies, said farmers in the Prairie Pothole Region received about 60% of all prevented-planting payments between 2000 and 2013, equal to about $5 billion. That allocation dropped to 40% in 2014, according to the group. The analysis, based on Agriculture Department data, covers years of record-high crop prices, which resulted in higher payments to farmers.

After last year's wet spring prevented Doyle Lentz from planting 10% of his acreage, the Rolla, N.D., farmer filed a claim under his crop-insurance policy and received 60 cents on the dollar for the insured value of wheat, barley, and soybeans that he had intended to plant.

"Farmers don't want to have to file for this," Mr. Lentz said. "They're not set up to not plant."

Others aren't so sure. Some environmentalists say the wetlands aren't fit for farming and farmers are abusing the system. Critics are calling on Congress to stop subsidizing this type of coverage.

Prevented-planting policies, which are overseen by the Agriculture Department but sold by insurance companies, became a part of crop insurance in 1995. The federal government, in addition to subsidizing farmers' premiums, also shoulders some of the claim-related losses.

Since its rollout, the program has come under fire from both the Government Accountability Office and the USDA's internal watchdog. In 2013, the department's inspector general cited hundreds of millions of dollars in potentially excessive payouts, and said the program discouraged farmers from planting other crops later in the season when their first choice was no longer an option.

USDA spokeswoman Gwen Sparks said the prevented-plantings payments help preserve the environment. "These provisions protect the soil by providing a safety net when conditions are not suitable for planting, such as when there is too much or too little water," she said.

The debate about prevented plantings is taking shape as a broader fight about agricultural subsidies simmers on Capitol Hill. Farm-state lawmakers contend growers need to be protected from forces beyond their control, while nonfarm representatives and fiscal conservatives maintain that the government is providing a needless and costly form of income support.

"We should not be forcing taxpayers to foot the bill for expensive subsidies to big businesses that don't need it," said Sen. Jeanne Shaheen (D., N.H.).

Sen. John Thune (R., S.D.) said the number of prevented-planting claims should drop in coming years as new conservation compliance requirements deter farmers from trying to plant in areas known for being seasonal wetlands.

The latest statistics "fail to recognize how recent important policy and legislative improvements will likely reduce future prevented-planting claims and protect marginal lands, including wetlands," Mr. Thune said.

So far this year, the region is getting less-than-average rainfall, suggesting flooding won't be as big of an issue.

The White House proposed new limits on prevented-planting payments in its 2016 budget. The Agriculture Department, meanwhile, is rolling out new eligibility standards specifically for Prairie Pothole farmers. Starting last year, farmers have had to show they were able to harvest a crop at least once in the past four years.

 
China to give $9 bln to support grain farmers 
 
BEIJING, May 1 (Reuters) - China will give a total of 57.8 billion yuan ($9.32 billion) to grain farmers as part of efforts to deepen rural reform, promote modern agriculture and raise incomes for farmers, state news agency Xinhua said.

The total includes 14 billion yuan in direct subsidies, while 20.4 billion yuan will go to farmers to promote better crop varieties, Xinhua said late on Thursday, without providing a time frame.

A further 23.4 billion yuan will be used to support the "appropriate management scale of grain, with a focus on big professional bodies such as family farms and farmer cooperatives", it added.

Last year Beijing scrapped its cotton and soybean stockpile schemes, switching to direct subsidies to farmers to cover the gap between a target price and the market price, but it kept the stockpile policy for grains, sugar and rapeseed.

Sinograin, the state stockpiler, purchased a record 125 million tonnes of grain in 2014, according to state media. ($1 = 6.2018 Chinese yuan) (Reporting by Ben Blanchard; Editing by Ed Davies) 
 
 
Import Tax Sop Fails to Warm Rubber Heartland 
1 May 2015
New Indian Express
Abhilash Chandran

Kottayam: The Central Government’s decision to increase the import tax from 20 to 25 per cent on natural rubber has evoked lukewarm response in Central Travancore, the heartland of rubber. Though, farmers view it as an interim relief and temporary step towards arresting the nosedive of rubber prices, experts call for follow-up steps to keep the momentum. According to Pious Scaria Pottenkulam, a planter and former president of the Indian Rubber Dealers federation, the revision of import duty would make meagre changes in prices and would not create any miracle in the ailing rubber industry till the domestic prices are fully dependent on international prices. “The fact is that this is the maximum step the government can take in compliance with the World Trade Agreement (WTO). It will bring only a nominal change in the market. Moreover, tyre companies have already imported a significant volume of rubber to meet their upcoming requirements,” he said. V C Sebastian, secretary general of the Indian Farmers’ Movement (Infam), said that a five per cent increase in the import duty would not effect any change in the prevailing crisis in the industry.

“In the prevailing condition, an expected difference in prices would be a maximum of ` 5-6, which is not at all competent enough to influence the market. What we need is a comprehensive intervention of the Central Government including restrictions in import, the formation of price stabilisation fund exclusively for rubber, reinstating of port restrictions and quality checks,” he said. Burdern on Public Meanwhile, experts point towards the chances of tyre companies passing the burden on the public at large by increasing prices in their products in proportion to the increase in rubber prices. “The prospects of the rubber market in the wake of import duty hike will depend upon how the manufacturing industry accepts the new scenario. Chances are high from their part to increase the price of their products as they are a collective force. At the same time, since there are no quantitative restrictions in the import of rubber, the prices will be still dependent on the international market,” a higher official with the Rubber Board said. The farmers’ community demands the urgent and comprehensive intervention of the Central Government, by expediting steps to announce the proposed national rubber policy at the earliest and strengthening of the Rubber Board.

 
Lawmakers ask Obama administration to address alleged Gulf airline subsidies 
By Jeffrey Dastin 
 
April 30 (Reuters) - More than 250 members of Congress have signed a letter urging the U.S. departments of state and transportation to seek consultations with Qatar and the United Arab Emirates over subsidies the states have allegedly given Gulf airlines.

The letter, sent Thursday, adds to political pressure on the Obama administration since three U.S. airlines first alleged in January that Emirates airline, Etihad Airways and Qatar Airways have received more than $40 billion in subsidies in the last decade. U.S. airlines say this has allowed the Gulf carriers to drive down ticket prices and push competitors out of key markets.

"Failure to address these practices will lead to significant job losses in the United States and set a dangerous precedent that could lead to further harm to the U.S. airline industry and the broader U.S. economy," the letter said.

The Gulf carriers have denied the subsidy allegations and said U.S. airlines' service is not competitive and has caused them to lose market share. The carriers say they have supported thousands of U.S. jobs by buying U.S.-manufactured airplanes and by flying thousands of travelers to the country, helping the U.S. economy.

The Obama administration has solicited comments from interested parties and expects to begin reviewing them by the end of May.

It has said it is seriously considering the competition concerns raised by U.S. airlines but that it also remains committed to the Open Skies policy that authorizes flights to and from foreign countries. (Reporting By Jeffrey Dastin in New York; Editing by Ken Wills) 
 
 
China, India, on U.S. list for intellectual property concerns 
 
WASHINGTON, April 30 (Reuters) - China and India remain on a U.S. priority watch list for lax rules on copyright, trade secrets and other intellectual property rights violations in an annual review of trading partners published by the U.S. Trade Representative on Thursday.

Thirteen countries are on the priority watch list for 2015, including Russia and Ukraine as well as China and India, and another 24 are on a lower-level watch list.

China was cause for concern because of online piracy and rising theft of trade secrets as well as rules aimed at fostering the local technology industry at the expense of foreign suppliers, the report found.

"We felt it was critical to call this out," Deputy U.S. Trade Representative Robert Holleyman told reporters.

The United States has welcomed the suspension of rules forcing Chinese banks to buy local technology products and asking foreign firms to hand over source code.

But U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman said this week the United States would take up issues like "buy local" laws and technology transfer as part of an investment treaty between the two countries.

The bilateral investment treaty, which is under negotiation, should also cover unfair competition by state-owned firms and discriminatory enforcement of China's competition law, he said.

In India, USTR said there had been signs of progress in addressing intellectual property concerns and the United States expected "substantive and measurable improvements."

No country was listed in the worst offender spot of "priority foreign country," a label that can eventually lead to trade sanctions or the loss of trade benefits. (Reporting by Krista Hughes; Editing by Bill Trott and Leslie Adler) 
 
 
US tech faces wider probe as EU eyes tighter web regulation; Targets range from retail to telecoms in push for 'digital single market'
By Duncan Robinson and Alex Barker in Brussels 
1 May 2015
Financial Times
 
Brussels is set to widen its front against US tech companies just two weeks after the launch of its competition case against Google by initiating a new probe into a range of online platforms.

The move marks a first step towards tighter EU regulation of the internet and comes with the European Commission under pressure from France and Germany to take a tougher line on tech groups such as Amazon and Google.

In a draft plan for a "digital single market" encompassing everything from online shopping to telecoms regulation, the commission said it would probe how online platforms list search results and how they use customer data. The latest draft of the plan, seen by the Financial Times, will be approved by the commission next week.

The plan could also bring in stricter rules for video-on-demand services such as Netflix and communications apps, including WhatsApp and Skype, that have become rivals to traditional European media and telecoms groups.

Companies such as Airbnb and Uber are also likely to be roped into any investigation into platforms, which will aim to determine whether they are abusing their market power in the so-called "sharing economy".

The EU's intensifying assault on big tech groups has triggered accusations in the US, including from President Barack Obama , that the bloc is engaging in -protectionism.

The plan for a "comprehensive assessment" of online platforms comes after French and German ministers urged the EU to launch an investigation into the role played by the US internet giants.

French economy minister Emmanuel Macron and German counterpart Sigmar Gabriel this week sent a letter to the commissioner overseeing the reforms.

"The growing power of some digital platforms is a wider challenge that warrants a policy consultation with the aim of establishing an appropriate general regulatory framework for 'essential digital platforms'," they wrote.

The commission will start the probe "before the end of 2015", according to the draft. It will look at the role of paid-for links and advertisements in search results, along with the ability of individuals and businesses to move from platform to platform.

"Some online platforms have evolved to become players competing in many sectors of the economy and the way they use their market power raises a number of issues that warrant further analysis beyond the application of competition law in specific cases," the 17-page document reads, in a clear reference to the Google antitrust case.

Elsewhere in the draft, the commission says that it will "review" whether on-demand services such as Netflix should be subject to the same rules as traditional broadcasters.

According to the document, ondemand services are sometimes -"subject to lower obligations" than their television peers.

 
EU opens investigation into Chinese steel rebar imports 
 
BRUSSELS, April 30 (Reuters) - The European Commission said on Thursday it had opened an investigation into alleged dumping by Chinese producers of a grade of steel used to reinforce concrete principally in Britain and Ireland.

The Commission said it had received a complaint from European steel association Eurofer in March on behalf of producers of high fatigue performance (HFP) steel concrete reinforcement bars.

It is the latest in a series of complaints by the EU steel industry about a surge of cheap Chinese imports, which EU producers says are made possible by state subsidies for Chinese rivals.

Eurofer said that Chinese imports of the product had risen from zero in 2012 to 250,000 tonnes last year, taking a quarter of the market, with prices considerably lower than those of EU producers.

The market for HFP rebar in Britain expanded significantly during the period, but due to the massive rise in Chinese imports, the volume of European produced HFP rebar fell considerably, losing a third of their market share.

The Commission said Eurofer's evidence showed that the volume and prices of the imported product had a negative impact on the overall performance and financial situation of the EU industry.

EU producers include Spain's Celsa Group, Italy's Gruppo Riva SpA and ArcelorMittal.

HFP rebar is reinforcing bars with an ability to endure repeated stress without breaking and is principally used in Britain and Ireland.

The investigation is due to conclude in 15 months, although the Commission can set provisional duties after an initial nine months if it concludes there has been dumping - selling at artificially low prices that may be below cost.

It has already done so in the case of stainless steel cold-rolled flat products from China and Taiwan.

Duties imposed at the end of an investigation are typically in place for five years. (Reporting By Philip Blenkinsop; Editing by Dominic Evans) 
 
 
U.S. Officials Announce Philippines TPP Ministerial, CN Meeting In Guam
World Trade Online
Posted: April 30, 2015 
U.S. officials have announced that Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) ministers will meet May 26-28 in the Philippines and that chief negotiators will gather immediately prior to that from May 15-25 in the U.S. island territory of Guam.
 
Under Secretary of State for Economic Growth, Energy, and the Environment Catherine Novelli announced the dates and location of the ministerial – as well as the site of the chief negotiators meeting – during a briefing for foreign press on April 30.
 
The chief negotiators meeting in Guam will immediately precede a May 23-24 gathering of Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) trade ministers in the nearby Philippines on the beach resort island of Boracay. 
 
A spokesman for the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative said TPP chief negotiators will meet in Guam from May 15-25 “to build on the momentum in the negotiations and continue to resolve outstanding issues.”
 
But he declined to confirm the dates and location of the TPP ministerial, claiming that they had not yet been set. “We expect TPP Ministers to meet bilaterally to discuss TPP issues on the margins of the upcoming APEC trade ministers’ meeting in the Philippines,” he said. “No decisions have been made on a TPP ministerial meeting and the 12 countries will do so when appropriate.”
 
Novelli raised the possibility that ministers could reach a TPP agreement during their May 26-28 meeting, but indicated it was not a sure thing. 
 
“Negotiators are going to meet for two weeks in Guam to try to really take a big leap forward,” she said. “And then the ministers will obviously try to see what they can do to further narrow the differences. If they can narrow them completely, then we will have an agreement. And if there's still some things that are outstanding, then we will continue on with the negotiations.”
 
She subsequently said she did not want to portray it as though TPP countries are calling this ministerial to have a “final conclusion.”  
 
The dates and location of the ministerial, as well as the site of the chiefs meeting, were reported by Inside U.S. Trade earlier in the day on April 30.
 
 
Talks on India-EFTA free trade pact stuck over IPR issues 
From Shreerupa Mitra-Jha

Geneva, May 1 (PTI) The negotiations between the European Free Trade Association and India over a free trade pact are stuck due to intellectual property rights issues but the Swiss government is hopeful that talks could soon resume.

Switzerland's Economic Affairs department said that free trade negotiations between the EFTA states -- Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway and Switzerland -- and India are stuck due to intellectual property rights issues.

"The negotiations on certain issues like tariffs and non-tariff measures were promising. Unfortunately, concerning other important issues like intellectual property and data security the positions diverge widely," Isabel Herkommer, spokesperson for State Secretariat for Economic Affairs (SECO) told PTI in an email interview.

"We hope to resume negotiations as soon as possible. We still have a very good relationship with our Indian partners," she said.

The free trade negotiations that were launched between the EFTA and India in 2008 for trade in goods, services and investments have been stalled primarily due to strong objections from the Swiss pharmaceutical industries.

The SECO chief Marie-Gabrielle Ineichen-Fleisch told a Swiss daily yesterday that chances of a free trade accord being signed between India and Switzerland were "low" because it is not just about patents, but also to brand protection.

The total Indo-Swiss trade went down by 36.5 per cent last year, though India's exports to Switzerland increased while the imports, which primarily includes pharmaceuticals, machinery, transport equipments, chemical products and watches, decreased.

The balance of payments, however, is still heavily skewed in favour of Switzerland.

According to the Ministry of Commerce data, India's exports to Switzerland was USD 1.8 billion in 2013-14 and imports were USD 19.3 billion for the same period.

Many multinationals, especially pharmaceutical companies in the US and the Switzerland, have been lobbying against India's "weak IP regime", especially over a provision for compulsory licensing to meet public health requirements and absence of a period of exclusive marketing rights when a new drug gets regulatory approval in the Indian patent laws.

The Swiss pharmaceutical giant Novartis lost a case in April 2013 in India's Supreme Court which denied a patent to the multinational for its cancer drug Glivec.

Developing countries like India have the support of the World Health Organisation that encourages member states to make use of the flexibilities in the WTO-administered Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) flexibilities in view of maintaining public health.

India's IPR policy affects billions of people globally as it is the largest supplier of low-cost generic medicines. PTI SRM ASK NSA AKJ NSA

 
India, Japan vow to conclude FTA talks by 2015-end 
 
New Delhi, Apr 30 (PTI) India and Japan today pledged to fast-track negotiations for the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP), a mega free trade deal, and wrap it up by the end of 2015.

They also announced to make it a "high quality and mutually beneficial" agreement.

RCEP came up for discussion during the meeting of Commerce and Industry Minister Nirmala Sitharaman and her Japanese counterpart, Yoichi Miyazawa, here.

"The two ministers reaffirmed the commitment of both countries to actively engage in the RCEP negotiations and make it a modern, comprehensive, high quality and mutually beneficial economic partnership agreement... They shared their intention to accelerate the negotiations towards conclusion by the end of 2015," the Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion (DIPP) said.

The 16-member RCEP comprises 10 ASEAN members and its six FTA partners, namely India, China, Japan, Korea, Australia and New Zealand. The 16 economies account for over a quarter of the world economy.

The RCEP negotiations were launched in Phnom Penh in November 2012.

RCEP is an extremely important institutional process which could lead to a plurilateral agreement that will have wider implications for partners.

Both the countries today signed a 5-point action plan to boost bilateral trade and investment.

As part of the broader efforts, the trade ministers also agreed on developing select clusters -- the Delhi Mumbai Industrial Corridor (DMIC) and Chennai Bengaluru Industrial Corridor (CBIC) -- as 'Japan Industrial Townships' in order to facilitate Japanese investment to India.

They also identified 11 sites for this purpose, which include Tumkur, Ponneri, Jhajjar, Supa, Neemrana and Mandal.

"They stressed the importance of collaborative steps between Indian and Japanese sides for the improvement of business environment," DIPP added.

 
Les stagiaires non-payés de l’ONU vont manifester
30 avril 2015 06:00; Act: 30.04.2015
20 Minutes
par Julien Culet - Mécontents de leur statut, les petites-mains de l’institution manifesteront à Genève pour la Fête du travail. Une première au bout du lac.
 
«Je touche 1850 fr. par mois pour un travail à 100%. Je suis chanceuse par rapport à d’autre.» Contrairement à Marjolaine, la plupart des stagiaires ne sont pas du tout payés par l'ONU, à Genève. Ils remplissent des tâches essentiellement administratives. Combien sont-ils? L’institution ne peut donner de chiffres. Pour dénoncer cette situation, la jeune femme participera vendredi à 15h au cortège genevois du 1er Mai au départ de la place des 22-Cantons avec son mouvement Pay Your Interns, dont elle est la porte-parole. Mercredi soir, près de 400 participants étaient déjà annoncés sur Facebook.
 
Partie des Etats-Unis, la protestation contre le statut des stagiaires a gagné l’Europe ces dernières années. Le groupe onusien genevois, qui compte une cinquantaine de membres, souhaiterait s’étendre à d’autres organisations internationales ayant des pratiques similaires. «C’est un cercle vicieux, poursuit Marjolaine. Car pour espérer avoir un salaire décent, on doit enchaîner les stages, qui sont mal reconnus en terme d’expérience professionnelle.» Dans une ville chère comme Genève, beaucoup se découragent, n’ayant pas les moyens de subvenir à leurs besoins, surtout ceux venant de l’étranger. «C’est incohérent en regard des valeurs d’égalité des chances promues par l’ONU», relève-t-elle.
 
Contactées, les Nations Unies expliquent offrir «la possibilité à des étudiants diplômés d’améliorer leurs connaissances sur l’ONU. Ceci est une expérience inestimable qui permettra d’aider ces stagiaires dans leur future carrière.»
 
 
OECD Trade Leader Joins Lincoln Team 
Lincoln University 
1 May 2015
Scoop.co.nz
 
Lincoln University today announced the appointment of Crawford Falconer to the inaugural Sir Graeme Harrison Professorial Chair in Global Value Chains and Trade.

Mr Falconer is currently leader of the OECD Services Trade and Global Value Chains/Trade in Value Added (TIVA) projects, where he is overseeing two major research streams on services trade restrictions and the creation of value added in global value chains.

Sir Graeme Harrison, Founder and Chairman of ANZCO Foods, is personally funding the Professorial Chair at Lincoln. "I am delighted that the University has secured someone of Crawford Falconer's calibre for this position. Crawford comes with many years' experience in trade negotiations and this experience will be invaluable when it comes to repositioning Lincoln as a thought leader in world trade," says Sir Graeme.

Mr Falconer was formerly the Deputy Secretary of the Trade and Economic Group of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade (MFAT). As New Zealand's senior trade official, he managed all trade negotiations between 2009 and 2011 - including WTO, TPP, Korea, Indian, GCC, ACTA, AFTA/CER - and all bilateral trade and economic matters. Prior to that he was New Zealand Ambassador to the WTO in Geneva where he also chaired the Doha Round Agriculture Negotiations from 2005 to 2009.

Lincoln University's Vice-Chancellor Dr Andrew West describes Sir Graeme's support of the University in this way as "an extraordinarily visionary and generous act" adding that the appointment of Crawford Falconer to the Sir Graeme Harrison Professorial Chair "will enable the University to make a step change in our teaching, research and influence in the area of global value chains and trade."

Crawford Falconer is currently domiciled in Paris with the OECD and will join the University in September 2015. "This is in some ways a return to my early career days when I was a junior lecturer, but I can now bring the experience I have gained in negotiations and trade policy over the years to provide far wider insight for students and the University as a whole. It is a privilege to be able to now come back to New Zealand in a role that has the potential to influence the education of the students and also to enable change within the land-based sectors and the way New Zealand businesses trade on the world stage," says Mr Falconer.

The Sir Graeme Harrison Professorial Chair in Global Value Chains and Trade will be housed in Lincoln University's Faculty of Agribusiness and Commerce.
END


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.