WTO upholds Japan, EU claims on China steel duties
OMC : l'UE et le Japon ont gagné contre la Chine dans un conflit sur les tubes en inox
La OMC declara ilegales los aranceles chinos a los tubos acero de UE y Japón; UE CHINA
EU, Japan win WTO dispute on China anti-dumping steel duties
Taiwan launches WTO dispute over Indonesian steel duties
OMC/Chine: le Canada veut un panel pour le différend sur la pâte pour transformation
Canada seeks WTO aid to resolve row with China
U.S. SEEKS WTO CONSULTATIONS WITH CHINA OVER ALLEGED EXPORT SUBSIDY
Projects can further promote Northeast Asian prosperity 
 
 
WTO upholds Japan, EU claims on China steel duties
The World Trade Organization has upheld most parts of a complaint made by Japan and the European Union against China's anti-dumping duties on steel pipe imports.

A WTO dispute panel gave the ruling on Friday and called on China to take remedial measures.

China has been imposing extra duties on high-grade stainless steel pipes since 2012. It says unfairly low prices had been hurting Chinese companies.

The pipes are used for power plant boilers.

Japan said the Chinese duties violated WTO rules because there were no manufacturers of similar high-grade products in China.
The WTO panel said China had decided domestic firms were being hurt without carrying out proper surveys.

Japan's industry ministry says Japanese makers have paid additional duties of more than 8 million dollars annually because of the Chinese measure.

The ruling will be finalized unless China appeals within 60 days.

China's commerce ministry suggested the possibility of filing an appeal. Ministry officials said they will carefully analyze the ruling and consider whether to take further action. 
 
 
 
 
 
OMC : l'UE et le Japon ont gagné contre la Chine dans un conflit sur les tubes en inox
 
Agence France Presse ECOFI
 
Un tribunal d'arbitrage de l'OMC a donné tort à la Chine dans un conflit commercial qui l'opposait à l'UE et au Japon portant sur les tubes en acier inox, selon une décision publiée vendredi par l'Organisation mondiale du commerce à Genève.
 
Le Japon et l'UE avaient engagé une procédure contre la Chine en 2012 et 2013 pour protester contre les mesures anti-dumping imposées par Pékin sur les importations de certains tubes inox.
 
Ces tubes sont utilisés dans l'équipement des centrales thermiques.
 
Un panel (tribunal d'arbitrage) a été mis en place en 2013, chargé de trancher ce litige, et il vient de rendre ses conclusions.
 
Selon la décision du panel, la Chine, en imposant ces mesures de dumping, "n'a pas respecté" l'accord Antidumping, et doit à présent prendre les mesures nécessaires pour se mettre en conformité.
 
Un appel contre cette décision est possible durant un délai de 60 jours.
 
Le Japon se plaignait notamment des effets de cette mesure sur les exportations vers la Chine des sociétés telles que Nippon Steel ou Sumitomo Metal Corp.
 
L'UE défendait quant à elle les intérêts des sociétés espagnole Tubacex S.A et allemande Salzgitter AG.
 
"En matière de commerce international, nous devons tous agir en suivant les règles du jeu, je suis contente de voir que l'OMC a demandé aujourd'hui à la Chine de se mettre en conformité avec les règles de l'OMC", a déclaré la commissaire européenne en charge du commerce international Cecilia Malmström.
 
L'UE relève que c'est la deuxième fois qu'elle gagne contre la Chine devant l'OMC en matière de mesures anti-dumping.
 
La première concerne des appareils à rayons X exportés vers la Chine.
 
"Il s'agit d'une victoire claire pour l'UE", ajoute encore Mme Malmstroem.
 
 
 
 
La OMC declara ilegales los aranceles chinos a los tubos acero de UE y Japón; UE CHINA
Agencia EFE - Servicio Económico
EFESE
 
Bruselas, 13 feb (EFECOM).- La Organización Mundial del Comercio (OMC) declaró hoy ilegales los derechos "antidumping" que China impone a las importaciones de tubos de acero inoxidable de alto rendimiento producidos en la Unión Europea (UE) y en Japón, informó hoy la Comisión Europea (CE) en un comunicado.
 
El panel de la OMC encargado de la disputa que enfrenta a la UE y Japón con China informó de que considera incompatibles con sus normas dichos aranceles, impuestos por Pekín en 2012.
 
"En el comercio internacional todos tenemos que jugar según las reglas", indicó la comisaria europea de Comercio, Cecilia Malmström, quien celebró la decisión y mostró su confianza en que China "reaccionará a esta sentencia inmediatamente y restaurará condiciones de comercio justo para los productores de la UE".
 
Según explicó la CE, la organización con sede en Ginebra consideró que las medidas chinas "no respetan completamente los métodos prescritos por la OMC para calcular los márgenes de dumping".
 
Además, señaló que China no logró justificar que los tubos importados de la UE causaran daños a su industria nacional, y que el procedimiento "antidumping" tenían faltas en términos de "procedimiento y transparencia".
 
Las autoridades chinas tendrán ahora la posibilidad de recurrir esta decisión en los próximos 60 días.
 
Los tubos de acero de alto rendimiento se utilizan esencialmente en calentadores y supercalentadores de calderas supercríticas y ultra-supercríticas de centrales eléctricas. 
 
 
 
EU, Japan win WTO dispute on China anti-dumping steel duties
 
13 February 2015
24 Ore Radiocor-Newswire International Edition
 
We all need to play by the rules - EU commissioner (Il Sole 24 Ore Radiocor) - New York, 13 Feb - A World Trade Organization panel found Chinese anti-dumping duties on European and Japanese imports of high performance, seamless stainless steel tubes in breach of WTO rules, the WTO said.
 
The WTO panel found that the Chinese measures did not fully respect the prescribed WTO methods to calculate dumping margins. The panel also concluded that the Chinese antidumping procedure came short of the WTO requirements in terms of due process and transparency.
 
The WTO proceedings started in the end of 2012 initially between Japan and China. The EU joined the procedure in mid-2013.
 
Japan lamented that China's behavior penalized firms such as Nippon Steel & Sumitomo Metal Corp. The EU filed the complaint to defend the interests of exporters such as Tubacex in Spain and Salzgitter in Germany.
 
"In international trade we all need to play by the rules. I am glad that the WTO panel confirms this today asking China to bring its customs duties in line with the WTO obligations," said EU Trade Commissioner Cecilia MalmstrAm. "I hope to see China reacting to this ruling immediately and restoring fair trading conditions for EU producers." A24-Zap
 
 
 
 
Taiwan launches WTO dispute over Indonesian steel duties
 
GENEVA, Feb 13 (Reuters) - Taiwan has complained at the World Trade Organization about Indonesia's plan to impose "safeguard" duties on flat-rolled products of iron and non-alloy steel, the WTO said on Friday.
 
Safeguard duties are emergency tariffs that a country can impose temporarily to shield a specific sector from a sudden and damaging surge in imports. There are strict conditions for their use, which Taiwan accuses Indonesia of ignoring.
 
Under WTO rules, Indonesia has 60 days to satisfy Taiwan by negotiating or clarifying its rules. After that period, Taiwan could ask the WTO to adjudicate on its complaint. (Reporting by Tom Miles) 
 
 
 
 
OMC/Chine: le Canada veut un panel pour le différend sur la pâte pour transformation
 
Le Canada a demandé jeudi la constitution d'un panel de l'Organisation mondiale du commerce (OMC) pour trancher son différend avec la Chine sur la pâte à papier pour transformation chimique.
 
Le ministre canadien du Commerce international, Ed Fast, a dénoncé "l'imposition par le gouvernement chinois de mesures non fondées et discriminatoires qui désavantagent les exportations canadiennes de pâte pour transformation chimique".
 
Cette pâte pour transformation est utilisée dans la fabrication de cellulose pure ou de ses dérivés.
 
Compte tenu de "l'impasse des discussions en cours avec la Chine", le gouvernement canadien "demande l'établissement d'un groupe spécial (ndlr, panel) de l'OMC concernant l'imposition par la Chine de mesures antidumping discriminatoires pour les exportateurs canadiens" de pâte de transformation, selon Ed Fast.
 
Le gouvernement cherche à "défendre les intérêts des entreprises ainsi que des travailleurs canadiens du secteur forestier".
 
Le ministre a estimé que "l'enquête de la Chine n'a pas été menée conformément aux règlements de l'OMC", et a jugé "erronées" les conclusions.
 
La décision de mettre en place un panel revient à l'organe de règlement des différends de l'OMC. Une fois le panel décidé, la procédure peut prendre de longs mois avant une décision sur le différend.
 
 
 
 
 
Canada seeks WTO aid to resolve row with China
 
The Canadian Press
Saskatoon Star Phoenix
 
The federal government is seeking a World Trade Organization tribunal to help resolve a dispute over China's move to slap duties on Canadian wood-pulp exports.
 
Last fall, Ottawa filed a complaint with the WTO over Chinese levies on Canadian dissolving pulp, which is used to make rayon for clothing and other products.
 
But the Chinese investigation into Canada's concerns had flaws because it did not follow WTO rules, International Trade Minister Ed Fast alleged Thursday.
 
"Due to the inability to resolve this matter through ongoing engagement with China, Canada is requesting the establishment of a WTO panel," Fast said.
 
WTO tribunals adjudicate disputes between member countries. The panel will then produce a report that says whether it believes the complaints were well founded. The Chinese duties on Canadian pulp can reach as high as 23.7 per cent. They were imposed against several companies, including Fortress Paper and Tembec.
 
China first imposed the duties in November 2013 against Canada, the United States and Brazil, claiming the imports hurt its domestic pulp market. They became permanent in April 2014.
 
Fast said the Chinese measures are discriminatory and put Canadian pulp exporters at a disadvantage.
 
His department said Canadian firms exported $317 million of dissolving pulp to China last year. In 2013, Canada produced about 750,000 tonnes of the pulp and more than half of it was exported to China.
 
 
 
 
 
 
U.S. SEEKS WTO CONSULTATIONS WITH CHINA OVER ALLEGED EXPORT SUBSIDY
 
13 February 2015
Inside U.S. Trade
 
The Obama administration on Feb. 11 took the first step toward launching a new case against China at the World Trade Organization by requesting consultations over a program supporting Chinese manufacturers and producers in seven sectors that the U.S. claims provided more than $1 billion in prohibited export subsidies in violation of trade rules.
 
The U.S. became aware of the new program, which covers sectors such as textiles and agriculture but not autos, while engaged in an earlier set of WTO consultations with Beijing in 2012 over what the U.S. charged were prohibited export subsidies provided to Chinese auto and auto parts manufacturers, according to a U.S. trade official.
 
The official, speaking at a Feb. 12 press briefing on the new WTO challenge, announced that China appears to have removed key measures at issue in those earlier auto consultations (see related story).
 
The subject of the latest round of WTO consultations is a program under which the U.S. alleges China provided free and discounted services as well as cash grants and other incentives to companies operating in 178 industrial clusters known as “demonstration bases.” In order to receive that support, these companies had to meet certain export performance criteria, according to a USTR press release.
 
The U.S. charges that this amounts to a prohibited export subsidy within the meaning of Article 3.1 of the Agreement of Subsidies and Countervailing Measures (ASCM), which prohibits subsidies contingent in law or in fact upon export performance.
 
Specifically, the U.S. is alleging that the subsidies are contingent in law on export performance, the U.S. trade official said. The U.S. consultation request list 182 laws and regulations at the central and sub-central government level through which China has implemented this program.
 
The seven sectors that are represented in the demonstration bases are textiles, apparel and footwear; advanced materials and metals; light industry; specialty chemicals; medical products; hardware and building materials; and agriculture. Each demonstration base is typically made up of companies from only one of these sectors, officials said.
 
USTR Michael Froman unveiled the new consultation request at a Feb. 11 press event that USTR had billed as a “major enforcement announcement.” He was flanked by six House Democrats and one House Republican hailing from regions that produce goods covered in the seven sectors.
 
Several of the House members who spoke, including Reps. Mike Thompson (D-CA), Charles Boustany (R-LA), Jim Costa (D-CA) and Scott Peters (D-CA), emphasized that strong enforcement of existing trade agreements is necessary in order to build support for new trade deals the U.S. is negotiating such as the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP).
 
“If we are going to convince our constituents here in the United States — American workers and American businesses — that these negotiations will be good for country, for our economy, and for the world order of future trade, we have to ensure that our existing trade agreements are being followed,” Costa said.
 
A U.S. trade official rejected the notion that new consultation request was deliberately timed in order to build support for the president’s trade agenda, saying that these enforcement actions are taken according to their own internal timelines.
 
But one observer supportive of the consultation request charged that the timing is a “transparent effort” designed to help the administration build support for Trade Promotion Authority and the TPP negotiations.
 
The other House lawmakers who took part in the announcement were Reps. David Price (D-NC), Suzan DelBene (D-WA) and Derek Kilmer (D-WA).
 
Among the prohibited export subsidies that the U.S. is alleging were provided to companies in the demonstration bases are free and discounted services delivered through so-called “Common Service Platforms.” These include information technology services, product design services and worker training services, Froman said at the press event.
 
The U.S. estimates that China provided $1 billion worth of these subsidized services between 2010 and 2012, according to U.S. trade officials. They said the Demonstration Bases-Common Service Platform program has been in place since at least 2009 or 2010.
 
USTR said in the press release that exports from the demonstration bases comprise a “significant portion” of China’s global exports. It noted that exports from 16 of the roughly 40 demonstration bases specializing in the textiles sector amount to $33.25 billion in 2012, accounting for 14 percent of China’s total textile exports that year. Meanwhile, exports from six of the 10 demonstration bases specializing in seafood production totaled $3.59 billion in 2012, making up 20 percent of China’s seafood exports in that year.
 
Because the dispute involves prohibited subsidies, the timeline for the U.S. and China to hold consultations is shorter compared to WTO disputes involving other matters.
 
Specifically, the ASCM requires that, in disputes involving prohibited subsidies, the member alleged to have subsidized shall enter into consultations “as quickly as possible.” If those consultations fail to resolve the dispute in 30 days from the request, a party can request the establishment of a dispute settlement panel.
 
By contrast, the rules established in the Dispute Settlement Understanding for general WTO disputes require 60 days to elapse before a party can request the establishment of the panel.
 
Asked why the U.S. opted to pursue these subsidy programs in the WTO rather than by self-initiating a countervailing duty (CVD) case, the U.S. trade official argued that the WTO provides a more sweeping remedy because it allows the U.S. to challenge this program at its roots rather than targeting specific products through CVDs.
 
He noted that a CVD case would likely target a more narrow class of products and therefore require multiple cases, while U.S. through the WTO can target seven broad sectors in one fell swoop.
 
In addition, he indicated that a WTO challenge enables the U.S. to address the impact of China’s export subsidies in third markets where Chinese and U.S. products compete, whereas CVDs would only address the U.S. market.
 
The official indicated that, prior to requesting the WTO consultations with China, the U.S. discussed its potential case with other WTO members, including Mexico.
 
Those WTO members at the time all expressed an interest in the case the U.S. planned to pursue, and will now decide whether to join the consultations or become third parties to them, the official said. Mexico in 2012 requested WTO consultations with China over alleged subsidies for textiles, but has not yet requested a panel in that dispute (Inside U.S. Trade, Oct. 26, 2012).
 
The National Council of Textile Organizations (NCTO) and the United Steelworkers praised the administration’s consultation request in separate statements as an important step in fighting unfair Chinese trade practices.
 
NCTO welcomed the USTR announcement and said the subsidies at issue have bolstered China’s “meteoric rise” of textile and apparel exports since 2001. This surge has cost NCTO members billions of dollars in lost sales and tens of thousands of jobs in the U.S. and the Western Hemisphere, it claims.
 
“We applaud the Obama Administration for today’s decision to hold our international trading competitors to their WTO obligations,” NCTO President Augustine Tantillo said in the statement. 
 
 
 
 
Projects can further promote Northeast Asian prosperity
 
Woo Duck Han   
14 February 2015
China Daily-Hong Kong Edition
 
The "Belt and Road Initiatives" embody China's economic diplomacy under the new leadership led by President Xi Jinping. In particular, the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road manifests China's recent economic diplomatic initiatives such as neighborhood policy, multilateral cooperation and energy diplomacy.
 
China has become increasingly active in economic diplomacy since becoming a member of the World Trade Organization in 2001. And the "Belt and Road Initiatives" are an important part of that.
 
The entry into the WTO represented China's integration with the international economic community led by the West, and the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road is the hallmark of Xi's economic diplomacy. Economic diplomacy contains two opposite aspects: one is to promote economic growth through diplomatic measures, and the other is to achieve a certain diplomatic goal by using economic means. The "Belt and Road Initiatives" display both features, but the latter is more prominent.
 
Such a diplomatic strategy is based on China's knowledge of and attitude toward its neighbors. The US "pivot to Asia" and containment policy and the fact that a growing number of its neighbors are becoming unfriendly or pro-American are both concerns for China. Some of China's neighbors believe that the "Belt and Road Initiatives" are an attempt to redress this situation. If China hopes to make the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road strategy a success, it has to dispel their misgivings.
 
To reach the goal, China should first formulate policies that conform to internationally recognized rules rather than those established by China itself. Second, China needs an open policy that does not exclude any individual country or group of countries. Third, an institutionalized decision-making system in which all member states can participate should be set up. And most importantly, the primary condition is that all neighboring countries should believe that their security is safeguarded. All neighbors are observing China, and counting on it to fulfill its commitments to equality, mutual benefit and safeguarding security as it presses forward with the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road.
 
Among China's neighbors, the Republic of Korea is a typical pro-American country. Its attitude toward the "Belt and Road Initiatives" is one of caution, because it has to consider the US position in East Asia. Therefore, it hesitates to be part of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank that is dominated by China and maintains a position of reserve toward the Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia. But Seoul will have no reason to refuse joining the AIIB or taking part in confidence-building measures in Asia when the conditions are ripe, because both mechanisms will promote economic growth and security in the region.
 
The "Belt and Road Initiatives" are actually China's "Go West" strategy. As a country to China's east, the ROK is not involved in this strategy. But the ROK attaches great importance to the plan as the "New Silk Road" is in line with the Eurasian initiative proposed by ROK President Park Geun-hye, and will help the peaceful development on the Korean Peninsula.
 
Just as we observed at the ASEAN-Republic of Korea summit at Busan in the ROK last December, Seoul takes cooperation with the ASEAN members seriously, and actively promotes cooperation projects in energy, infrastructure and national security, which dovetail with the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road initiative. So China's "Belt and Road Initiatives" fit into and are mutually complementary to the ROK's economic diplomacy.
 
During his visit to the ROK, Xi Jinping and Park Geun-hye agreed to build a "Belt and Road" industrial negotiation mechanism and, hence, we expect the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road to extend to Busan and Incheon, and contribute to the common development of Northeast Asia.
 
The author is director of Korea JoongAng Daily's Institute of Chinese Studies.
