Progress needed on Doha to avoid 'dangerous situation': WTO
India might not ratify WTO trade facilitation pact
WTO confirms Ukraine`s extra import duty complies with WTO regulations
Kenya ready to host WTO ministerial conference
Amina Urges Trade Liberalisation Plan Ahead of WTO Meet
Pacific trade talks in final stretch as ministers meet in Hawaii
Key facts about the TPP trade alliance
Dairy trade impasse holding up Pacific trade deal -NZ envoy
Wine, chicken tariffs to be lifted / Several stages for elimination eyed under TPP accord

 


Progress needed on Doha to avoid 'dangerous situation': WTO

28 July 2015

Agence France Presse

The World Trade Organization said Tuesday that huge gaps remained among members trying to negotiate a global trade deal, warning that failure to make progress by year's end could spark a "dangerous situation".

The 161-member WTO began its so-called Doha Round of talks in 2001, aiming to tear down global trade barriers, with an emphasis on supporting development in poorer nations.

Progress has been slow and frustrating, but members set a July 31 deadline to agree on a work plan to move the talks forward at a ministerial meeting in December in the Kenyan capital Nairobi.

That deadline will almost certainly not be met, chief WTO spokesman Keith Rockwell told journalists on Tuesday.

"If we were to achieve a work programme in the next 72 hours, I would be very, very surprised... so that is a disappointment," Rockwell said.

"The gaps are very wide," he said, lamenting that members including the world's top economic powers have appeared unwilling to make concessions in key areas.

With the Doha Round set to drag into its 14th year, Rockwell said the need for concrete progress in Nairobi was vital.

"I think people are starting to understand that we are running out of time and that a failure to achieve a meaningful outcome in Nairobi... would be a difficult and dangerous situation for the organisation," Rockwell said.

"A failed meeting in Nairobi would have very adverse consequences for the WTO," he continued, citing concerns that some countries could lose the will to carry on with the process.

The WTO reached a landmark deal in late 2013 on overhauling global customs procedures, the first multilateral agreement concluded by the organisation since it was founded in 1995.

The measures will take effect once they are ratified by the parliaments in two thirds of member-states.

But agreements on the trade of agricultural goods and industrial goods -- the other key planks of the Doha Round -- have remained elusive.

"Among the big players, there is a big gap between what they want others to give and what they are prepared to give in return," Rockwell said.

bs/mnb/gd. Agence France-Presse

India might not ratify WTO trade facilitation pact

Nayanima Basu New Delhi 

29 July 2015

Business Standard

In a repeat of events a year ago, India is unlikely to ratify the World Trade Organization (WTO)’s trade facilitation agreement (TFA), even as it has decided to seek a permanent solution on the food stockholding issue at the coming 10th ministerial meeting in Nairobi, Kenya, in December.

The government is believed to be again taking a tough stance, as it did last year when it decided to veto the protocol of amendment of the TFA that made it a legal agreement under WTO. It is learnt the government has decided to not ratify the pact, as there has been no progress in negotiations on a permanent solution on food security for stockholding purposes.

Besides, India was also miffed with the fact that there had been no positive discussion on other issues of the Doha round, the most important being a ‘substantial reduction’ in the overall trade distorting subsidies (OTDS) of developed countries in their farm sector, officials told Business Standard.

At a meeting of the WTO’s General Council on Tuesday, director general Roberto Azevêdo said it remains very unlikely that a clearly defined work programme on the remaining Doha issues could be agreed by the mandated deadline of July 31.

However, he said that this did not in any way mean that members could not reach a successful outcome at the 10th ministerial conference in Nairobi this December.

Legally, India cannot be taken to the WTO dispute settlement body for not ratifying the TFA. However, rich WTO members such as the US, the European Union, Canada and Australia want India to implement the TFA, which will boost seamless movement of goods, due to the sheer size of its market. Once ratified, the TFA will come into effect. However, according to WTO norms, for the TFA to come into force, two-thirds of the entire WTO membership must ratify the agreement by submitting its ‘instrument of acceptance’ to the multilateral trade body.

So far nine countries have ratified the deal. China and EU is expected to do it soon.

The TFA has to be ratified by the 10th ministerial.

The TFA seeks to relax customs rules, allowing seamless flow of goods across international borders. Once implemented, it is expected to infuse $1 trillion into the global economy and add 21 million jobs, according to Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development estimates.

On a permanent solution for the food stockpiling programme, India believes developed countries aren’t working cohesively towards changing the reference price from 1986-88 for calculating farm subsidies. The deadline to find a permanent solution, which entails offering those subsidies to farmers who are otherwise prohibited under global trading rules, is December 31. If this deadline isn’t met, countries that run food stockpiling programmes can continue using the ‘peace clause’, which allows them to keep giving subsidies to poor and marginal farmers. India follows the mechanism of minimum support price (MSP).

Meanwhile, the US and a couple of other developed countries have raised questions with the ministry of commerce and industry on the methodology followed and the quantum of MSP given to farmers.

Additionally, India wants a clear work programme on all the pending issues of the Doha round, which started in 2001, such as non-agriculture market access and a reduction in OTDS at the ministerial meeting, the WTO’s highest decision-making body, scheduled for December 15-18.

In a written reply to the Rajya Sabha last week, Commerce and Industry Minister Nirmala Sitharaman said, “India is working with WTO members to ensure a permanent solution at the earliest.”

Business Standard Limited (India) 

WTO confirms Ukraine`s extra import duty complies with WTO regulations

28 July 2015

Unian

The General Council of the World Trade Organization (WTO) has confirmed that an additional import duty imposed by Ukraine complies with the requirements of WTO agreements, according to Deputy Minister of Economic Development and Trade, Trade Representative of Ukraine Natalia Mykolska, Interfax Ukraine reported.

”The committee report on the balance of payments with respect to consultations with Ukraine on additional import duties has been approved by the WTO General Council. The decision of the WTO General Council confirmed the compliance of the additional import duty with the requirements of WTO agreements,” Mykolska tweeted, according to Interfax Ukraine,

The Ministry of Economic Development and Trade is completing the analysis of the additional import duty effect on the economy, in particular production and exports, and would submit the results to the Cabinet for consideration, according to the official. 

3484613.html

SPINTREX HOLDINGS Ltd. (UNIAN) 

Kenya ready to host WTO ministerial conference


28 July 2015

PANAPRESS - Pan African News Agency

Nairobi, Kenya (PANA) - Kenya's Foreign Affairs and International Trade Cabinet Secretary Amina Mohamed has said that necessary arrangements are in place and Kenya is ready to host the 10th World Trade Organization (WTO) Ministerial Conference in December 2015.

According to a press release issued by the Foreign ministry's press division Tuesday, the conference, to be held in Nairobi, will draw over 7,000 participants including civil society representatives and the media. WTO has a membership of 162 countries.

Speaking Tuesday in Geneva during the information session on the logistical preparations for the WTO conference, Amb. Mohamed updated the Permanent Representatives of WTO member states on the state of play in logistical preparations for the Conference.

She informed them that a national preparatory committee was overseeing the preparations.

We are working closely with the technical team of the WTO Secretariat which has conducted a number of visits to Nairobi and expressed satisfaction on the status of preparations so far,” she added.

At the same time, Mohamed urged the teams engaged on trade negotiations in Geneva to speed up development of a work programme for trade liberalization ahead of the 10th WTO Ministerial Conference.

Panafrican News Agency

Amina Urges Trade Liberalisation Plan Ahead of WTO Meet

by Kennedy Kangethe 

28 July 2015

All Africa

Nairobi, Jul 28, 2015 (Capital FM/All Africa Global Media via COMTEX) -- Foreign Affairs Cabinet Secretary Amina Mohamed has urged teams engaged on trade negotiations in Geneva to speed up development of a work programme for trade liberalization ahead of the 10th World Trade Organisation (WTO) December Ministerial Conference in Nairobi.

Noting that the Nairobi meeting is only four months away, she expressed concern that limited progress has been made in the preparation of a detailed work programme on freeing up trade, also dubbed as the Post-Bali Work Programme.

The programme refers to development of a roadmap for implementation of agreements on opening of global trade that were reached in Bali, Indonesia, during the 9th WTO Ministerial Conference.

"Not much time is left. We must, therefore, speed up and conclude negotiations on a Post-Bali Work Programme that reduces trade barriers and fuels the growth of the global economy ahead of the MC10 in Nairobi," said Mohamed.

She stressed that the work programme must strike the right balance between the core areas of negotiations especially agriculture and services as well as the special needs and interests of the developing and Least Developed Countries (LDCs).

She said that all the necessary arrangements are in place and Kenya is ready to host the conference that will attract about 7,000 participants among them delegates, civil society representatives and the media.

The Cabinet Secretary was speaking in Geneva during the Information Session on the logistical preparations for the conference.

During the Session, She updated the Permanent Representatives of WTO member states on the state of play in logistical preparations for the Conference.

She informed the representatives that a National Preparatory Committee, comprising 10 sub-committees, was overseeing the preparatory process and all requisite arrangements are in place and on schedule.

"The 10 sub-committees are dedicated to specific aspects of the Conference namely conference facilities, security, registration and accreditation, hotel accommodation and hospitality, publicity and communication as well as transport, protocol and liaison," said the Cabinet Secretary.

"We are working closely with the technical team of the WTO Secretariat which has conducted a number of visits to Nairobi and expressed satisfaction on the status of preparations so far," she added.

The WTO has a membership of 162 countries from across the world. Kenya won the bid to host the conference in December last year. 

All Africa Global Media

Pacific trade talks in final stretch as ministers meet in Hawaii

Kayo Mimizuka Kayo Mimizuka 

29 July 2015

Kyodo News

LAHAINA, Hawaii, July 28 -- Talks on a multilateral Pacific free trade agreement are entering the final stretch with trade ministers from 12 countries set to gather Tuesday for make-or-break bargaining toward creating the world's largest free trade zone in decades.

The four-day meeting on the U.S.-led Trans-Pacific Partnership initiative on the Hawaiian island of Maui is viewed as the final opportunity to cut a deal by the end of the year. No further negotiating session is on the horizon given tight political schedules in the United States and some other member economies.

Expectations for striking a deal in Hawaii rose higher than ever after U.S. President Barack Obama late last month signed the Trade Promotion Authority bill into a law that gives him the power to negotiate international trade deals with limited interference from lawmakers.

Japanese Economic and Fiscal Policy Minister Akira Amari, who is in charge of the country's TPP talks, told reporters before the start of the meeting Tuesday that Japan aims to "contribute to concluding a deal that will be win-win for all negotiating parties."

As an agreement takes shape, opponents of the controversial trade pact are intensifying their criticism, saying the TPP would push up medical costs, jeopardize the farming sector and food safety, and adversely affect people's lives for the sake of big corporations' profits.

"Whether or not any real deal is made, a 'breakthrough' likely will be announced. But for whom would it be a breakthrough?" Public Citizen, a U.S.-based nonprofit organization, said in a statement.

"For many people in the TPP countries, a deal based on the current text would not be good news."

Negotiation sources said the talks are in the end-game after chief negotiators thrashed out outstanding problems in the run-up to the ministerial meeting, but some thorny issues still remain to be resolved by the ministers. The course of the negotiations will not become clear "until the last five minutes," said one Japanese source.

Bilateral talks between the United States and Japan, the two largest economies accounting for some 80 percent of gross domestic product in the TPP framework, are seen as being very close to settling differences, but they still have the difficult task of finalizing a bilateral agreement on opening up the Japanese rice market and abolishing U.S. tariffs on autos.

Prior to the plenary ministerial session on Tuesday, Amari met U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman. According to people familiar with Japan-U.S. talks, Washington is likely to be considering scrapping its tariffs on many auto-related products as soon as a pact takes effect, in response to Tokyo's calls for expanding imports of Japanese automotive parts.

But Amari said it would be "difficult" to settle all the remaining issues between the United States on Tuesday, and he plans to meet with Froman "several times" during the Hawaii session.

People involved in the TPP are also concerned over a delay in talks on the patent protection period for biological medicines that could affect the availability of generic medicines, an issue being discussed in the intellectual property chapter.

The United States, which had insisted the period be set at 12 years to protect profits of pharmaceutical firms, is now considering a compromise plan of setting the period at shorter than 10 years, according to the sources. However, it remains uncertain if Australia, which has proposed a much-shorter five-year monopoly period to promote generic medicines production, would accept the new U.S. offer.

Canada's resistance to liberalizing its protected dairy and poultry markets also remains one of the biggest sticking points, although Ottawa has been showing more flexibility in Hawaii, the sources added.

The trade ministers are expected to hold a joint press conference on Friday afternoon.

The TPP, which would cover some 40 percent of global output, involves Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore, the United States and Vietnam.

Kyodo News

Key facts about the TPP trade alliance

29 July 2015

Agence France Presse

The Obama administration's ambitious Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) proposal would create a 12-country trade bloc covering about 40 percent of the global economy and bringing potentially far-reaching economic change to its members.

But secretive talks to iron out a deal have dragged on for years as negotiators struggle to bring divergent national economic priorities in line across the vast and varied TPP region.

The following is a look at the stakes and stumbling blocks faced by the pact's potential signatories.

The TPP is the main economic component of the Obama administration's strategic shift of attention toward the vibrant Asia-Pacific, particularly as concerns rise over China's growing economic and diplomatic clout.

Washington says the TPP will help enshrine global trading rules that safeguard labour rights, environmental protection, an unfettered Internet, and a level playing field for domestic and foreign enterprises operating in the same market -- goals not always shared by Beijing.

China's proposal for an Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB), which could challenge Western-controlled multilateral institutions like the IMF that currently set trading rules, has added a sense of urgency.

But some critics say the process is being driven by US corporations seeking to crack open markets overseas, while they continue to insist on measures that protect their interests such as longer patent protections, making generic drugs more expensive, and giving foreign investors more legal leverage overseas.

Due to the political sensitivity of the trade issues under discussion, talks have been smothered in secrecy, further fuelling suspicions.

The participation of economic powerhouse Japan is critical to the TPP's success, but Tokyo's reluctance to throw open its cosseted agriculture and automotive markets has been a major snag.

But Prime Minister Shinzo Abe is seeking to drag Japan out of more than two decades of economic stagnation, and joining the TPP could help him to force through structural reforms he desires.

Membership also would allow Japan to emphasise its trading clout in the face of rival China's march toward becoming the world's biggest economy, while further cementing Tokyo's alliance with Washington.

Canberra says the TPP will offer expanded markets abroad for the country's huge exports of agriculture and mining products, while also benefitting the services, e-commerce, and other sectors.

But critics fear it could water down Australia's stringent food-safety and quarantine standards, and that intellectual-property changes could raise medical costs.

Australia is also among prospective TPP nations who are concerned that investor-protection mechanisms under the pact could allow foreign companies to challenge domestic regulations.

The government's resistance to opening up Canada's heavily protected poultry and dairy sectors has emerged as a potential deal-breaker, particularly with national elections scheduled for October 19.

Asked whether Ottawa -- which already is line with major trading partners like the US through other agreements -- could opt out of the TPP, a Department of Foreign Affairs, Trade and Development spokesperson told AFP the government "will only sign an agreement that is in the best interests of Canadians".

The country is a major world exporter of dairy and other agricultural products, and the government touts studies saying the TPP could boost overall export receipts by US$4.1 billion annually by 2025, a 6.8 percent increase.

But the government insists it will not agree to a deal that harms its farmers.

The TPP secrecy also has fuelled warnings that an accord could undermine New Zealand's sovereignty.

Dependent on exports of oil, gas, palm oil and rubber, Malaysia's government has welcomed the TPP as an opportunity to penetrate further markets.

But negotiations have snagged on fears that the pact would challenge Malaysia's politically sensitive system of preferential treatment for its ethnic Malay majority in areas such as government procurement contracts.

Also, concerns are high that drug prices could rise in a country where 80 percent of government-supplied medicines are low-cost generics.

One of the world's richest and most open economies, trade-reliant Singapore is a staunch TPP proponent.

It already has signed a slew of regional and bilateral free-trade agreements, and the government credits them with helping fuel the city-state's highly successful economic growth, predicting the same for the TPP.

Vietnam's developing economy could be a big TPP winner, analysts say, with the government expecting a boost in foreign investment and for key exports like clothing and rice.

It also is seen as a potential spark for much-needed domestic economic reform, and as a way of cementing relations with Washington at a time of deep concern in Vietnam over the assertiveness of its northern neighbour China.

But a requirement that signatories use yarn from TPP member-countries in textile manufacturing complicates negotiations. Most textile materials now used in the country's economically vital clothing manufacturing market originate from China, a cheap producer.

The TPP is viewed in Mexico as a way to secure the country's interests in the all-important US market, while opening the door to Asia -- a largely unexplored frontier considered critical to Mexico's future growth.

The agricultural and livestock sectors, however, are strongly against any deal that could give countries like Australia or New Zealand a leg up in Mexico.

The two South American neighbours already have free-trade agreements with nearly all of their TPP partners, and thus have little to lose or gain directly.

But Peru and Chile, which also have free-trade deals with major trading partner China, continue to face significant non-tariff barriers in the Chinese market, and TPP membership is considered a way of joining a broader effort to challenge those barriers.

Tiny oil-rich Brunei has joined a range of trade alliances as a way of helping to diversify a one-dimensional economy heavily dependent on energy exports.

But US lawmakers and activists have called for the Islamic sultanate's exclusion from the pact over its adoption of a harsh sharia penal code.

burs-skc/dma/as. Agence France-Presse

Dairy trade impasse holding up Pacific trade deal -NZ envoy

29 July 2015

Reuters News

By Krista Hughes 

LAHAINA, Hawaii, July 28 (Reuters) - The United States, Canada and Japan have to make concessions on dairy trade before a wider Pacific trade deal can be wrapped up, New Zealand's agricultural trade envoy said on Tuesday. 

Mike Petersen, a farmer who represents the interests of New Zealand agriculture, said the dairy part of the Trans-Pacific Partnership negotiations was at an impasse. 

During four days of meetings in Hawaii this week, TPP ministers hope to wrap up the 12-nation deal, which would cut tariffs and set common ground on issues such as environmental standards and intellectual property protections for 40 percent of the world economy. 

"It's like a set of dominos, we are waiting for one country to effectively make a move and that will trigger a whole lot of other things for other countries in the talks," he told Reuters. 

"The level of ambition for the dairy part of these talks is just not where we need it to be, and so we need some real movement over the next few days if we are going to get these talks concluded. 

"We have got to see movement with Canada and the USA, Japan and New Zealand and Australia in particular, that's where the dairy things lie," Petersen said. 

One TPP diplomat said countries were closing out issues of less importance, which boded well for reaching agreement on more contested issues this week. 

While New Zealand and Australia are pressing for more dairy exports to U.S., Canadian and Japanese markets, U.S. milk producers are eyeing more access to Japan and Canada to make up for any extra imports into the United States from countries such as New Zealand. 

Jaime Castaneda, senior vice president at the U.S. Dairy Export Council, said the U.S. industry was prepared to match other countries in cutting tariffs. 

"Once Canada makes a credible market access offer, all the other pieces will fall into place," he said. 

According to material prepared for the meetings by the Dairy Companies Association of New Zealand, the European Union has 30 percent of global dairy trade, New Zealand has 17 percent and the United States 13 percent, with the U.S. share having tripled since 2003. 

Within the 12-nation TPP trade network, the United States has nearly half the dairy market, compared with New Zealand at 30 percent. The majority of New Zealand dairy farmers will not break even this year, the presentation said. Thomson Reuters (Markets) LLC

Wine, chicken tariffs to be lifted / Several stages for elimination eyed under TPP accord


29 July 2015

The Japan News

The government plans to abolish tariffs for imported wine, chicken and some other items in stages over several years under the Trans-Pacific Partnership free trade framework, it has been learned.

Japan has been in working-level bilateral talks over tariffs with 11 other TPP participating countries in Hawaii, where chief negotiators from the countries have also begun talks.

In bilateral talks with the United States, Australia and other agricultural exporters, Japan is now in final negotiations to do away with tariffs on wine in stages over five to seven years, according to sources.

Currently, tariffs on wine are set at either 15 percent of the price or 125 yen per liter, whichever is lower. Abolition of the duty would give consumers greater benefits when buying inexpensive wine.

Japan has already agreed to gradually abolish tariffs on wine from Australia and Chile under economic partnership agreements it has with those two TPP countries. If the TPP participants reach a broader deal, the same would apply to wine imported from the United States, New Zealand and other countries as well.

With chicken, tariffs vary depending on the parts or whether they come refrigerated or frozen. For example, for thigh meat, the tariff is set at 8.5 percent. Japan is in final negotiations to do away with tariffs for most parts over several years in stages, according to the sources.

Benefits for consumers

Under the TPP negotiations, pork sausages, liquid egg and salt are also among the items considered for abolishing tariffs. Japanese consumers will most likely enjoy the benefits of the free trade framework.

With wine, the abolition of tariffs would have a greater effect on inexpensive products, according to an importer of California wine in Tokyo.

"We can expect products sold at 1,000 yen or cheaper to see bigger price cuts as the duty accounts for more of their prices [than those for higher products]," said the importer.

Tariff abolition would have limited benefits for higher-end products. For example, wine sold at 10,000 yen per liter would see its price cut by just 125 yen.

With regard to chicken, cheap frozen products are imported in great quantity from Brazil, mainly for commercial use. If tariffs are cut for chicken produced in the United States, another major exporter to Japan, retail prices could go down as a result of fierce competition between the two exporters.

The United States is also the largest exporter of liquid egg to Japan, shipping 6,000 tons, worth roughly 1.8 billion yen, in 2014. If the tariffs are abolished, it would help domestic producers of bread and confectioneries cut material costs and likely have favorable effects on retail prices.

The government will promote branding of Japanese wine as a countermeasure to the negative effects the tariff abolition could inflict on domestic wineries. On the other hand, the government believes domestic poultry farmers would not be greatly affected as use for domestic and imported products vary and the price range differs.

In Hawaii, bilateral talks at the working level are being rushed to finalize their agreements, as a broader agreement under the TPP framework can come only after each of the 12 participants wraps up negotiations with their 11 counterparts.

However, Japan is expected to leave talks over tariffs on rice and auto parts unfinished at the working level. The government is protective in these areas and TPP minister Akira Amari aims to reach deals at his level with the United States, Australia and Canada on the sidelines of the ministerial talks that were to kick off Tuesday.

The Yomiuri Shimbun| 



Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.
