Singapore Ratifies WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement
World Bank cuts forecast for growth
China Responds To U.S. Bird Flu Incidents With Blanket Poultry Ban
China Ministry: Abolished Rare Earth Export Quota Due to WTO Decision
The Geopolitics of 17 Very Obscure Minerals
U.S. Tells WTO of Lithuanian Meat Import Proposal, Raising Hopes of EU Officials
EU gives member states power to block GM crops
Angola to impose quota on food, drink imports in 2015
Public backlash threatens EU trade deal with the US
US oil production to rise
Japan, U.S. resume bilateral TPP talks in Tokyo
WTO official in Taiwan to discuss multilateral trade issues
 
Singapore Ratifies WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement
WTO Reporter, January 14, 2015

Jan. 13 –Singapore submitted its instrument of acceptance to adopt the World Trade Organization's Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA), the body's first multilateral accord in 20 years.
 
The TFA aims to simplify customs procedures by streamlining customs formalities and issuing advanced custom duties rulings that proponents estimate will provide a $1 trillion boost to the global economy.
 
Singapore joins Hong Kong, which became the first WTO member to ratify the TFA in December. After two-thirds of the WTO members submit their instruments of acceptance, the TFA will be ratified and enter into force.
 
Although members would like to see full TFA ratification before the end of 2015, U.S. and European Union officials previously said it could take up to five years to reach the two-thirds threshold.
 
 
World Bank cuts forecast for growth
Ferdinando Giugliano, Economics Correspondent
Financial Times
January 13, 2015 9:02 pm
 
The World Bank has cut its forecast for global growth, warning that the world economy remained overly reliant on the “single engine” of the US recovery.

The Bank said it expected lower oil prices to provide a boost to global activity. But it warned several headwinds would mitigate the effect of the falling cost of crude. These include weak confidence among consumers and businesses and the inability of big central banks to cut interest rates below their record-low levels to boost inflation expectations.
 
“The global economy is running on a single engine,” said Kaushik Basu, chief economist at the World Bank. “It is only the US economy that is forging ahead in a global economy with so much uncertainty. We need several engines,” he added.

In its twice-yearly Global Economic Prospects, the World Bank forecasts the world economy will expand by 3 per cent this year and by 3.3 per cent in 2016. In June the Bank’s economists had predicted global growth this year and next to be 3.4 per cent and 3.5 per cent respectively. 
 
The Bank lifted its forecasts for growth in the US this year from 3 per cent to 3.2 per cent, while slashing those for the eurozone from 1.8 per cent to 1.1 per cent. The UK is expected to grow by 2.9 per cent in 2015.

Middle-income countries were hit by a raft of downgrades, with Russia now expected to contract by 2.9 per cent instead of growing by 1.5 per cent. South Asia provided a rare bright spot, with forecasts for 2015 lifted by 0.2 percentage points to 6.1 per cent.

The Washington-based institution said it expected the 60 per cent drop in the cost of crude since June to lift growth by around 0.5 per cent over the medium run. But the Bank struck a downbeat tone on the prospects for the world economy. “Risks to this slow-moving global recovery are significant and tilted to the downside,” the report said. 
 
The most significant threat to the recovery listed by the Bank is the normalisation of monetary policy in the US. Last week, minutes from the December meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee showed the US Federal Reserve could raise interest rates from 0-0.25 per cent as soon as April. The Bank fears this could lead to a sudden tightening of financial conditions for governments and corporates in emerging markets, which have enjoyed low borrowing costs.

However, the Bank does not expect a repeat of the turmoil that hit developing countries in the summer of 2013, when the Fed first revealed it might pull back from its programme of quantitative easing. “The adjustment in developing countries to financial tightening is expected to proceed more smoothly,” the report said.

Mr Basu said he did not think monetary tightening in the US would force central banks in emerging markets into sudden interest rates hikes. “Central banks in emerging markets will have to react but the reaction will not have to be any more muscular than one-and-a-half year ago,” he explained. 
 
Last October, the International Monetary Fund lowered its forecasts for global growth, saying the world economy would expand by 3.3 per cent in 2015 instead of 3.4 per cent. The IMF’s latest batch of economic forecasts will be released next week in an update to its twice-yearly World Economic Outlook.
 
 
China Responds To U.S. Bird Flu Incidents With Blanket Poultry Ban 
World Trade Online
Posted: January 13, 2015 
China, a major market for U.S. poultry exporters, has become the latest in a string of countries to ban U.S. poultry products due to an outbreak of high-pathogenic avian influenza in Oregon and Washington state.
 
China's Ministry of Agriculture and General Administration for Quality Supervision, Inspection and Quarantine imposed the restriction effective Jan. 8, according to a Jan. 12 press release from the USA Poultry & Egg Export Council (USAPEEC). The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) on Jan. 12 also added China to the list of countries to which U.S. poultry producers are no longer eligible to ship as a result of the outbreak.
 
USAPEEC President Jim Sumner said in the statement that "there's absolutely no justification for China to take such a drastic action," and emphasized that the outbreaks in Oregon and Washington were "isolated and remote incidents
 
are hundreds if not thousands of miles away from major poultry and egg production areas."
 
"Most all of our other trading partners have taken some sort of regionalized approach, and have limited their restrictions to the state or, in some cases, to the county," he said. "We would have expected China to do the same."
 
Sumner also highlighted that the ban includes breeding stock, which he said means the Chinese industry will not be able to "replenish and maintain its production."
 
According to a USDA spokeswoman, China banned U.S. poultry due to the avian flu findings. She added that "USDA is actively working with the poultry industry, trade associations, and others to mitigate the impact on exports."
 
However, the spokeswoman stopped short of saying if USDA is engaging directly with Chinese authorities to convince Beijing to roll back the ban. USDA has been engaging with most of the countries imposing blanket restrictions; a poultry industry source said both Washington and Beijing will likely begin talking within the next month, but that discussions might not have begun yet because of how recently China imposed the ban.
 
According to USDA data, U.S. poultry exports to China, excluding eggs, totaled $286.6 million during January-November 2014, a decrease of 29 percent from $402.9 million during the same time period in 2013. That made it the fourth-largest export market for U.S. poultry behind Mexico, Canada and Hong Kong. Full year 2014 data is not yet available.
 
A poultry industry source noted that U.S. exporters are already wrestling with duties that China put in place last year to comply with a World Trade Organization ruling that faulted the methodology Beijing had used to calculate antidumping and countervailing duties on U.S. broiler chicken. The Office of the U.S. Trade Representative in an annual report released last month said that it was "evaluating its next steps to take in this dispute" after China had re-calculated those duties to comply with the ruling; the U.S. in July 2014 rejected China's claim that the new duties fell into compliance.
 
USDA did not immediate return an request for comment on whether China's actions would have any bearing on exports to Hong Kong as well. Hong Kong separately issued more limited restrictions on imports from Douglas County, Ore. and Benton County, Wash. The U.S. poultry industry source noted, however, that much of the poultry currently shipped from the U.S. to Hong Kong is ultimately bound for consumers in mainland China.
 
More than 30 countries so far have placed some sort of restriction on imports of U.S. poultry, with most countries singling out imports from the affected states or counties within those states. China joins South Korea, Thailand, Russia and the European Union among countries placing blanket bans on all U.S. poultry
 
 
China Ministry: Abolished Rare Earth Export Quota Due to WTO Decision 
By Chuin-Wei Yap 
13 January 2015
Dow Jones Newswires Chinese (English)
 
BEIJING--China abolished a quota system limiting its exports of rare-earth minerals due to a decision by the World Trade Organization that ruled against the policy, the commerce ministry said Tuesday.

"The government has had to take a full range of economic means to effectively manage and bring order to rare earth resources," the ministry said in a statement. "The abolition of the quota is to coordinate domestic and international markets."

The Wall Street Journal reported last week that China had abolished the quota.

The U.S., European Union and Japan in 2012 complained to the WTO that China was using the quota in violation of WTO rules. Beijing officially lost the dispute in 2013 over the 17 metals, which are used in high-technology industries such as smartphones and missile systems.

"As a WTO member, China has always respected WTO rules and ways to strengthen the protection of resources and the environment to achieve sustainable development," the ministry said.

 
The Geopolitics of 17 Very Obscure Minerals
Bloomberg, Jan 12, 2015 6:25 AM EST
By Adam Minter 
 
Rare earths aren't the world's sexiest commodity. The 17 elements are notoriously difficult to extract from the ground and have brazenly obscure names. (Don't make the classic rookie mistake of confusing yttrium with ytterbium.) But what they lack in branding, they certainly make up for in utility and ubiquity: they’re essential to products as wide-ranging as wind turbines, smartphones, high-tech weapon systems, and even your fishing reel.

Although the United States was once a major supplier of rare earths, China has been the world’s primary source since the 1990s. And that makes them more than just a commodity; they're a test of how China's vast economic and diplomatic ambitions bear on one another. As recent events demonstrate, they're also a window into understanding that, even in the face of obstacles, China won't give them up so easily.

As recently as 2013 China provided 86 percent of the world's rare earths supply and, especially over the past several years, Chinese officials have made no secret of their plans to use their accumulating monopoly power.

In 2009, a senior official in Inner Mongolia, home to China’s most productive rare earth mine, explained to Xinhua, the state newswire, that export controls on rare earths (dating back to 1999) were designed “to attract more Chinese and foreign investors into the region.” This was a message to companies the world over: if you want to ensure continued access to rare earths, you’d better relocate your factory to China.

Then, in September 2010, China abruptly blocked export of rare earths to Japan after Japan detained one of its fishermen caught in waters claimed by both countries. Only after he was released did the flow of rare earths start again. But for Japan and the United States, two of its biggest and most vulnerable rare earth customers -- and two of China’s biggest geopolitical rivals -- the implication was clear: when it comes to rare earths, China saw no reason to separate economic goals from political ones. In the words of then-Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, China’s application of political pressure against Japan served as a "wake up call." 
 
In one sense, that call came too late. By 2011, several foreign users of rare earths had already relocated production to China, according to the New York Times. Meanwhile, fear and speculation served to drive up prices. For example, cerium -- a rare earth often used in aluminum and iron alloys -- rocketed from $6 per pound in 2008 to a record of $77 per pound in August 2011.

But the demand -- both political and economic -- for alternative sources of rare earths soon began to shift the market. Alternatives to Chinese rare earths quickly began cropping up, whether via recycling, new mines, alternative materials, or even smuggling. In July 2010, the Colorado-based Molycorp raised $393.8 million in an IPO, the proceeds of which went to re-opening a rare earths mine it had closed the previous decade. For its part, Japan set a goal of securing 60 percent of its rare earth supply from outside of China by 2018. 
 
By mid-2011, the combination of conservation, new mine, and alternative materials had produced a price crash from which the rare earth market has yet to recover completely. And this has forced China to change course: on New Years’ Day Beijing lifted the 15 year-old export controls on rare earth minerals, in accord with the WTO ruling. 
 
But it would be naive to expect China to give up its mercantile aspirations without a fight.  Indeed, rescinding the export quotas wasn't a very significant concession in the first place: demand has fallen off so significantly that the quotas had ceased to be an issue. During the first 11 months of 2014, for example, China exported 24,866 metric tons of rare earths -- significantly less than the full-year quota of 30,611 tons. Thus, when the WTO ruled in March 2013 that China’s export controls on rare earths and other industrial metals violated its rules, China didn’t so much as complain.

Moreover, rather than abandoning its plans for rare earths, China has already moved onto its Plan B: consolidating the industry into two state-owned conglomerates. The thought seems to be that consolidation will address one of the main problems in China’s domestic market: the proliferation of private mines and wildcatters who can and do supply smugglers.

This isn't to suggest that the West should be lamenting the disappearance of these smaller mines -- they tend to be especially destructive to the environment. But it seems pretty obvious that China's decision-making in this case is motivated less by environmental concerns than a desire to maintain its monopoly power. “The move will help the country maintain its pricing power for rare earth products,” reported Caixin, a Chinese business magazine in August.

It’s an open question whether Chinese industrial policy can maintain the country’s rare earths primacy -- and a return to high rare earth prices -- via consolidation. But, if their goal is to maintain the country’s geopolitical leverage, they probably don’t need to do anything at all. As the Wall Street Journal noted in December 2013, even if China doesn’t dominate rare earth mining, it continues to dominate rare earth processing (the dirty, dangerous, energy-intensive and expensive process of turning rare earths into something useful).

Even Molycorp, the company that was meant to be America’s great rare earths hope, sends some of its rare earths to China for processing, and that’s unlikely to change. The company, whose shares reached $77.54 in 2011, at the rare earth market peak, closed at $.60 on Friday. Unless there’s a dramatic change in rare earth prices in the near term, there’s no guarantee that Molycorp will even have enough cash to make it to the end of the year, much less build an expensive processing operation. Either way, China’s new rare earth conglomerates -- which enjoy state-backing to cover their losses -- seem likely to continue their dominance for years to come.
 
 
U.S. Tells WTO of Lithuanian Meat Import Proposal, Raising Hopes of EU Officials
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, January 14, 2015
 
Jan. 13 –The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) is proposing to add Lithuania to the list of countries it considers eligible to import meat products to the U.S., according to World Trade Organization documents released Jan. 13.
 
The proposal would permit imports of meat from cattle, sheep, swine and goats slaughtered in Lithuania and processed in certified Lithuanian establishments, according to a recent USDA notice.
 
The USDA's Food Safety and Inspection Service (FSIS) said that its review of Lithuania's laws, regulations and inspection implementation shows “that its meat inspection system requirements are equivalent to the [U.S.'s] Federal Meat Inspection Act and its implementing regulations,” according to the notice.
 
Stakeholders are permitted to comment on the Lithuanian meat proposal until Feb. 17.
 
Broader EU Prospects?
 
The proposal could renew prospects for wider approval of other European Union meat exports to the U.S. following the USDA's recent decision to permit Irish beef imports.
 
The U.S. said that Ireland had implemented an adequate beef slaughter inspection system to meet U.S. food safety standards, according to a Jan. 5 letter from FSIS.
 
EU health and trade officials hailed the decision and urged the U.S. to roll back its ban on meat exports from other EU nations.
 
EU meat exports to the U.S. have been restricted since 1998 due to health concerns stemming from incidents of bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE, or mad cow disease) found in EU livestock.
 
 
EU gives member states power to block GM crops
Christian Oliver in Brussels
Financial Times 
January 13, 2015 6:25 pm
 
The EU has sought to resolve years of acrimony over the status of genetically modified crops by giving each of its 28 member states the final say over whether they can be grown within their borders.

While GM crops are common in America and Asia, they remain divisive in Europe. Brussels has repeatedly insisted that US companies such as Monsanto will not be able to use a transatlantic trade deal under negotiation with Washington to push Europe to buy more GM crops. 
 
At the European Parliament in Strasbourg on Tuesday, lawmakers voted that each national government should be allowed to ban the planting of GM crops, even if they had been declared safe by Brussels. This rare opt-out from Europe’s hallowed single market showed how intractable positions had become.

The measure was passed with a majority of 480 to 159. Activists and businesses remained split over whether the parliamentary compromise meant that the EU would soon be open to other biotech crops. At present, only one is in cultivated: a variety of GM maize developed by Monsanto.

Green lawmakers voted against the measure, arguing that Europe would indeed now turn to more bio-engineered crops. Some also predicted that food safety authorities in Brussels would be more inclined to approve pending GM licences because of the safety net offered by individual countries being able to ban them.

“I believe what this will mean in reality for the UK is more GMOs not fewer,” said Keith Taylor, a Green lawmaker. “This is because our pro-GM government are now able to give the go-ahead to more authorisations.”

Britain’s stance towards GM agriculture lies in stark contrast to France and Germany, where attitudes are far more hostile. Surveys across the EU often find that consumers are worried that gene-spliced foods pose a risk to human health and can throw ecosystems out of kilter.

“Despite a majority of EU member states and citizens being consistently opposed to GMOs, the real purpose of this new scheme is to make it easier to wave through EU authorisations of GM crops,” said Bart Staes, food safety spokesman for the Greens in the European Parliament.

However, many observers rejected any suggestion that the vote would suddenly open the floodgates.

Jeff Rowe from EuropaBio, the trade association representing bioindustries, called the EU’s move a “stop sign for innovation in Europe”. 
 
This is another nail in the coffin of genetically modified crop . . . this new law allows governments to shut the door on biotech crops in Europe
- Mute Schimpf, Friends of the Earth

“Member states will receive a licence to ban safe products which have been approved at European level, and they will be allowed to base these bans on non-scientific grounds,” he added.

EuropaBio called for all “23 safety-assessed products” waiting for approval by the European Commission to be approved without delay. 
 
Friends of the Earth, the environmental campaign group, also reckoned that the compromise would halt any advance of GM crops because of public opposition.

“This is another nail in the coffin of genetically modified crops,” said Mute Schimpf, the group’s food campaigner. “While not perfect, this new law allows governments to shut the door on biotech crops in Europe and shift farming in a more sustainable direction. The public has continually rejected GM foods.”
 
 
Angola to impose quota on food, drink imports in 2015 
 
LUANDA, Jan. 13 (Xinhua) -- Angola will impose a quota system on the imports of food, drinks, eggs and vegetables from the year 2015 as the country was now able to produce over 60 percent of the products, the official news agency Angop reported on Tuesday.

The imports would be gradually reduced and the quota would be jointly determined by executive decrees of the ministries of trade, finance, transport, industry, agriculture, fisheries and the national bank of Angola (BNA), according to recommendations presented by the first national seminar on import quotas implementation held on Monday in Luanda by the ministry of trade.

The participants believed that domestic production was a priority to diversify the country's oil-dependent economy and the import of the farming products should complement the home production deficit.

The seminar also recommended, under the national program to fight hunger and poverty, that trading companies shoulder greater social responsibility and save one percent of the quantities of food imported annually for strategic food reserve of the state.
 
 
Public backlash threatens EU trade deal with the US
Christian Oliver, Brussels
Financial Times
January 13, 2015 4:56 pm
 
The EU has been hit by a stinging public backlash against its landmark trade deal with the US, making it increasingly unlikely that the accord will be concluded this year. 
 
Brussels last year launched a public consultation to gauge popular sentiment about the most contentious part of the deal: clauses mapping out the rights of foreign investors to sue governments in international tribunals, bypassing national courts. 
 
The European Commission received almost 150,000 responses to its survey — more than 100 times more than any previous consultation on trade — and admitted on Tuesday that the majority of respondents expressed fears that the deal’s investment clauses would undermine national sovereignty. 
 
“The consultation clearly shows that there is huge scepticism against the [investment] instrument,” said Cecilia Malmström, the EU trade commissioner.

The 28 EU nations want to conclude the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership this year, finalising what would be the world’s biggest trade deal. 
 
But the so-called Investment State Dispute Settlement provisions are now the biggest political obstacle to a deal, with activists arguing that they could be used to undermine national safeguards on health, food and the environment. Opposition is particularly strong in Germany, the EU’s most powerful country.

Businesses argue that ISDS is vital to protecting investors against bias in national courts.

Of the replies, a large number were based on copy-and-paste templates circulated by non-governmental organisations campaigning against TTIP. However, trade officials in Brussels said they would not discount these submissions as they were still a sign of discontent. 
 
Ms Malmström vowed a “frank discussion” on how to proceed with ISDS with EU states, the European Parliament, businesses and NGOs. “The European Commission would never even consider an agreement which would lower our standards or limit our governments’ right to regulate,” she added. 
 
Keith Taylor, a European parliamentarian representing the UK’s Green party, said ISDS had to be dumped. “Investors should rely on domestic courts for redress, not set up special tribunals,” he said. 
 
However, ditching ISDS would be legally complex as Brussels has been mandated to negotiate it into the deal by the 28 national governments. There are also strong doubts about whether the US would support any deal without it. 
 
Instead, commission officials expect Ms Malmström to work towards a new type of ISDS framework that addresses the concerns, setting out clear rules on how international arbitrators would be appointed. 
 
While anti-Americanism is surging in Germany because of US espionage in the country, German companies have been active proponents of ISDS and the EU has 1,400 bilateral ISDS agreements. Rejecting ISDS completely would open up European countries to a charge of double standards in that they are seeking to deny US companies the same safeguards that their businesses enjoy. 
 
EU trade officials also say European businesses want to ensure ISDS remains in TTIP so that it is maintained as a standard feature for inclusion in any agreement with China.
 
 
US oil production to rise
Anjli Raval, Neil Hume and Robin Wigglesworth in London and Gregory Meyer in New York
Financial Times 
Last updated:January 13, 2015 6:48 pm
US oil production will increase both this year and next despite the 60 per cent slide in oil prices since mid-June and an Opec policy designed to rein in the North American shale boom, the US government said. 
 
The forecast came as a leading Opec producer said the cartel was sticking to its strategy of maintaining output and testing the mettle of high-cost producers around the world. 
 
The US Energy Department said output would rise by 600,000 barrels a day this year to 9.3m b/d and by 200,000 b/d to 9.5m b/d in 2016. 
 
FirstFT is our new essential daily email briefing of the best stories from across the web

The projected increase for this year is slightly lower than a previous a forecast in December, reflecting the pressure of lower crude prices on the US oil industry.

“Many oil companies have cut back on their exploration drilling in response to falling crude prices and will concentrate their drilling activities in established areas that already have productive wells,” the department said. 
 
The combination of technologies such as horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing, or “fracking”, has unlocked America’s vast shale resources and propelled US production to around 9m b/d.

The official estimates suggest the US shale industry has proved more resilient in the face of collapsing oil prices than initially feared. Although production will slow, officials said output next year will be at its highest level since 1970.

However some analysts are less optimistic, predicting a major pullback in investment which will lead to production declines by the end of this year. 
 
The slide in oil prices accelerated in November last year after Opec, the producers’ cartel, which pumps a third of the world’s oil, decided to keep output steady at 30m b/d, rather than cut its production to shore up prices.

Speaking at an energy conference in Abu Dhabi, Suhail bin Mohammed al-Mazroui, the oil minister for the United Arab Emirates — a leading Gulf producer — said the cartel would not change its strategy. 
 
“We have seen oversupply coming from shale oil and that needed to be corrected,” he said. 
 
Opec has shown no signs of capitulation despite poorer members of the cartel such as Venezuela voicing concern about low prices. Iranian president Hassan Rouhani said on Tuesday that Saudi Arabia and Kuwait would also suffer from the drop in oil prices.

So pessimistic are investors about the oil price that some have placed bets on US crude slumping to beyond $20 a barrel, a level last traded almost 13 years ago. 
 
The number of outstanding contracts that give the right to sell US benchmark West Texas Intermediate at this level by June, known as put options has swelled from almost zero at the start of the year to 13,129 lots, according to Nymex data. This is the equivalent of 13m barrels of oil.

The latest trades underscore the scale of the oil rout and the still murky outlook for the world’s staple industrial commodity. Not even at the height of the 2008-09 financial crisis — when much of the developed world was marred in recession — did US crude or its international counterpart Brent reach $30 a barrel. 
 
The appearance of these pessimistic wagers since the start of the year does not necessarily mean the market will reach those levels. But traders have said these bets are a low-risk, low-cost way to bet on further falls in prices that have already dropped by almost 60 per cent since mid-June. Each option costs just 7 cents. 
 
So far, these contracts are heavily “out-of-the-money”, in financial parlance. with current prices more than double the $20 strike price. But even if West Texas Intermediate oil does not fall to this level, these options can increase sharply in value if oil starts dipping closer to it.

ICE February Brent fell $1.54 to $45.90 in afternoon trading while Nymex February West Texas Intermediate declined 60 cents to $45.47 having briefly traded at parity with the international oil benchmark. Both markers are at the lowest since March 2009.

The price of Brent crude has fallen by more than 20 per cent since the start of the year, while WTI has dropped by 16 per cent, coming under further pressure as oil market watchers downwardly revised forecasts.
 
 
Japan, U.S. resume bilateral TPP talks in Tokyo 
Kyodo News
 
TOKYO, Jan. 14 -- Trade officials from Japan and the United States resumed talks Wednesday over bilateral outstanding issues related to market access for agricultural products and autos under a 12-country Pacific free trade initiative.

The fresh round of bilateral negotiations come after the Trans-Pacific Partnership countries failed to see major progress at their leaders' summit held in November in Beijing, with Japan and the United States, the largest economies in the framework, struggling to fill gaps over the contentious issues.

Japan's Economic and Fiscal Policy Minister Akira Amari said earlier this month he hopes to hold a ministerial meeting by early spring to cut a deal given the United States will enter campaign mode later this year toward the 2016 presidential election, adding that a bilateral agreement between Tokyo and Washington will be a "prerequisite" to that end.

John Cornyn, the No. 2 Republican in the U.S. Senate, said Tuesday U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman told lawmakers the TPP deal is "on a two-month trajectory," although the trade office said there is no set timeframe for the negotiations, according to Reuters.

The United States has insisted that Japan drastically open up its agricultural market, while Tokyo is seeking to exempt its key farm products -- rice, wheat, beef and pork, dairy and sugar -- from tariff abolition.

Japan's deputy chief negotiator Hiroshi Oe and Acting Deputy U.S. Trade Representative Wendy Cutler are expected to discuss issues including how to deal with Japanese tariffs on beef and pork, and safeguard measures Tokyo wants to introduce should imports of the products surge under the envisioned TPP.

The two sides are also at odds over U.S. tariffs on automotive parts and the elimination of nontariff barriers in the Japanese auto sector. Takeo Mori, Japanese ambassador in charge of economic diplomacy, will attend negotiations on auto trade.

The Japanese Foreign Ministry said it is unclear when the latest round of negotiations will wrap up.

The other 10 TPP negotiating members are Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Singapore, Peru and Vietnam.

 
WTO official in Taiwan to discuss multilateral trade issues 
 (By Tang Pei-chun and Elaine Hou) 
13 January 2015
Central News Agency English News
 
Taipei, Jan. 13 (CNA) A World Trade Organization (WTO) official responsible for accession matters is in Taiwan to discuss multilateral trade issues, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs said Tuesday.

Chiedu Osakwe, director of the WTO Accessions Division, is visiting Taiwan Jan. 12-16, during which he is scheduled to give talks at the Chung-Hua Institution for Economic Research, a local think tank, and National Taiwan University, according to John Lai, director-general of the Foreign Ministry's Department of International Cooperation and Economic Affairs.

Lai said at a regular press conference that he expects the visit by Osakwe of Nigeria will help Taiwan learn more about the system of multilateral trade.

Since Taiwan joined the international organization in 2002, the ministry has been making efforts to arrange for visits by WTO officials to Taiwan to increase mutual understanding, Lai said.
