The good, the bad and the ugly of the TPP 
China espera que el acuerdo del TPP impulse el crecimiento de Asia Pacífico; TPP COMERCIO 
Why China should join the TPP 
‘No dumping levy’ between provisional, final orders 
Kazakhstan economy: Kazakhstan poised to join WTO 
WTO Accession: New Horizons for the Food Industry Market at the WorldFood Kazakhstan 2015 Exhibition
Philippines formalizes push for MSMEs adoption by WTO
 
The good, the bad and the ugly of the TPP 
Alan Kohler
ByAlan Kohler, 
Business Spectator - Online
Alan Kohler
ByAlan Kohler, 
6 October 2015, 
In some ways the most important, and yet most controversial, aspect of the new era of negotiations is that they get done in secret.
As I drove around the south of France two weeks ago, I could see clearly for the first time why the Doha round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) failed, marking the end of history for the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation and GATT.
The landscape was beautifully adorned with sub-scale farms: a few acres of corn waving in the breeze here, a clutch of cows happily chewing grass there, a field of sunflowers basking in the sun, all charmingly divided by immovable stone fences draped in ancient moss.
None of these farms would have been viable, but all of them were intrinsic not just to the character of the Lot Valley, where I was, but to its existence. Without these uncompetitive farms lined by mossy stone fences, rural France itself would die.
It wasn’t the only reason GATT failed, but the special safety mechanism designed to protect the farmers of Europe and Japan was rejected by India and China. A compromise that would fudge the numbers was desperately proposed at the last minute by WTO President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Pascal Lamy but rejected by the US.
Thus began the era of bilateral and smaller multilateral trade agreements culminating in last night’s signing of the 12-nation Trans-Pacific Partnership, covering 40 per cent global economy, negotiations for which had already started when GATT finally failed.
The US joined in 2008 and it quickly became, and remains, at its core a bilateral deal between the US and Japan, with 10 other hangers-on, including Australia.
In essence Japanese Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Shinzo Abe has capitulated on the agricultural tariffs that caused the GATT stalemate for two reasons: global trade and Japan’s economy have both failed to recover so it’s clear that a simple rising economic tide is not going to save Japan, and both Japan and the US are keen to do something about China.
To get the TPP signed, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Shinzo Abe has had to take on Japan’s agricultural lobby, arguing that without structural reform Japan’s economy will struggle to grow.
How he won the argument, and therefore enabled the TPP to be signed last night, is that Japan’s economy contracted at an annual rate of 1.2 per cent in the second quarter of this year and will contract again in the third quarter.
So 25 years after its Great Crash, Japan has still failed to generate any growth and in fact has now slipped back into recession.
Like all trade deals, the TPP is primarily a political document, an attempt by the US and Japan to steal a march on China and to set up a Pacific rim economic zone that doesn’t include the world’s second largest economy (which also happens to sit on the Pacific rim).
But it’s also a template for future trade deals -- a successor to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO’s GATT that, in the end, was entirely too ambitious, attempting, as it did, to get 153 countries to agree. A dozen is doable.
But Japan’s desperation to get its economy out of the mire of long-term depression has enabled the US to write a lot of the rules, specifically US corporations.
They haven’t got it all their own way -- big pharma has to cop a reduction in the data lock-up for biologic drugs from 12 years to between five and eight years (the data from their trials is needed to create “biosimilars” -- generic drugs).
And at Australia’s insistence, tobacco and public health issues have been carved out of the Investor-State Dispute Settlement (ISDS) process that allows firms to sue governments over any regulatory changes that disadvantage them.
To that extent Australia has had a win with the TPP, although the final judgement will have to await the details of the agreement.
More broadly, the TPP establishes some rules for global commerce around labour, intellectual property and environmental standards, as well as tariffs on agriculture and manufacturing.
It means the pressure will now come on Europe and China to fall into line, on agricultural subsidies and intellectual property respectively.
Will they do it? Who knows. There’s a long way to go for this TPP to be ratified by each country’s legislature, let alone extending it to the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership currently being negotiated between the US and Europe, or any multilateral deals that include China.
In some ways the most important, and yet most controversial aspect, of the new era of negotiations is that they get done in secret.
GATT failed partly because the transparency of each stage of negotiations encouraged constant domestic lobbying by the losers, which eventually tipped the political balance against a deal.
The politicians have learnt the lesson: transparency is out, something the Productivity Commission in Australia has been loudly complaining about.
In July the PC chairman, Peter Harris, laid out an interesting and worthwhile proposal for assessing free trade agreements: an initial assessment by the PC of the issues before negotiations start, and then a second assessment once the deal has been agreed but before it is signed. Both of these would be published.
But there’s no sign that the Government is going to pick that idea up for the TPP: the process is likely to be more like the one with China -- here’s the deal, take it or leave it, following by closed-door negotiations with the ALP and Senate cross-benchers.
And leaving aside the matter of transparency, Peter Harris was less than enthusiastic about free trade deals in general: “it does a nation no good in the long run to add to the cost of doing business and employing Australians by making imported goods and services more expensive than they need to be; nor to congratulate ourselves on obtaining slightly more export access to another market in return for that.
“The transactions involved are complex. And they mix short-term export improvement in goods trade with long-term cost exposures across the economy. The net gains may be positive, but how would we know? Detailed analysis is simply not available.”
And that’s the problem with free trade agreements like the TPP: they are fundamentally political things, negotiated by politicians.
That inevitably makes the motives suspect to some extent because politics often puts the short term before the long term, and announcement effect ahead of reality.
 
 
China espera que el acuerdo del TPP impulse el crecimiento de Asia Pacífico; TPP COMERCIO 
Agencia EFE - Servicio Económico
6 October 2015 05:43, 
429 words, 
Pekín, 6 oct (EFECOM).- El Gobierno chino anunció hoy que espera que el consenso alcanzado para firmar el Acuerdo de Asociación Transpacífico (TPP), que es visto como un contrapeso al poder económico de China, pueda impulsar el crecimiento de la región.
China "está abierta a cualquier mecanismo que siga las normativas de la HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Organización Mundial del Comercio (OMC)", dice un comunicado publicado hoy por el ministerio de Comercio chino en respuesta al TPP, en el que la segunda economía mundial no está incluida.
En el texto, el organismo espera que el TPP y otros acuerdos similares puedan impulsar a los países de la región y "contribuyan al comercio, la inversión y el crecimiento económico de Asia Pacífico".
"El TPP es uno de los tratados de libre comercio claves para la región", destaca el ministerio, sin profundizar en el asunto.
Tras cinco años de negociaciones secretas coronados por varias jornadas maratonianas de negociación en Atlanta (EE.UU.), el lunes se llegó finalmente a un acuerdo para crear una zona libre de aranceles que representa alrededor del 40 por ciento del producto interior bruto (PIB) mundial.
Los países integrantes del TPP son Japón, EE.UU., Australia, Brunei, Canadá, Chile, Malasia, México, Nueva Zelanda, Perú, Singapur y Vietnam.
El acuerdo es visto como un contrapeso al poder económico de China, una visión que remarcó el presidente estadounidense, Barack Obama, al defender el acuerdo.
"Cuando más del 95 por ciento de nuestros potenciales clientes viven fuera de nuestras fronteras no podemos permitir que países como China escriban las reglas de la economía global", argumentó Obama el lunes.
El presidente estadounidense considera este acuerdo comercial clave para su legado al reforzar la vinculación de EE.UU. con la cuenca del Pacífico y dejar a China fuera del pacto.
China fue invitada a ser parte integral del acuerdo pero lo rechazó por las restricciones en sectores como el financiero.
No obstante, no se descarta que pueda participar en el tratado en el futuro, ya que hay voces que consideran clave que se involucre, como el primer ministro nipón, Shinzo Abe, que consideró hoy que una futura inclusión de China serviría para favorecer la estabilidad de la región.
De manera paralela a las negociaciones del TPP, China ha impulsado este último año el proceso para construir una Zona de Libre Comercio de Asia Pacífico entre las 21 economías del foro APEC de Asia Pacífico, un acuerdo que de firmarse -aún lejos de serlo- representaría el mayor tratado comercial del mundo. EFECOM
 
Why China should join the TPP 
PETER CAI
ByPeter Cai, 
Business Spectator - Online
ByPeter Cai, 
6 October 2015, 
877 words, 
Just as China was able to harness economic reforms to its HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO accession in the nineties, so joining the TPP could give a much-needed boost to the country's latest reform push.
Australia, the US, Japan and 9 other Pacific Rim countries have finally sealed the largest trade deal in more than two decades. The agreement is a huge diplomatic triumph for President Obama, who just weeks ago also signed a crucial nuclear deal with Iran.
The Trans-Pacific Partnership is more than a pact about jobs and investment; it is widely regarded as the economic arm of the Obama’s administration’s ‘pivot’ to Asia, which is aimed at containing China’s expanding influence in the region. Not surprisingly, China is not a party to the deal.
The deal has been sold as a 21st Century, comprehensive, high-standard trade deal, yet it excludes the world’s second largest economy, which is the largest trading partner for most of the signatories, including Australia. The big test for Beijing is how it should deal with the TPP challenge.
It could push ahead with its own regional trade agreement without the US such as an FTAAP. This could be described as the AIIB option -- when China is not happy with existing order it can choose to set-up an alternative shop. Beijing’s recent triumph in winning over friends and allies to join the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Asia Infrastructure Investment Bank, over Washington’s objections, could prompt it to take this path.
However, a better option is for China to join the TPP and fast. This will not be an easy option for Chinese policymakers. If Australians are concerned about some of the TPP provisions such as intellectual protection and investor-state dispute resolutions, one can only start to imagine the reservations in Beijing.
If China does not join the pact it will become marginalised in the new preferential trade area. Companies, including Chinese ones, will adjust their supply chains to take advantage of preferential access to TPP markets and especially the all-important US. It will accelerate the migration of low-cost manufacturing from China to new TPP signatories such as Vietnam.
According to an HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" economic model developed by Petri, Plummer and Zhai, China could lose $46 billion from not joining the TPP. However, should the country join the TPP -- along with South Korea, Indonesia, the Philippines and Thailand -- gains for China could be as much as $800bn by 2025. Though you have to always to take these forecast gains with a huge pitch of salt, it nevertheless shows the cost of abstaining.
However, the biggest reason for China to sign up to the TPP is not about becoming a part of preferential trade club but to give a shot in arm to the country’s slowing reform program. The overall goal of the TPP is to break new ground and establish the rules for trade in the new century. The deal will includes provisions such as enforceable labour standards, environmental protections and curbing the competitive advantages enjoyed by state-owned enterprises.
There is actually a great deal of overlap between the goals of the TPP and China’s own ambitious reform agenda unveiled two years ago. According to a comprehensive analysis by Caixin, a respected Chinese business publication, only 23 out of 113 reform areas are really making any progress and the rest are either stuck in the slow lane or not moving forward at all (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" China’s reform program moves into the slow lane, September 2).
What China needs now is to fast track its reform agenda. Judging by its progress so far, it is not moving fast enough, in fact, far from it. Some of the country’s most senior policymakers, such as the central bank governor and the finance minister, have warned about the dire consequences of not pushing ahead with reform (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" China's central bank governor beats the drum on reform, October 5) and (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" How China can avoid the middle income trap, May 5).
It is clear that the domestic impetus is not enough. What China needs is strong external pressure to break down the reform impasse and there is no better instrument for doing this than the TPP. Beijing was bold enough to sign up to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation back in 2000 against significant domestic opposition and many of the doomsday predictions didn’t become true. China’s bet paid off handsomely and it is now the world’s largest trading nation.
In a powerful editorial penned by reformer Hu Shuli, the editor in chief of Caixin, she HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" argued four years ago about the need for China to sign on to the TPP. “If China wants to ride the next wave of globalisation, it must break out of its reform fatigue and free itself from shackles of special interest groups. It should achieve TPP standards as soon as possible and proactively open itself more to the outside world.”
China’s accession to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO was a turning point in the country’s long march to become an economic superpower and the TPP could be the next milestone. However, judging by the slow pace at which reforms are progressing, one cannot be too optimistic. 
 
‘No dumping levy’ between provisional, final orders 
Krishnaprasad, 
Business Line (The Hindu)
Krishnaprasad, 
6 October 2015, 
460 words, 
English, 
Supreme Court rejects appeal by Bengaluru Customs Interpreting Indian anti-dumping laws in tune with international practices under HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO agreements, the Supreme Court has declared that anti-dumping duty cannot be levied during the interregnum between the expiry of the provisional anti-dumping duty and the imposition of final anti-dumping duty.
A Bench of the apex court comprising Justice AK Sikri and Justice Rohinton F Nariman rejected an appeal by the Commissioner of Customs, Bengaluru, against an order passed by the Customs, Excise and Gold Tribunal, Karnataka in 2005.
The Customs Department had levied an anti-dumping duty on GM Exports, Bengaluru under the provisions of the Customs Tariff (Identification, Assessment and Collection of Anti-dumping Duty on Dumped Articles and for Determination of Injury) Rules, 1995 on imported vitrified tiles in 2002-03. 
The Customs Act and the Rules were amended to incorporate anti-dumping measures after India signed the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) in 1994.
Impact of dumping
The Indian Customs Act states that provisional anti-dumping can be in force for up to six months, and the authorities will have to determine the final anti-dumping duty by investigating the impact of dumping of goods within a year from imposition of provisional anti-dumping duty. 
The Union government then had claimed that the final anti-dumping duty would take effect from the date of imposition of the provisional duty.
This would necessarily include the “gap” period, which is the period between the lapse of the provisional duty and the imposition of the final duty, and hence can be enforceable for more than six months and up to one year.
Relying on its own judgments and that of the House of Lords, the apex court said: “In a situation in which India is a signatory nation to an international treaty, and a statute is made to enforce a treaty obligation, the statutory language should be construed in the same sense as that of the treaty.”
The court, after examining the uniform provisions on anti-dumping in Europe, US and other countries under HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO agreements, held that “there can be no levy of anti-dumping duty in the ‘gap’ or interregnum period between the lapse of the provisional duty and imposition of the final duty”.
Different rulings
While the Customs, Excise and Gold Tribunal, Karnataka had in 2005 held as illegal the final anti-dumping duty levied by the Customs on GM Exports beyond the provisional anti-duping duty period of six month, the Bombay High Court in 2011 and Kerala High Court in 2010 had declared as legal the levy of final anti-dumping duty beyond six months in the case of some other companies.
Kasturi & Sons Ltd 
 
 
 
Kazakhstan economy: Kazakhstan poised to join WTO 
Economist Intelligence Unit - ViewsWire
5 October 2015, 
1566 words, 
English, 
Kazakhstan's accession to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO), which is expected by the end of this year, will open up the domestic goods and services markets to foreign investors, reduce tariffs and provide a modest improvement to the regulatory environment for investors. At the same time, Kazakhstan's accession to the world trade body is likely to exacerbate existing tensions over trade within the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Eurasian Economic Union (EEU, a Russia-led regional free-trade zone). HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO accession may cut inflation in the medium term and eventually provide a modest boost to GDP. However, significant structural constraints on growth will remain, and non-tariff barriers will limit the gains from free trade.
Kazakhstan completed accession negotiations with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO in June and is expected to join by mid-December. The government intends to complete ratification of the accession package by October 31st, after which a 30-day countdown to accession will begin once it has notified the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO. Kazakhstan intends to participate in the WTO's Ministerial Conference in Nairobi, the capital of Kenya, on December 15th-18th, as a full member.
Under its accession terms, Kazakhstan has agreed to bind tariff rates on all goods at an average of 6.1% (7.6% for agricultural products and 5.9% for non-agricultural products), to be implemented within five years of accession. It will reduce tariffs on more than 3,500 product lines and bind export duties on 370 tariff lines, including 55 lines to be bound at 0% duty. The government will retain export duties on all items currently subject to them, including oil products and scrap metal. In order to join the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO, Kazakhstan has signed 29 bilateral market access agreements on goods and 15 bilateral market access agreements on services with HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO member states.
Agriculture and industry
Kazakhstan's accession terms permit it to subsidise its agricultural sector-which contributes some 5% of GDP but employs around one-quarter of the workforce-to the level equivalent to 8.5% of agricultural output. This was a concession by the government, which had sought to secure terms allowing subsidies of 10%, the de minimis level permitted for developing countries under HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO rules (against 5% for developed countries). The government agreed not to provide subsidies for agricultural exports, and to abolish preferences for agricultural producers by January 1st 2018. Tariff rates for beef and poultry imports were set at 15% for in-quota imports and 40% for out-quota imports.
Kazakhstan will eliminate or modify industrial subsidies so that they do not distort trade by favouring domestic over imported goods, or by encouraging exports. The government has formed a working group with the National Chamber of Entrepreneurs to draft measures to support local producers, to bring them in line with Kazakhstan's new HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO commitments. The director of the National Economy Ministry's Department for the Development of Foreign Trade Activity, Zhanel Kushukova, said in August. Preferential tariffs and tariff exemptions supporting the automotive sector are to be abolished by July 1st 2018. Import duties on new vehicles will fall from the current average of 27.9% to 13.3% after accession, and ultimately to 10.8%, according to data from the Ministry for Investment and Development. Duties on used cars will be reduced from 25% to 15%. The government is considering WTO-compliant measures to support the automotive sector, including new tax perks, Ms Kushukova said. According to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Commission, a mechanism has been established to ensure that HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO member states receive compensation before tariff rates are aligned.
Opening up services sector
Services markets will open up to foreign investors. A restriction of 49% on foreign equity in the telecommunications sector will be abolished two and a half years after accession, with the exception of the main state-owned operator, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Kazakhtelecom. Foreign-owned banks and insurance companies may open branches in Kazakhstan five years after accession (foreign banks already operate subsidiaries in the country), and crossborder travel agencies two years after accession. The government will open maritime and road transport services to foreign investors, and permit wholesale distribution of pharmaceutical products and medical goods five years after accession. Kazakhstan is committed to acceding to the WTO's Government Procurement Agreement on goods, services and capital infrastructure within four years of accession, providing equal terms for foreign and domestic suppliers in state procurement tenders.
Impact on "local-content" rules
Kazakhstan has pledged to eliminate "local-content" provisions under which a proportion of goods, services and workers must be locally sourced in order to protect domestic industries and encourage the hiring of Kazakh citizens over foreign labour. It will abolish all local-content rules, including those in existing investment contracts, by the end of 2020. This is a major concession by the government, which had argued that such provisions were essential to boost local employment and make domestic output competitive, particularly in the oil and gas industry. In order to meet HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO commitments, the deputy health and social development minister, Birzhan Nurymbetov, said in July that the government will abolish its quota requiring medium-sized and large companies to ensure that at least 70% of senior managers are Kazakh citizens, and will reduce its quota of 90% for junior and mid-level staff to 50%. However, we expect the government to maintain other regulations and restrictions that will limit the hiring of employees by foreign companies. For example, it may retain limits on work visas for foreigners, which would effectively force companies to hire local staff.
The faltering Eurasian Union
Kazakhstan's HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO accession process was significantly delayed by its accession in 2010 to the Customs Union, a regional Russia-led free-trade zone which became the EEU on January 1st 2015. Kazakhstan's accession talks were among the "most challenging" in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's history, the organisation said in June, owing to complications stemming from its membership of the EEU (which comprises Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic and Russia). The main obstacle was tariff adjustment, requiring the resolution of discrepancies between bilateral market access agreements concluded by Kazakhstan with HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO member states before the formation of the Customs Union and the EEU's common external tariff, which came into force in 2010. Kazakhstan's average tariff rate stood at 6.7% when it joined the Customs Union, then rose to 11.1%, according to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Bank data. Even after prolonged negotiations, there will still be significant discrepancies between the average tariff rate applied by Kazakhstan and other EEU members, whose average tariffs are 10.4%. The minister for economic integration, Zhanar Aytzhanova, who was Kazakhstan's chief negotiator in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO talks, said in July that Kazakhstan would negotiate with EEU partners to harmonise its new HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO tariffs with those of the EEU within four years of accession. It is not clear how this will be achieved, however, as Russia is unlikely to agree to lower its tariffs, given strong protectionist sentiment among Russian policymakers.
The negotiation process over tariff harmonisation will bring existing tensions within the EEU to the fore. Kazakhstan and Russia imposed tit-for-tat import bans earlier this year, in moves symptomatic of growing protectionism within the fledgling union. Tensions with Russia (also a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO member) have already emerged over Kazakhstan's HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO accession. According to a Russian business daily newspaper, Vedomosti, there will be discrepancies between Russia and Kazakhstan on tariffs covering more than 3,000 products. This raises the risk for other EEU members-in particular, Russia-that companies will re-export products from Kazakhstan to benefit from the lower tariff regime. Russian officials have said that joint measures will be taken to prevent the re-export of goods, but it is unclear what this will entail. Kazakhstan's accession to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO will highlight growing inconsistencies in trade and tariff policy within the EEU, and will raise questions about its functioning as a means of encouraging regional economic trade and development. Kazakhstan has refused to join Russia in imposing sanctions on Western food products, and has ruled out imposing import restrictions on Ukraine. As a result, Russian commentators have voiced concerns that Kazakhstan may become a conduit for illegal re-exports to Russia of goods under sanctions-the same issue has previously led to tensions between Russia and another fellow EEU member, Belarus.
Outlook
Kazakhstan's accession to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO after 19 years of negotiations represents a diplomatic milestone for the administration of the veteran president, Nursultan Nazarbayev. The reduction in tariffs should increase competition and cut prices on a number of goods, leading to lower inflation in the medium term. For foreign investors, Kazakhstan's HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO accession will eliminate barriers to entry in some sectors of Kazakhstan's economy and should contribute to improving the investment climate and affording investors more equitable treatment and greater transparency. These factors, combined with increased competition, may provide a modest boost to GDP in the medium term. However other structural constraints-corruption, weak institutions and high state involvement in the economy-will persist. Moreover, non-tariff barriers, stemming from both corruption in the border service and from the regulatory environment, are likely to remain high and are likely to limit potential gains from free trade. As Russia has shown, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO membership is not necessarily a guard against the adoption of protectionist policies. 
 
WTO Accession: New Horizons for the Food Industry Market at the WorldFood Kazakhstan 2015 Exhibition
 
Kazakhstan Newsline
5 October 2015, 
517 words, 
 “Membership in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO opens up new horizons for Kazakhstan economy and gives domestic enterprises access to foreign markets, while consumers get access to the wide choice of goods and services,” said Nursultan Nazarbayev as he announced the completion of negotiations on Kazakhstan's accession to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO.
Improving competitiveness of agricultural products under the existing circumstances becomes one of the primary goals of the state. Today, food industry is faced with the high aims of providing the population of the Republic with quality domestic product and bringing it on the world market.
The largest Central Asian International Exhibition WorldFood Kazakhstan 2015 which will be held on November, 4-6 in the City of Almaty and present on its stage the focus of modern food industry market and set the vector of domestic production development for years to come.
WorldFood Kazakhstan 2015 Exhibition traditionally presents products from the four key sections: food and beverages, ingredients, equipment and technologies for food industry, and baking.
“Bread Baking” sector takes up 30% of the general exhibit display. Such companies as ADIL (Kazakhstan), CZECH TRADE (The Czech Republic National stand), FAVOURITE TECHNO (Kazakhstan/Italy), GOSTOL (Slovenia), HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" MIWE MICHAEL WENZ GmbH (Germany), VERNYY KHLEB (Kazakhstan), VOSKHOD (Russia), MAKIZ URAL/IP PRISYAZHNYY (Russia), REVENT (The Czech Republic), MUCHNYE TEKHNOLOGII (Russia), NIZHEGORODSKIY KHLEB (Russia), KEN FOOD (Greece), ECOPACK (Russia/Italy), TECHNOSERVICE PLUS (Kazakhstan) and many others are preparing their part of the display.
This year WorldFood Kazakhstan Exhibition sets the goal of not only offering the food and beverage producers and distributors innovative trends and products, but also providing them with opportunity to get the necessary first-hand information from experts in the corresponding market sector.
Round Table meeting will be held within the exhibition, the topic of which will be “Food security: ingredients and equipment for environmentally friendly and natural food production”.
The following topics will be discussed during the Round table:
• Food security of the country. Healthy eating for the nation.
• Accession to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO: consequences for food industry (explaining the changes in technical requirements related to food and beverage production).
• Economic justification of changes in operating regulations related to food and beverage production after accession to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO.
• Modern trends in the world bakery products and confectionary market. Market trends and production statistics in Kazakhstan: perspectives and consequences.
• Economic benefits of using the innovative ingredients.
• Presentation of innovative ingredients, technologies and equipment in bread production and candy manufacturing.
Let us remind you that this year WorldFood Kazakhstan Exhibition will take place for the 18th time. Exposition will present more than 450 companies from over 35 world countries. Another four specialized exhibitions will be held along with the WorldFood Kazakhstan:
AgroWorld Kazakhstan 2015 — “Agriculture”
KazUpack 2015 — “Packing, Tare, Label”
HOREX 2015 — “Everything for Hotels, Restaurants, Supermarkets”
CleanExpo Central Asia 2015 – “Cleanliness Industry”
Exhibition is organized by Kazakhstan Exhibitions & Conferences Organisation Iteca and its partner HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" ITE Group Plc (United Kingdom).
 
 
Philippines formalizes push for MSMEs adoption by WTO
The Senate also approves the bill seeking to provide micro, small, and medium entrepreneurs more access to micro-financing 
MANILA, Philippines – The Philippines has formalized its advocacy to make micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) part of the global trade agenda, leading to its adoption by the World Trade Organization (WTO).
The Philippine Mission to the WTO (PMWTO) in Geneva has submitted two documents on "Fostering the Participation of MSMEs in Regional and Global Markets," the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) announced on its website on Monday, October 5.
The PMWTO said the first submission in July provided the rationale for starting a conversation that includes MSMEs. It also highlighted the opportunities to further strengthen linkages within the WTO. It also covered push for discussions on existing linkages with other international organizations, such as the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the World Bank Group, and the International Trade Centre. 
The second submission provided a draft ministerial statement for the 10th WTO Ministerial Conference in Nairobi, Kenya, which will be held from December 15 to 18. The conference is held every two years and the Philippines has been an advocate of the MSME sector in these high-level meetings.
The Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC), through the HYPERLINK "http://www.rappler.com/business/economy-watch/94217-apec-trade-ministers-meeting-boracay" Boracay Action Agenda in May, formalized the use of MSMEs from SMEs and thereby indicate the sector's distinctive situation and full inclusion in its agenda to foster their participation in regional and global markets.
HYPERLINK "http://www.rappler.com/business/211-governance/105634-dti-gregory-domingo-resigns" Gregory Domingo, in his remaining months as DTI secretary, earlier said he will continue initiatives in providing HYPERLINK "http://www.rappler.com/business/77412-sme-apec-technology-growth" broader opportunities for MSMEs in the international market.
Most vulnerable
At the 8th Ministerial Conference in 2011, the Philippines urged WTO to prioritize then SMEs in the ongoing trade talks as they are most vulnerable to market uncertainties.
At the 9th Ministerial Conference, the Philippines negotiated the HYPERLINK "http://www.rappler.com/world/regions/asia-pacific/45450-wto-hails-historic-trade-agreement" Bali Package, designed to streamline trade and benefit the Philippines’ SMEs, particularly exporters.
Domingo, who participated in the WTO Public Forum in September this year, said the plenary session on “Making Trade Work for Business” particularly focused on the relationship between trade and business, including MSMEs and agribusiness.
The Philippines also organized a working session on “Fostering the Participation of MSMEs in Regional and Global Markets,” which further provided clarity on how global collaboration, with the WTO at the forefront, would be a critical element in making trade work for all.
Access to financing
Also on Monday, the Senate approved on 3rd and final reading a bill that seeks to provide more access to financing for MSMEs.
Senate Bill 2909, introduced by Senator Paolo Benigno Aquino IV aims to expand and strengthen the current HYPERLINK "http://www.rappler.com/business/economy-watch/99929-bsp-credit-surety-fund-smes" Credit Surety Fund (CSF) program of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP) by making it easier for MSMEs – including cooperatives and non-government organizations (NGOs), authorized representatives of local government units (LGUs), government financial institutions (GFIs), and other institutional/government agencies – to gain access to credit facilities.
The CSF is created by pooling the contributions of cooperatives and NGOs, LGUs, and partner institutions. It allows MSMEs to borrow from banks using the CSF as security for the loan instead of conventional collateral. Under the BSP’s CSF, cooperatives and NGOs may accept collaterals that are otherwise not acceptable to banks such as stocks in trade, agricultural land, chattel, and vehicles.
"The lack of access to financing remains the biggest roadblock for the growth of MSMEs in the country since the existing requirements for credit do not consider the nature of micro and small businesses," Aquino, chairman of the committee on trade, commerce, and entrepreneurship, said in a statement released October 5.
The measure would give small enterprises with loan requirements ranging from P500,000 ($10,757.24) to P5 million ($107,573.47) access to loans provided by established banking institutions. Under the measure, the BSP will spearhead the promotion, creation, and organizational development of CSF cooperatives.
It will provide technical assistance, such as training and seminars, as well as assist the Cooperative Development Authority in setting the criteria and qualifications for CSF cooperatives. It will also provide other forms of assistance as determined by the Monetary Board.
Data showed that the BSP has around 40 CSF projects across the country. It also showed that 548 cooperatives are now involved in the project, with over 14,000 Filipinos benefitting from the program.
“The challenge now is to how to help our countrymen grow their micro businesses into small enterprises, and the enterprises, to medium enterprises,” Aquino said. – Rappler.com
US$1 = P46.48 HYPERLINK "http://www.shutterstock.com/pic-248023324/stock-photo-phnom-penh-cambodia-nov-the-local-seller-in-central-market-phnom-penh-cambodia-on-november.html?src=CMrLGl38z1jOjtzUFP0p9g-2-23" Seller image from Shutterstock
 
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.