HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "L'Organisation mondiale du commerce fêtera à Marrakech ses 20 ans d'existence
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO Chief Praises Morocco’s South-south Cooperation Approach
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO Rejects Vietnamese Appeal in U.S. Shrimp Dumping Dispute
·         HYPERLINK \l "USTR Official: EGA Parties Have Not Discussed Tariff Phaseouts, Finalized Scope Format
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO Case Against China's Banking Regs Would Face Pitfalls
·         HYPERLINK \l "Min: Russia not to change assembly rules for foreign carmakers
·         HYPERLINK \l "Brazil, U.S. Close to Finalizing Bilateral Beef Trade Agreement
·         HYPERLINK \l "USTR Calls Out Corruption Problems In EU Members' Procurement Markets
·         HYPERLINK \l "IMF sees low potential economic growth around world
·         HYPERLINK \l "Currency wars: is the US the new victim?
 
L'Organisation mondiale du commerce fêtera à Marrakech ses 20 ans d'existence
 
RABAT, 7 avril (Xinhua) -- L'Organisation mondiale du commerce (OMC) fêtera ses 20 ans d'existence à travers une conférence africaine qui sera tenue à Marrakech, ville du sud du Maroc), avec la présence du directeur général de l'organisation, le Brésilien Roberto Azevedo.

Plus de 45 pays africains seront représentés à cette conférence ministérielle et parlementaire à Marrakech, où ont été conclus les accords instituant la plus haute instance dirigeante du commerce mondial en 1995.

L'événement mettra à l'honneur le continent africain, ses perspectives et sa place dans le système commercial multilatéral, tout en faisant valoir le rôle leader du Maroc en matière de négociation et d'appui à la facilitation des échanges commerciaux. Les discussions porteront aussi sur le bilan de l'action de l'organisation, sa contribution à la croissance et à l'emploi en Afrique, le renforcement des capacités de production et d'exportation pour une meilleure intégration du continent dans l'économie mondiale.

La ratification de l'accord de Bali conclu en décembre 2013, le processus de négociations post-Bali et les préparatifs pour la 10ème conférence ministérielle de l'OMC prévue en décembre prochain au Kenya sont parmi les questions à l'ordre du jour.

Depuis sa création il y a deux décennies, l'organisation intergouvernementale basée à Genève a accueilli 33 pays supplémentaires et compte désormais 160 Etats membres qui représentent 98% du commerce mondial.

Dans un article publié en prélude à la rencontre de Marrakech, intitulé "OMC: retour à Marrakech 20 ans après", M. Azevedo a souligné l'attachement de l'organisation aux principes et à l'esprit hérité de la conférence fondatrice tenue en 1994.

Rappelant que la 10ème Conférence ministérielle de l'OMC se tiendra à Nairobi au Kenya du 15 au 18 décembre 2015, M. Azevedo a souligné que ce sera la première fois depuis sa création à Marrakech que l'organisation tiendra une réunion ministérielle en Afrique.

Dans une interview accordée à l'agence de presse marocaine MAP, M. Azevêdo a indiqué que "la prochaine grande tendance de l'économie mondiale se trouvera en Afrique, de même que les opportunités en matière de commerce et d'investissement".

Pour le patron de l'OMC, l'Accord sur la facilitation des échanges de l'OMC, conclu à Bali, participera de cet effort en fixant des règles pour abaisser les obstacles et simplifier les procédures douanières.

Cet accord commercial, a-t-il expliqué, devrait réduire les coûts du commerce jusqu'à 15% dans les pays en développement (PED).

Pour la première fois dans l'histoire de l'Organisation, la mise en oeuvre de cet instrument par les PED est soumise à la mise à disposition d'assistance et de soutien suffisants.

Servant de cadre de négociation sur des règles universelles, l'OMC, qui a succédé à l'Accord général sur les tarifs douaniers et le commerce (GATT), s'engage dans une course contre la montre pour clore l'interminable cycle de négociations de Doha, qui dure depuis 14 ans, plombé par les désaccords sur l'agriculture et les antagonismes Nord-Sud.

Le Maroc avait assumé en 2013 les fonctions de coordonnateur du groupe Africain OMC et présidé le même groupe lors du processus préparatoire de la réunion de Bali.

Ses efforts ont permis au groupe des Etats africains de jouer un rôle de premier plan dans le succès de la conférence et la conclusion du précieux accord sur la facilitation des échanges. Fin

 
WTO Chief Praises Morocco’s South-south Cooperation Approach
Tuesday 7 April 2015 - 10:12
MAP 
 
Geneva- Morocco’s role in promoting south-south cooperation reflects the openness of the Moroccan economy as well as its dynamism and attachment to cultural roots, said Director General of the World Trade Organization (WTO) Roberto Azevêdo.
In an interview with MAP prior to his visit to attending an African conference in Morocco on the occasion of the 20th anniversary of the WTO, Azevêdo said that Morocco’s status as the second African investor in Africa reflects the growing trend of its economy.
“Morocco recognizes the importance of the African market as a driver for future growth,” said Azevêdo.
The WTO is closely following the development of the Moroccan economy which showed remarkable resilience in the wake of the economic crisis and the fluctuations it engendered in European markets, the WTO chief said, noting that growth prospects in Morocco for 2015 are estimated at 4.5%.
While recognizing the work that remains ahead in terms of reducing unemployment, the WTO Director General highlighted the sound foundations of political stability in Morocco that enable the implementation of efficient economic and trade policies with promising results.
“Since it joined the international multilateral trade system, the Moroccan economy successfully managed to transform and to diversify exports,” he said.
Azevêdo recalled that Morocco remains the world largest phosphate exporter and a leading producer of citrus fruits, agri-food products and textile.
In the same vein, he noted the growing exports of high added value goods such as cars, electronic devices and airplane parts.
He also pointed out to the important infrastructure investments in Morocco, notably the Tanger-Med ports and its role in promoting large-scale investments in car making and aviation.
Azevêdo will be visiting Morocco to attend the ministerial conference on the occasion of the 20th anniversary of the WTO.
The conference is held under the high patronage of King Mohammed VI with the participation of several African trade ministers.
 
 
WTO Rejects Vietnamese Appeal in U.S. Shrimp Dumping Dispute
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, April 8, 2015
 
April 7 — The World Trade Organization rejected an appeal lodged by Vietnam in its dispute over U.S. antidumping duty measures on imports of Vietnamese frozen shrimp.
 
The April 7 appellate panel report said that Vietnam failed to show that a U.S. law used to comply with WTO dispute decisions was inconsistent with the WTO's Anti-Dumping Agreement.
 
The appellate body said that an earlier dispute settlement report, which found that the U.S. measures were inconsistent with its international obligations, was made objectively and in accordance with WTO rules.
 
“The United States is pleased with this result,” said Andrew Bates, press secretary at the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative. “We will be closely reviewing the findings in the panel report as we consider options to respond.” Vietnamese trade officials did not respond to Bloomberg BNA's request for comment.
 
Commerce ‘Zeroing’ Methods
 
The dispute centers on the U.S. Commerce Department's use of “zeroing” methods to calculate the dumping margins of individually examined Vietnamese producers and exporters in three antidumping administrative reviews.
 
Using this methodology, Commerce designates a margin of zero to merchandise sold at higher prices in the U.S. than in the home market. Commerce excludes zero margins in its aggregated calculation of a company's weighted-average dumping margin, which generally leads to higher dumping margins.
 
Though Commerce ceased its use of the zeroing method in the 2006 dumping investigations, it continued to apply the method in administrative reviews and sunset reviews until 2012 (29 WTO, 2/14/12).
 
On Nov. 17, 2014, the WTO's Dispute Settlement Body (DSB) said that such methods violated U.S. obligations under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and the Anti-Dumping Agreement (222 WTO, 11/18/14).
 
Uruguay Round Agreements Act
 
Vietnam appealed the decision, in part, because it said that Section 129(c)(1) of the Uruguay Round Agreements Act (URAA) was inconsistent with Articles 1, 9.2, 9.3, 11.1 and 18.1 of the Anti-Dumping Agreement.
 
Section 129(c)(1) of the URAA creates a mechanism for U.S. officials to modify Commerce regulations in order satisfy DSB recommendations and rulings. The provision enables Commerce to amend, rescind or otherwise modify the regulation in question upon the fulfillment of a series of procedural steps.
 
Vietnam said that the DSB committed an “egregious error” in its understanding of the law, according to the appeal. The URAA only implements modifications to Commerce policies after the date of an adverse WTO ruling, thereby excluding prior imports in its modified antidumping calculations, Vietnam said.
 
The WTO appellate panel rejected Vietnam's argument that the earlier panel had erred when it found that Section 129(c)(1) did not preclude full implementation of WTO reports.
 
As a result, the appellate body said that it would not address Vietnam's request for completion of the legal analysis in order to determine whether Section 129(c)(1) is inconsistent with the Anti-Dumping Agreement.
 
 
USTR Official: EGA Parties Have Not Discussed Tariff Phaseouts, Finalized Scope Format
World Trade Online
Posted: April 07, 2015 
 
Despite their plans to launch formal negotiations on product scope next month, the United States and the other 16 participants in the Environmental Goods Agreement (EGA) have not yet finalized the format for conducting those talks and have not even discussed the length of tariff phaseouts that will ultimately be applied to products included in a final deal, according to an official with the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative.
 
Speaking at an April 7 event hosted by the National Foreign Trade Council (NFTC), the USTR official said EGA members are still discussing how to structure their first-ever round of product scope talks, which will take place the week of May 4 in Geneva. But the official said “ultimately, we will have to be having a line-by-line, detailed conversation, but how we're structuring it, we're still thinking through.”
 
One Geneva source indicated last week that EGA members will negotiate over product scope on a line-by-line basis and gauge the support of members of each tariff line, sources said. The source said EGA members are considering starting with the highest-numbered tariff lines in the Harmonized System and working their way down, although this has not been decided.
 
The USTR official emphasized that discussions so far among EGA members have been on product scope and they have not even decided when they will begin negotiating tariff phaseouts.
 
They have not even decided whether to emulate the phaseout structure used in the Information Technology Agreement (ITA) or whether to do something different, the official added.
 
Under the original ITA agreement, the participants agreed to three staging categories to eliminate tariffs for those covered products: immediate, three years, and five years. In exceptional circumstances, parties were able to negotiate a seven-year phaseout period. Participants in the negotiations to expand the ITA, which are currently stalled, have also agreed to accept the original 1996 framework. “We haven't gotten into detailed conversations as a group about 'Is ITA our model? Is there something similar to ITA but not exactly like ITA?'” the official said. “We haven't had those kinds of detailed discussions.”
 
But the ITA is already serving as a model for the EGA when it comes to calculating the “critical mass” of participants that would be needed to cover the vast majority of trade in environmental goods. The ITA set the threshold for “critical mass” at 90 percent of trade in information technology goods, and USTR officials have repeatedly signaled they are using that threshold as a guideline in the EGA talks.
 
At the April 7 event, the USTR official indicated that EGA members have already passed, or are very close to passing, the 90-percent threshold established under the ITA.
 
But the official declined to say what percentage of trade in environmental goods are covered by the current participants. Instead, the official noted that the United States accounts for 11 percent of trade in the 54 environmental goods on which Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) countries agreed in 2012 to reduce tariffs. That list is the basis of the EGA talks.
 
Based on the APEC list of 54 environmental goods, the original 14 members of the EGA accounted for 86 percent of the global trade in those products.
 
Achieving a critical mass is crucial to the success of the EGA because the tariff cuts made by participants will be extended to all WTO members on a most favored nation basis. If a critical mass is not achieved, then WTO members who do not participate but are major exporters of the covered goods could reap the benefits of the deal without having to lower their own tariffs -- posing what is known as the "free rider" problem.
 
With regard to product scope, the USTR official signaled the United States is cool to the proposals by some EGA members to include agricultural goods in the scope of the EGA. The official did so by saying the U.S. has been focused on nominating industrial goods for tariff elimination.
 
In February, sources said EGA members had nominated agricultural biofuels like biodiesel and methanol, a move which generated some controversy. This is because these products are subsidized in some countries, and some EGA countries may object to lowering tariffs on these goods if those subsidies are not addressed, one informed source said.
 
NFTC Vice President Jake Colvin said business groups have been touting the EGA as a way to talk to Democratic members of Congress about trade and why they need to support Trade Promotion Authority (TPA). He suggested that congressional Democrats are more likely to be supportive of the EGA than other trade agreements because they support environmental protection and conservation.
 
“We're doing our best to try to engage those members -- and help articulate the benefits of EGA and 'by the way, in order for an EGA to get the maximum amount of support it needs, you'll need TPA as well,'” he said.
 
A USTR spokesman did not respond directly when asked whether implementing the tariff cuts under a final EGA would require legislation. If so, such implementing legislation could ultimately be subject to the fast-track procedures laid out in a TPA bill.
 
The USTR official, as well as other business supporters of the EGA who spoke at the NFTC event, argued that there is strong bipartisan support for EGA.
 
 
WTO Case Against China's Banking Regs Would Face Pitfalls
By Alex Lawson 
 
Law360, New York (April 07, 2015, 7:46 PM ET) -- A momentary truce between the U.S. and China over Beijing's controversial rules covering information technology in its banking sector appears to be a welcome development for potential service providers, as experts say a successful World Trade Organization challenge is far from certain.

At issue between the two trading powers are a suite of regulations China has rolled out over the last six months ostensibly aimed at bolstering the security of its financial services sector by placing certain restrictions on the type of information technology that can be provided to its banks.

The regulations appear to require Chinese banks to prioritize the use of domestic technology over that of foreign providers and require overseas suppliers to hand over source codes and other sensitive intellectual property for its products. While those provisions would appear to run counter to many WTO agreements, China's framing of the policy as a security measure could prove to be a roadblock.

"I suspect that this wouldn't work, for the simple reason that it looks to me like China is trying to take a national security slant on this," said David Collins, a professor of international economic law at City University London. "National security is basically the atom bomb of trade discussions. As soon as you raise national security, it's basically all bets off."

The U.S. has already provided a preview of what a full WTO complaint might look like, suggesting in an April 1 report that the banking regulations flout China's obligations under the WTO's Committee on Trade-Related Investment Measures, or TRIMS, as well as the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, and the General Agreement on Trade in Services.

On its face, former USTR associate general counsel and current Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld LLP partner Stephen S. Kho said the case against China was rather strong, but whether and how aggressively China would pursue a national security defense was enough of a red flag to give the U.S. pause before pursuing a case.

"The national security argument has always been the 'get out of jail' card, or at least it's been viewed that way by WTO members," Kho told Law360. "If they play it, everyone else would assume that the panel would defer to the country that is making that argument."

The exception, enshrined in Article XXI of GATT, essentially allows WTO members to take actions that violate other WTO commitments as long as it deems those actions to be "necessary for the protection of its essential security interests."

As a practical matter, a possible challenge from the U.S. or any other party is a long way off. China agreed to delay implementation of the highly contentious measures just a few days after the U.S. delegation formally raised the issue for the first time at the WTO.

The administration has been under tremendous pressure from business organizations and lawmakers to address the regulations. But even the delay from China appears to be a limited victory, as the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative is still awaiting further clarity on how Beijing will proceed.

"We continue to seek China's reconsideration of the approach it has taken to regulate information and communication technology equipment in the banking sector," a USTR spokeswoman told Law360. "We trust that the Chinese government will understand the urgency of delaying the implementation of the banking measures, and in such case we encourage them to clarify the status of the measures publicly."

Collins said that the Chinese regulations appeared to be a prime candidate for a national security defense, citing the WTO's relative ineffectiveness as an arena for dealing with disputes featuring novel policy developments and high geopolitical stakes.

"The WTO dispute settlement system is meant to crystallize legal, trade-related disputes and if it's something like cybersecurity, I think we are looking at a classic nontrade exception," he said.

However, the prong of the regulations that appears geared toward advancing China's policy of "indigenous innovation," or the favoring of domestic industries over foreign ones, is a clear violation of the national treatment principle underpinning the WTO, Kho noted.

"The U.S. side is certainly more comfortable challenging industrial planning," Kho said. "There is an industrial planning and economic link to it. It's not clear that China is doing this explicitly for national security reasons or if they would be willing to play that card."

The risk in asking a panel to rule on the national security exception cuts both ways, Kho pointed out, for if China were to raise it as a defense, it would then be opening the door for other countries to do the same in cases it may bring in the future.

More broadly, Kho speculated that the accelerated intermingling of economic policy and security policy may mean that the WTO will be forced to weigh in on the contours of the exception sooner rather than later.

"I think every year we inch closer and close to having to deal with the national security question at the WTO," he said. "You are starting to hear governments openly talking about this in the cyber world, the IT world, the sanctions world. I think when these issues intersect with trade and countries are utilizing economic sanctions and trade tools to deal with essential security issues, you're going to have this type of discussion."
--Editing by Katherine Rautenberg and Kelly Duncan.
 
 
Min: Russia not to change assembly rules for foreign carmakers 
 
HO CHI MINH, Vietnam, Apr 7 (PRIME) -- Russia will not change industrial assembly rules for foreign automakers operating in the country, Industry and Trade Minister Denis Manturov told reporters Tuesday.

“We will not change anything. We have a law in that part that ensures compensation of companies’ losses while switching to a customs regime, payment of a duty,” he said.

The industrial car assembly regime, introduced in Russia in 2005, allows car producers to import car components to Russia at zero or reduced duties on condition that localization of their production in Russia reaches 60%. In accordance with Russia’s agreements with the World Trade Organization (WTO), all incentives should be abolished on July 1, 2018.

Manturov also said he did not rule out that Germany’s Daimler could enter Russia’s industrial assembly regime for production of Mercedes cars under quota of U.S. car producer General Motors (GM), which recently announced a decision to leave the Russian market.

 
Brazil, U.S. Close to Finalizing Bilateral Beef Trade Agreement
By Michael Kepp
WTO Reporter, April 8, 2015
 
April 7 — The U.S. and Brazil are close to finalizing a bilateral beef trade agreement that will resolve Brazil's long-running attempt to export beef to the U.S. market, an official at Brazil's Agriculture Ministry (MAPA) told Bloomberg BNA.
 
“The USA and Brazil have advanced in negotiations to open beef exports from 14 Brazilian states and we now await U.S. publication of the final version of the agreement,” said a statement from MAPA following the last round of talks at a meeting of the U.S.-Brazil consultative committee on agriculture on March 31.
 
Odilson Ribeiro, director of MAPA's department of sanitary and phytosanitary international negotiations, told Bloomberg BNA April 7 that “even though we hope to finalize the agreement by the end of April, I am not 100 percent certain of this. But I can say that the agreement is in its final stages and should be finalized soon.”
 
Fernando Sampaio, the executive director of the Brazilian Association of Beef Exporting Industries (ABIEC), a beef exporters' association, told Bloomberg BNA April 6 that “we are fairly sure that the agreement will be signed by [the] end [of] June because all but the smallest details of the negotiations have been settled.”
 
Welber Barral, a Brasilia-based trade consultant and former secretary of foreign trade at Brazil's Ministry of Development, Industry and Foreign Trade, told Bloomberg BNA April 5 that “the agreement is very far along and will be finalized in the next few months, ending Brazil's long-standing wait to export unprocessed beef to the U.S. market.”
 
Agreement Will Allow Export of Fresh Beef
 
The accord will allow 14 Brazilian states to export fresh (chilled or frozen) beef, as opposed to processed beef—like canned corned beef—to the U.S. and allow the U.S. to likewise export fresh beef to Brazil. Both countries currently export only processed beef to each other.
 
The accord will be published by the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) as soon as the remaining technical details regarding the international health certificates that must accompany these bilateral fresh beef exports are resolved, Ribeiro told Bloomberg BNA.
 
Brazil has been trying to export fresh beef to the U.S.since 1999; however, isolated cases of foot and mouth disease suspended that attempt. Brazil has blocked beef imports from the U.S. due to limited instances of mad cow disease.
 
In 2010, as part of a deal to end Brazil's long-running World Trade Organization dispute with the U.S. over cotton subsidies, the U.S. agreed to begin the process of opening up its market for fresh beef imports from Brazil.
 
In 2011–2012, the USDA began a risk analysis of the safety of fresh Brazilian beef and in December 2013 published a proposed rule saying that it could be imported safely from 14 Brazilian states, mostly in southern, southeastern and central-western regions, provided exporters meet certain conditions. Public consultations about the proposed rule ended in April 2014.
 
Quota for Brazil
 
At the World Organization for Animal Health (OEA) meeting in May 2015, Brazil retained its insignificant risk status for mad cow disease and raised to 24 the number of states that are recognized by the OEA as being free of foot and mouth disease.
 
However, Brazil's agreement with the U.S. will only cover fresh beef exports from 14 states because “at this point, it would take too much time to renegotiate the agreement to expand it to cover 24 states, delaying its implementation,” Ribeiro of MAPA told Bloomberg BNA. “After the agreement is in place, we will try to increase the number of states allowed to export fresh beef to the USA from 14 to 24 states.”
 
He added that “thanks to nationwide vaccinations, all of Brazil is free of foot-and-mouth disease but we're still working on the documentation to attest to this in three remaining Amazon states.”
 
Under the agreement, there will be no quota for U.S. fresh beef exports to Brazil, but a quota of 64,000 tons per year will apply to U.S.-bound Brazilian fresh beef exports.
 
Sampaio of ABIEC said that “Brazil will have no trouble meeting the 64,000-ton-per-year quota and will mainly ship low-fat beef trimmings from pasture-grazed cattle to [the] U.S. market, whose feed-lot-raised cattle provide high-fat trimmings. In the USA both high and low-fat trimmings are blended and ground into hamburger meat.”
 
Ribeiro said that “some of the fresh beef that Brazil exports to the U.S. market will be scraps to be used in other food products, like pizza.”
 
Under the agreement, Brazil will mainly import “rump cap,” also called “top sirloin cap,” from the U.S., both Ribeiro and Sampaio told Bloomberg BNA. Rump cap beef, called “picanha” in Brazil, is a favorite cut whose demand requires Brazil to import some of it from Argentina.
 
“This is an agreement in which both the USA and Brazil gain something because each country will be importing different cuts and types of beef,” said trade consultant Barral.
 
MAPA is in the process of negotiating a similar bilateral beef trade agreement with Canada, Ribeiro said.
 
 
USTR Calls Out Corruption Problems In EU Members' Procurement Markets
World Trade Online
Posted: April 07, 2015 
The Office of the U.S. Trade Representative called out several European Union member states for maintaining public procurement regimes it charged are unfair, rife with corruption, or fail to consider legitimate factors besides product cost in awarding contracts in its annual report on trade barriers issued last week.
 
USTR's 2015 National Trade Estimate (NTE) report identified new or increased barriers to the procurement markets of six EU member states and reiterated procurement issues identified in its 2014 report for six others. Most of them were in Central and Eastern Europe, although France and Italy were also singled out.
 
The criticism comes as the United States and EU are negotiating on government procurement in the context of the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) talks. The EU is seeking greater access to the U.S.'s federal and sub-federal procurement markets as well as an exception to “Buy American” provisions, but the U.S. has thus far been cool and only assented to discussing possible market access improvements later this year, according to sources.
 
Poland and Slovakia were newly called out in this year's NTE report. It also identified new issues in the Czech Republic, France, Italy and Romania, although those countries received criticism for other procurement issues last year.
 
For instance, Italy was again identified as having widespread corruption on the local level, but the report added that “a series of large corruption scandals” in 2014 have led to hundreds of arrests and investigation.
 
“These recent corruption scandals show how deeply rooted corruption still is in public procurement,” the report said. In response, Italy's government has appointed an anti-corruption commissioner and introduced draft legislation to increase corruption penalties, the report said.
 
Similarly, the Czech Republic and France were also cited as having new problems with corruption in their procurement processes. France was identified by a February 2014 EU anti-corruption report as having to “root out corruption of public procurement contracts at the local level,” the NTE said. This includes strengthening its enforcement and increasing its penalties as “French laws that make it a crime to break public procurement rules rarely result in criminal charges and when they do, the punishment is not severe,” according to the NTE.
 
USTR criticized a Czech public procurement reform legislation as maintaining loopholes that could allow bidders to subcontract to anonymously held companies. An October 2014 analysis of the funding for political parties in the Czech Republic's lower legislative chamber showed that the sponsors of political parties received about $20 billion worth of public contracts. According to the report, some of those sponsors receiving contracts were registered overseas, did not declare ownership, or had no employees.
 
That reform law -- adopted by the Czech government in 2012 -- addressed corruption and transparency issues to some degree. But the threshold above which which these rules apply has subsequently been increased, from $50,000 to $300,000 for construction contracts, according to the report.
 
The 2012 law applied these more stringent public procurement rules to all contracts worth $50,000 and above. But according to USTR's 2014 NTE report, the Czech president in 2013 signed an amendment increasing that threshold to $150,000 for construction contracts.
 
In the latest report, USTR said the Czech Senate in 2013 voted to raise the threshold back up to $300,000 for construction contracts and $100,000 for other services.
 
Poland and Romania were also identified by USTR as still failing to comply with new rules under amended EU public procurement directives that would move them away from only awarding contracts based on lowest cost. The EU completed its procurement law reform in early 2014, although member states have until April 2016 to transpose the new rules into their national law, according to the European Commission.
 
U.S. companies operating in Poland allege that Polish officials only consider cost, “often overlooking other important factors, like quality, company reputation, and prior experience in product and service delivery, in bid evaluation,” the report said. But USTR also added that Polish officials have indicated that the government will comply with the EU directives in 2015.
 
Romania was also singled out as still failing to comply with those directives and for delaying relevant consultations with stakeholders.
 
Slovakia, which with Poland was the only new member state identified in the report's procurement section, was also criticized for lacking consistency in its public procurement regime. According to USTR, U.S. stakeholders have cited “corruption, inefficient government bureaucracy, inadequate transparency, unfair competition, and poor law enforcement as barriers to public procurement opportunities.”
 
 
IMF sees low potential economic growth around world 
 
* Potential growth in rich economies to edge up to 1.6 pct 
* Growth potential in emerging markets to fall further 
* Zero lower bound to remain issue for monetary policy

By Anna Yukhananov

WASHINGTON, April 7 (Reuters) - The world's growth potential took a big hit after the 2007-2009 financial crisis and is likely to lag for years, implying that interest rates should likely stay low for quite a while, the International Monetary Fund said in a study on Tuesday.

Potential growth, which gauges how fast economies can grow over time without hitting inflationary speed bumps, already was slowing in richer economies before the financial crisis due to aging populations and a drop in technological innovation.

But declines in private investment and employment growth cut annual potential growth in these countries to 1.3 percent between 2008 and 2014, half a percentage point lower than before the crisis, according to the IMF study.

The study, part of the Fund's twice-yearly World Economic Outlook, could frame the discussions over how to boost growth when the world's economic policymakers gather in Washington next week for the IMF and World Bank's spring meetings.

Over the next five years, advanced economies' annual growth potential should increase to 1.6 percent, still below pre-crisis growth rates, making it more difficult to cut high public and private debt, the IMF said.

With interest rates low, "monetary policy in advanced economies may again be confronted with the problem of the zero lower bound if adverse growth shocks materialize," the IMF said.

It also said weak demand in the euro zone and Japan could prompt even lower potential growth than forecast. The study comes ahead of the Fund's global economic forecasts next week.

In emerging markets, potential annual growth fell to 6.5 percent from 2008 to 2014, about 2 percentage points lower than before the crisis, and is expected to fall further to 5.2 percent over the next five years as populations age, structural constraints curb capital growth, and productivity slows.

A projected drop in growth potential for China, the world's second largest economy, could be even deeper as it transitions away from an investment-led economy to a consumption-based one, the IMF said.

The Fund urged rich economies to support demand and investment, including more funding for research and development and infrastructure. Emerging economies should also boost infrastructure spending, get rid of excessive regulation, and improve the quality of education, it said. (Reporting by Anna Yukhananov; Editing by Paul Simao) 
 
 
Currency wars: is the US the new victim?
Andrew Balls 
Financial Times
April 8, 2015 6:00 am 
 
Dollar strength reflects global policy divergence, not direct intervention
 
In September 2010, Guido Mantega, then Brazil’s finance minister, popularised the term “currency wars”. He claimed governments around the world — led by the US — were engaging in competitive devaluations of their currencies. Brazil and other emerging markets, which were doing better at the time, suffered overvalued currencies as a result.
 
Fast forward to today and the US dollar has appreciated on a trade-weighted basis at a faster pace for the past eight months than during any similar period since the end of the Bretton Woods system in 1971. This year, more than 20 central banks have eased monetary policy, including the European Central Bank, which at long last launched its quantitative easing programme. Meanwhile, at the US Federal Reserve‘s press conference last month, chairwoman Janet Yellen acknowledged that the US dollar’s strength was part of the reason for downward revisions in the Fed’s growth and inflation forecasts.

Is the US now the victim in this continuing currency war? In truth, while a catchy phrase, it is not an altogether helpful one. The dollar’s strength reflects fundamental economic and policy divergence versus the rest of the world, not direct exchange rate interventions. The euro’s weakness, of course, reflects the ECB’s QE, but this policy loosening is not an act of trade war: it is a reaction to the risk of entrenched deflation that the eurozone faces.
 
The US dollar aside, the main message from the Fed in March was that interest rate increases will be on the table, not in April, but at its June, September or December meetings. This cyclical divergence in policy is not surprising. The US is far more advanced in terms of its post-2008 crisis rehabilitation compared with other developed countries, and is a primary beneficiary of the decline in energy prices compared with the overall net negative impact on emerging markets.

Given that the low level of headline inflation and core inflation, one of the Fed’s preferred measures, is likely to remain below target this year and rise back to 2 per cent in 2016, the Fed has no need to tighten policy sharply.

We expect the Fed to start tightening policy in June, September or December, and to proceed at a fairly slow pace, with a rate rise only at every other meeting, at least at the outset. By removing the language on “patience” at its March meeting, the Fed has given itself the flexibility to act without pre-committing on the date. Our framework suggests the Fed is likely to move its target federal funds rate to 2 per cent to 2.5 per cent over the next couple of years.

It will do less than that if there are downside data surprises or an outsized market reaction to its tightening, and more if inflation were to surprise on the upside.

Cyclical divergence on fundamentals and on policy is likely to continue to support the US dollar. Conversely, low and indeed negative yields in Germany are likely to continue to encourage investors to look to higher-yielding eurozone assets and also to rebalance their portfolios away from the eurozone, which will be reflected in continuing euro depreciation. Of course, a stronger US dollar contributes to tighter overall financial conditions in the US. But, to the extent that they reflect these global spillover effects, a lower level of yields and a flatter US term structure work in the other direction.

Other factors, including US companies hedging euro cash piles they do not want to repatriate and a continued decline in the euro’s share of global central banks’ foreign exchange reserves, are likely to reinforce the trend. The dollar was appreciating at a rapid pace at the start of the year, before Ms Yellen’s March intervention. It is likely to continue to strengthen, especially as global markets focus on the impending Fed rate rise cycle, but at a more measured pace.

Emerging markets are likely to remain under pressure, reflecting the combination of the prospective Fed rate rise cycle, the US dollar’s strength, the lower level of commodity prices and a range of idiosyncratic country risks in what is a highly differentiated asset class. Reflecting myriad challenges for the country, the Brazilian real has depreciated by more than 40 per cent versus the US dollar since Mr Mantega’s currency war complaint in 2010.

Sometimes you have to be careful what you wish for.
Andrew Balls is Pimco’s chief investment officer for global fixed income
END