Regulate Chinese imports: KCR
TPP countries to hold ministerial talks May 26-28: U.S.
10 of 29 Chapters Resolved in TPP Talks
Obama Turns Up Heat on Trade
Froman Signals Progress in China E-pay Dispute with new regulations
India again on US IPR priority watch list; Govt disappointed, but not worried
USTR cites PH IPR enforcement reforms
Zim, Zambia to Boost Ties - Lungu
Keidanren Opposes Aussie Tobacco Packaging Rule
Anger as Algeria pores over new alcohol measures
A world of difference: the global challege of rising inequality
Si los tratados de libre comercio son beneficiosos, ¿Por qué es tan difícil aprobarlos?

Regulate Chinese imports: KCR
2 May 2015
The Hans India
 
Chief Minister K Chandrashekar Rao on Friday appealed to the Prime Minister, Narendra Modi, to see that the dumping of industrial goods into India by countries like China was prevented with the help of suitable measures. Addressing a huge gathering at Ravindra Bharati as part of May Day celebrations, KCR referred to two sick paper mills in the State and added that they were facing crisis of existence due to cheap imports of paper from China.
He called for measures to stop the flooding of Chinese goods into India in the interest of Indian industry and labour welfare. KCR targeted China for preventing Indian imports by imposing 51 per cent anti-dumping tax on Indian goods and at the same time flooding the Indian market with its cheap and inferior quality goods. "Chinese goods will be cheap no doubt, but they are also of quite inferior quality and will last only for three months," the Chief Minister opined.
Branding them as use-and-throw goods, he quipped, "These use-and-throw goods are leading to labour-throw". KCR expressed concern that cotton farmers were also at the receiving end due to Chinese imports. Acknowledging the competition between different States in the country for bringing new industries and investments to their respective States, KCR said the Telangana state has conceived the best industrial policy of which launching was only pending.
"Industrialists will get clearances within a matter of 15 days," he said adding that a land bank of 1.5 lakh acres was available with the government and it would allot the land to industries without any delay. Wishing labourers and workers of the State on the May Day occasion, the Chief Minister announced an accident insurance scheme to drivers of all private vehicles like autos, trucks and cabs.
The government will pay the premiums. KCR also announced an accident insurance scheme worth Rs 5 lakh for home guards and journalists. The Chief Minister said there were 16,000 home guards and 12,000 journalists in the State. KCR also announced hike in the sops to construction workers. He said the house-building workers would get Rs 10,000 instead of Rs 5,000 for marriage in their family.

TPP countries to hold ministerial talks May 26-28: U.S.
Kyodo
1 May 2015
 
WASHINGTON/TOKYO, May 1 -- Twelve countries negotiating for a Pacific free trade pact will hold ministerial talks from May 26 to 28 in the Philippines to seek ways to conclude a deal as soon as possible, a U.S. government official said Thursday.
The United States announced the schedule as Congress is deliberating a bill to help speed up the marathon negotiations for the U.S.-led Trans-Pacific Partnership deal that also involves Japan, Australia and nine other nations.
The TPP ministers last held talks in November in Beijing.
The high-level meeting on the TPP will follow trade ministerial talks of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum on May 23 and 24 in the Southeast Asian country, Catherine Novelli, undersecretary of state, said at a press conference. The Philippines is not taking part in the trade talks.
Remaining thorny issues include how to handle intellectual property, including data on new drugs, and reforms of state-owned organizations, according to negotiation sources.
Japan and the United States, the two largest economies in the envisioned pact, have remained at odds over bilateral issues such as Japan's exceptional tariffs on some agricultural produce and automotive trades.
To prepare for the ministerial talks, chief TPP negotiators from the 12 countries involved will meet from May 15 to 25 on Guam, the Japanese government said.
In addition to the United States, Japan and Australia, the other countries taking part in the talks are Brunei, Canada, Chile, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore and Vietnam.
 
10 of 29 Chapters Resolved in TPP Talks
1 May 2015
Jiji Press English News Service
 
Tokyo, May 1 (Jiji Press)--Japan and 11 other countries have concluded talks on 10 of the 29 chapters of a proposed Trans-Pacific Partnership free trade pact, the Japanese government said Friday.
The 10 chapters include those on streamlining customs procedures, requiring equal treatment of foreign and domestic service firms, and deregulating temporary entry of businesspeople.
Unresolved chapters include those on protection of intellectual property rights, treatment of state-owned enterprises and investment rules.
Most contentious is intellectual property protection. In particular, Japan and the United States are at odds with emerging market economies over a data protection period for new pharmaceutical products.
No marked progress was made over those unresolved chapters when chief negotiators from the 12 countries last met near Washington on April 23 through Sunday. They are scheduled to next meet in Guam on May 15-25 to try to narrow differences. The countries are also considering holding a ministerial meeting in late May.
 
 
Obama Turns Up Heat on Trade
Jim Randle 
1 May 2015
 Voice of America Press Releases and Documents
 
The Obama administration is pressing hard to win approval of controversial trade legislation in Congress, as a series of news reports say the Trade Promotion Authority (TPA) bill is in trouble. White House spokesman Josh Earnest said there is still "important work to be done" on this issue.
The effort includes a gathering of dozens of moderate Democrats at the White House, a briefing by a top economic official for the press, and a campaign-style trip by Obama to a major exporter on the West Coast.
House Speaker John Boehner, a Republican, says his party strongly supports trade and urged Obama to "step up his game" in terms of persuading skeptical Democrats to vote for trade legislation.
The first issue is Trade Promotion Authority which is sometimes called "Fast Track." TPA is strongly opposed by many of Obama's usual allies in the labor and environmental movements and a number of his fellow Democrats in Congress.
The TPA would set rules for congressional consideration of other trade agreements with Pacific nations and the European Union. TPA would allow members of Congress to approve or reject proposed trade deals, but not permit them to make changes.
TPA supporters say U.S. trading partners are not going to make their best offer in negotiations if they expect the U.S. Congress to pick apart the measure.
TPA opponents say Congress should not surrender authority to another branch of government. They also criticize the proposed agreements that would be facilitated by the TPA, the Trans Pacific Partnership and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership. Critics argue that the TPP, T-TIP and previous trade deals like NAFTA (The North American Free Trade Agreement) do too little to protect U.S. workers and the environment, and in some cases, give too much legal clout to foreign companies.
But White House Spokesman Earnest says the new agreements are an improvement over NAFTA because they include "enforceable" provisions to protect labor and the environment. And since NAFTA nations Canada and Mexico would be part of the new deal, it is a chance to redress problems with the prior deal. He says Obama believes that raising labor and environmental standards in nations that trade with the United States will "level the playing field" for U.S. firms. That is because when U.S. competitors have to go to the trouble and expense of meeting these standards, American firms that have to meet similar standards will no longer be at a competitive disadvantage.
The leading Democrat in the House of Representatives, Nancy Pelosi, said trade deals might get more votes if there were some "accommodations" to meet the concerns of critics. She said the current proposal offers far too little money for a program that retrains workers displaced by trade deals for new jobs in the future.
Pelosi told journalists that, so far, she does not see any "big movement" toward support among her fellow Democrats.
 
 
Froman Signals Progress in China E-pay Dispute with new regulations
292 words
1 May 2015
Inside U.S. Trade
 
U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman this week indicated that China has issued new regulations affecting its electronic payment services (EPS) industry that may resolve a longstanding World Trade Organization dispute.
In an April 27 speech at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, Froman said that Beijing has "recently announced a new set of regulations" for EPS and that the U.S. "welcomes" the move. "We are in the process of evaluating those regulations to determine whether they bring China into conformity with its WTO obligations," he said.
USTR did not respond a request for further information.
A 2012 WTO panel faulted Chinese measures on EPS for discriminating against foreign competitors, and China subsequently withdrew the offending measures. But since 2013, the U.S. has been engaged in a tit-for-tat with Beijing, with Washington insisting that by failing to grant market access to U.S. EPS suppliers, it is still in breach of WTO rules, and China firing back that it is under no obligation to do so (Inside U.S. Trade, Nov. 21, 2014).
As recently as April 22, at a meeting of the WTO Dispute Settlement Body, the U.S. noted that China's State Council announced more than five months ago that it would open the EPS market to foreign providers, but had yet to take any action to do so.
"China has yet to adopt any procedures under which foreign enterprises could apply for licenses, and as a result, foreign suppliers remain barred from operating in China," the U.S. said. "To comply with its WTO obligations, China must adopt the regulations necessary for allowing foreign EPS suppliers to operate in China." 
 
 
India again on US IPR priority watch list; Govt disappointed, but not worried
537 words
2 May 2015
Business Line (The Hindu)
 
Policies are in line with World Trade Organization's TRIPS agreement: Ministry India is disappointed at being featured yet again in the US Priority Watch List of weak IPR countries. But it is not worried.
A senior Commerce & Industry Ministry official told BusinessLine that the country's IPR legislations are well in line with the requirements underlined in the World Trade Organization's TRIPS Agreement.
The US has once again placed India on the 'Priority Watch List' of countries with an unfavourable Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) regime.
Nudging India to tighten its IPR rules, the Special 301 report for 2015, released by the United States Trade Representative (USTR) on Thursday, expressed hope that the new channels of engagement created in the past year with India will bring about "substantive and measurable improvements" in India's IPR regime for the benefit of a broad range of innovative and creative industries.
"We hope this year we can convince the US that our laws are drafted in a way so as to protect both our consumer and industry's interest. The new IPR policy that we are coming out with will take care of any anomalies or vagueness in our existing regime and make it tight and also fast-track clearances of patent applications," the official said.
US demand
But, the US may not be satisfied till India makes changes in its IP legislation. It wants India to change Section 3(d) of its patent law, which denies patents for incremental innovations to avoid ever-greening of patents (continuation of patent protection even after the life of the patent is over).
It also wants to discourage grant of compulsory licences to generic manufacturers by the Indian Government for producing patented medicines in times of emergencies or public health crises.
The USTR report, in fact, asks India to have another round of consultations with stakeholders before finalising the IPR policy, so that the US Government and industry can try to push its case further.
"Both the Indian Government and courts in the country have been very careful about dealing with requests for compulsory licences from the industry as well as interpreting Section 3(d). No global rules have ever been flouted," the official added.
Every year the USTR comes up with a list of countries, which, according to it, have IPR laws that do not grant adequate protection to patents and discourage innovation. It also has a mechanism to designate certain nations as 'priority countries' with a poor IPR regime against which the US could impose economic sanctions.
Although the US had initiated an Out-of-Cycle Review (OCR) of India last time to examine if it should be designated as a 'priority country', in 2015 it has refrained from doing so. But it has warned that an OCR could come later.
"We are not announcing another OCR at this time, but will monitor progress over the coming months, and are prepared to take further action, if necessary," the report said.
Other countries that are on the Priority Watch List include Algeria, Argentina, Chile, China, Ecuador, Indonesia, Kuwait, Pakistan, Russia, Thailand, Ukraine and Venezuela.
 
 
USTR cites PH IPR enforcement reforms
563 words
2 May 2015
Manila Bulletin
 
The Philippines has been cited by the US Trade Representative (USTR) for its cooperation among government agencies as a best practice among trading partners to pursue its commitment to a holistic approach to enhance the effectiveness of intellectual property rights (IPR) enforcement.
In its annual Special 301 Report posted on its website, the USTR cited best practices by trading partners in the area of IPR protection and enforcement.
"The Philippines carried out administrative enforcement reforms that have resulted in streamlined procedures, enhanced inter-agency cooperation, and more enforcement action, including increased seizures of pirated and counterfeit goods," cited the 2015 Special 301 Report.
The USTR noted that cooperation among government agencies is another example of a best practice.
"In Paraguay and the Philippines, commitment to a whole-of-government approach to IPR enforcement has been critical to enhancing the effectiveness of IPR enforcement and has resulted in positive reports from a number of affected stakeholder groups," stated the report.
Several countries, including the United States, have introduced IPR enforcement coordination mechanisms or agreements to enhance inter-agency cooperation. The United States encourages other trading partners to consider adopting similar cooperative IPR arrangements.
Allan B. Gepty, officer in charge of the IP Office of the Philippines (IPOPHL), said the decision of the USTR to maintain the Philippines its status is a proof that the government's drive to protect and ensure IPR regime in the country. It was only last year that the USTR removed the Philippines from the watch list of IPR violators.
"This is a recognition of our hardwork and sustained drive to improve the protection and enforcement of intellectual property rights in the country. It means that our national government gives priority to IP as a tool for economic development. It is also a recognition of the good coordination and working relationship of various government agencies involved in IP enforcement, particularly members of the National Committee on IPR, and PHILJA and the judiciary for continuously building capacity for special commercial court judges and court attorneys. And, it is an indication of our productive partnership with the private sector. With an effective and reliable IP regime, we can expect more foreign investments, particularly IP intensive industries, in the country, and improved competitiveness," Gepty said.
The report, however, noted that the United States is working intensively through bilateral and multilateral channels to advance US market access interests and to ensure that the trade initiatives of other countries and regions, including with respect to geographical indication (GI) protection, do not undercut US industries' market access.
"The United States is also engaging bilaterally to address GI-related concerns, including with Canada, China, Costa Rica, El Salvador, the EU and its Member States, Jordan, Morocco, the Philippines, South Africa, and Vietnam, among others," the report said.
GIs typically include place names (or words associated with a place) and they identify products or services as having a particular quality, reputation, or other characteristic essentially attributable to the geographic origin of the product or service.
The US is actively involved in promoting and protecting access to foreign markets for US exporters whose products are identified by common names or generic terms, like parmesan and mozzarella for cheese. The United States is pursuing these objectives in international fora, including in APEC, WIPO, and the WTO as well as in bilateral agreements.
 
 
 
 
Zim, Zambia to Boost Ties - Lungu
by Conrad Mwanawashe 
1 May 2015
All Africa
 
Bulawayo, May 01, 2015 (The Herald/All Africa Global Media via COMTEX) -- ZAMBIA is committed to enhancing trade with Zimbabwe as business co-operation between the two countries has strengthened over the years, Zambian President Edgar Lungu has said. In pursuit of growth in bilateral trade, Zambia would engage Zimbabwe on ensuring that the Victoria Falls-Livingstone One-Stop Border Post, and that of UniVisa were operational to facilitate more business between the two neighbours, he said.
Officially opening the 56th edition of the Zimbabwe International Trade Fair (ZITF) here yesterday, President Lungu said the two countries should seize various business opportunities around them and accelerate economic growth.
He said the theme of this year's edition of the ZITF was timely as it came at a time when Zambia and Zimbabwe were implementing measures aimed at ensuring value addition to various resources the two countries were endowed with.
"In our effort to stimulate trade, my Government is committed to ensuring that the two countries enhance trade in line with this year's Trade Fair theme," said President Lungu.
This year's edition of the ZITF was running under the theme: "Stimulating Trade, Seizing Opportunities to Accelerate Growth".
"In this regard, I am directing my Minister of Commerce, Trade and Industry, Hon Margaret D Mwanakatwe, MP, to closely work with her Zimbabwean counterpart and ensure that the Victoria Falls-Livingstone One-Stop Border Post, which were declared by Your Excellency (President Mugabe) and Your Departed Comrade His Excellency, Mr Michael Chilufya Sata (MHSRP), during the official opening of the United Nations World Trade Organisation in 2013 is operationalised."
President Lungu also directed the Minister of Home Affairs of Zambia to work with his Zimbabwean counterpart to finalise the implementation of the UniVisa between the two countries.
Zimbabwe and Zambia last year agreed to implement a UniVisa regime to facilitate trade and tourist arrivals between the two countries.
He said the friendship between Zimbabwe and Zambia founded by the forefathers, had a rich history dating back to pre-colonial days.
"The people of Zimbabwe and Zambia have always lived and worked together for the common good."
"We are Siamese twins joined by the Zambezi River and the mighty Victoria Falls, a natural monument and, one of the Seven Wonders of the World that symbolise our identity and cultures. The trade and investment relations between the two countries have strengthened over the years," said President Lungu.
From 2010 to 2014, Zambia's exports into Zimbabwe exceeded $1,3 billion, while Zimbabwe exports into Zambia over the same period were above $486 million.
Zimbabwe and Zambia have a history of working together in various joint venture projects both in the private and public sectors.
Some of the projects the two countries cooperated on include the construction and management of the Kariba Dam, the establishment of a One-Stop-Border post at the Chirundu Border, which was the first of its kind in Africa and the co-hosting of the United Nations World Tourism Organisation (UNWTO) Conference in 2013, among others.
He urged border agencies to compliment the efforts of the private sector, in particular, the small and medium entrepreneurs and ensure that trade between the two countries was smooth and uninterrupted.
"We should continue sharing information and engaging each other as we resolve any challenge, which may come our way," said President Lungu.
This year's edition of the trade fair attracted more than 400 direct exhibitors and 19 countries, which organisers said was encouraging.
President Lungu said the ZITF had traditionally been one of the region's leading trade fairs and was a fair where the best local, regional and international exhibitors always participated.
"The trade fair should be viewed as a celebration that has continually provided a platform for organisations to interact, create business partnerships and promote trade and investment in Zimbabwe and the region," said President Lungu.
He said this year's theme was befitting as the showcase came at a time when the two countries and the region were implementing reforms aimed at stimulating trade within the countries and across the borders.
"Your Excellency, we have just come from an Extraordinary Sadc Summit whose main objective was to put the region's industrialisation at the centre of the Sadc Development Agenda in order to deepen and broaden productive capacities and enhance their competitiveness," said President Lungu.
President Lungu said his relationship with his counterpart President Mugabe was cordial. He paid respect to President Mugabe saying Zimbabwe occupied a "special space" in his heart and, it was the first country he visited since assuming office in January this year. 
 
 
Keidanren Opposes Aussie Tobacco Packaging Rule
1 May 2015
Jiji Press English News Service
 
Tokyo, May 1 (Jiji Press)--The Japan Business Federation, or Keidanren, has voiced opposition to Australia's regulations on tobacco packaging, claiming that restrictions on designs infringe intellectual property rights, Jiji Press learned Friday.
"We are concerned with measures that substantially deprive" intellectual property owners of the protection of their rights through the so-called plain packaging measures, the biggest Japanese business lobby said in an opinion brief submitted to the World Trade Organization.
The WTO is currently studying whether the regulations breach WTO agreements.
Australia's plain packaging regulations prohibit tobacco makers from packaging that features corporate logos or trademarks with stylish designs that may attract smokers. Standardized sizes and fonts are required for lettering used on packaging.
The country also set rules for pictures and warnings that emphasize possible health damage from smoking. Australia believes that the regulations help improve public health by discouraging smoking.
Keidanren said in the brief that the regulations could make it harder for consumers to identify products and could hinder competition as a result.
"By eliminating virtually all forms of distinction between products, the plain packaging measures actually seek to mislead consumers," it said, warning that the regulations could also make it easier to produce counterfeit products.
Five countries--Ukraine, Honduras, the Dominican Republic, Cuba and Indonesia--have filed complaints with the WTO against Australia's plain packaging regulations, insisting that they violate international rules on intellectual property protection.
The WTO has set up a dispute settlement panel and started examining the case.
Australia introduced the plain packaging regulations in December 2012, followed by Ireland and Britain. Similar measures are being discussed in New Zealand, France, Norway and Brazil.
 
 
?	?
Anger as Algeria pores over new alcohol measures
Amer Ouali 
2 May 2015
Agence France Presse
 
Alcohol has resurfaced as a hot-button issue in Algerian politics, with ultra-conservative Muslims angered by plans to liberalise sales in a country torn between respect for Islam and freedom of choice.
With deeply-conservative Salafists threatening to take to the streets, Prime Minister Abdelmalek Sellal in mid-April blocked a circular issued by Commerce Minister Amara Benyounes liberalising the wholesale trade of alcohol.
"The prime minister, to keep the peace and harmony, has decided to freeze the circular," Benyounes said on the radio, complaining he had been the "victim of a media lynching" orchestrated by private television channels.
A popular firebrand television preacher, known as Chemseddine, had accused the minister on Nahar TV of "waging war on God".
"We want laws which conform to sharia (Islamic law) and not to the World Trade Organisation," he fumed, mockingly predicting that the sale of pork, which is banned in Islam, and prostitution would be next in line for liberalisation.
On the web, activists have launched a "together for an Algeria without wine" Facebook page that has attracted more than 10,000 supporters.
The daily El-Watan newspaper suggested that by freezing the circular, Sellal had exposed "the weakness of the current leadership in the face of the Islamist tendency".
The newspaper said political-religious pressures have been forcing government and local authorities to pass "incoherent and contradictory laws".
The circular issued by Benyounes, a minister from a secular party, aimed to scrap a ruling by an Islamist predecessor enforcing a system of permits for wholesale trade in alcoholic drinks.
According to the minister, 70 percent of imported alcohol is sold on the "informal" market in Algeria, which itself only produces wine and beer.
Annual beer production is running at 1.6 million hectolitres (42 million gallons) and wine at 700,000 hectolitres, said Ali Hamani, head of the Algerian Beverage Manufacturers Association, adding that 85 percent of output is consumed locally.
Algeria, with a population of 40 million, 99 percent of whom are Sunni Muslims, in 2014 imported $82 million (73 million euros) worth of alcoholic drinks, a rise of more than 40 percent over two years.
And yet the authorities have closed hundreds of bars for a whole host of infractions.
"Many of them are waiting desperately for authorisation to reopen after having met all the requirements in terms of hygiene, security and respect for the environment," a bar owner in downtown Algiers said, on condition of anonymity.
"It's a political decision. The authorities are scared of the Islamists," he said.
The series of closures has forced alcohol drinkers indoors, with most opting to drink either in smokey bistros, at home, or in remote outdoor sites away from the public eye.
One customer lamented the decline in local drinking holes.
"We used to have 15 bars around here, now we only have one," he said, expressing envy for those allowed to take non-alcoholic refreshments in outdoor cafes in the Spring sunshine.
 
 
A world of difference: the global challege of rising inequality
Martin Wolf
Inequality: What Can be Done?, by Anthony Atkinson, Harvard University Press, RRP£19.95/$29.95, 304 pages
 
The Globalization of Inequality, by François Bourguignon, translated by Thomas Scott-Railton, Princeton University Press, RRP£19.95/$27.95, 200 pages
Inequality is back, as both a subject of inquiry and a focus of concern. The extraordinary response to Thomas Piketty's HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/,DanaInfo=.awxyClzvGpj16m4rOuuA+catalog.php?isbn=9780674430006" Capital in the Twenty-First Century revealed that the ground for this renewed interest was already fertile. It merely required a seed. Other seeds are now being planted.
These new books by two distinguished experts, the British economist Sir Anthony Atkinson and the French economist François Bourguignon, are important contributions. The former is the doyen of the economists who are exploring this once-neglected terrain. The latter was chief economist at the World Bank, where he also did significant work in this area.
While the books are on the same topic, they are very different. Bourguignon presents a systematic account of the global and domestic trends, while Atkinson focuses on what is happening within advanced countries, particularly his own, the UK. Readers wanting a map of the terrain should read Bourguignon. Those who desire a thought-provoking guide to policy options in advanced countries should grapple with Atkinson's work.
Bourguignon makes clear that this is a global concern. "After a significant decline in the mid-20th century, followed by a long period of stability, inequality has begun to rise over the last two or three decades in the large majority of developed countries." he writes. "It has also risen in a number of developing countries for which we have long-term data. This phenomenon is therefore not isolated to a few cases, such as the oft-cited examples of the United States and China."
Yet, while inequality in the distribution of incomes has risen in most high-income countries, the scale of that increase varies. Atkinson notes that the US and UK have experienced exceptionally large rises in inequality since 1980. Italy, the Netherlands, Canada, Japan and Germany have experienced far smaller rises. France has even experienced a small reduction. The forces driving the increase in inequality in the high-income countries are strong, but cannot be overwhelming. This conclusion is supported by the fact that levels of inequality are also divergent: relatively low in the Nordic countries, far higher in the UK and US, but also in Italy and Japan, with France and Germany in between.
On inequality of wealth, Atkinson underlines points made by his sometime collaborator Piketty, whose thesis in essence is that returns on capital normally exceed the rate of economic growth, so generating a tendency towards increasing inequality. First, Atkinson says, ratios of wealth to national income have risen sharply since the mid-1970s, largely because of appreciation in the value of a range of assets. Second, a significant part of this increase in wealth belongs to the middle and upper-middle classes, because of the rise in the proportion of the population that owns its own homes, many of which have appreciated greatly in value. Many of these people also own claims on corporate equity via pension funds and other institutional arrangements.
Experience in emerging and developing countries is complex. Inequality of incomes has risen greatly in China and also, suggests Bourguignon, in India, Indonesia and Bangladesh, but not in the rest of Asia. In Africa, Ghana, Kenya and Nigeria have experienced large increases in inequality. But Cameroon, Uganda and Senegal have not. In Latin America, a continent of historically high inequality, it grew substantially in the "lost decade" of the 1980s, then fell quite broadly in the 2000s, though levels generally remain high.
Yet, crucially, while inequality among households has been rising within many countries, it has been falling among households at a global level, albeit from extremely high levels. This is because the "great divergence" in the average incomes of today's developed and developing countries that occurred during the 19th and early 20th centuries has been followed by, first, a period of postwar stability, and then by more than two decades of the opposite development — a "great convergence".
For the global distribution of household incomes, the dominant forces are not changes in the distribution of income within countries, but rather changes in the relative average incomes of countries, weighted by population. The extraordinary growth of China and, to a lesser extent, of India, which contain almost two-fifths of the world's population, largely explains the decline in global household inequality.
The proportion of the world's population living in extreme poverty has fallen from 32 per cent in 1990 to 16 per cent in 2010. Growth matters
The improved performance of erstwhile laggard economies has also brought with it an impressive reduction in the proportion of the world's population living in extreme poverty (judged to be an income below $1.25 a day at 2005 dollars adjusted for purchasing power). This has fallen from 32 per cent in 1990 to 16 per cent in 2010. Growth matters.
Underlying these complex trends, argue the authors, are complex economic forces: globalisation; technological change; the rise of winners-take-all markets; financial liberalisation; and a huge increase in rent extraction, shown in a big rise in the pay of the business executives who control a large part of the economy's resources and in extraordinary earnings in the financial sector. Entwined with these are political factors, especially the pro-free-market turn across the world since about 1980, and, more broadly, a decline in the egalitarian ethos that held sway in many countries in the mid-20th century.
Both authors agree that something should be done about inequality. Atkinson provides a number of arguments for concern over rising inequality within rich countries. Some argue, for example, that only equality of opportunity matters. To this he responds that successful personal outcomes are often merely a matter of luck, that the structure of rewards is often grossly unfair and that, with sufficient inequality of outcome, equality of opportunity must be mirage.
Beyond this, argues Atkinson, unequal societies do not function well. The need to protect personal security or to incarcerate ever more people is likely to become a drag on economic performance and inimical to civilised life. If inequality becomes extreme, many will be unable to participate fully in their society. In any case, argues Atkinson, a pound in the hands of someone living on £10,000 a year must be worth more than it is to someone living on £1m. This does not justify complete equality, since the attempt to achieve it will impose costs. But it does mean that high inequality needs to be justified.
What about policy? At the global level, both authors recommend improved and more generous aid. Bourguignon adds that properly managed trade has much to offer developing countries. Within countries, both authors call for higher taxes on wealth and incomes, and for better regulation, particularly of finance. Also important, they agree, will be policies directly addressed at improving educational outcomes for the disadvantaged.
Atkinson goes far further, offering a programme of radical reform for the UK. It is not merely radical, but precise and (to the extent such a programme can be) costed. It starts from the argument that rising inequality "is not solely the product of forces outside our control. There are steps that can be taken by governments, acting individually or collectively, by firms, by trade union and consumer organisations, and by us as individuals to reduce the present levels of inequality."
Thus policy makers should develop a national pay policy, including a statutory minimum wage set at the "living wage", and should also offer guaranteed public employment at that rate. A "participation income" should be introduced at a national or even EU level, or — as an alternative to such a universal income — social insurance should be made more generous.
In addition, the UK should offer national savings bonds that guarantee a positive real return, and should create a capital endowment paid to all on reaching adulthood. On the tax front, it should return to far more progressive personal income taxes, up to a top rate of 65 per cent, and should turn inheritance taxes into progressive taxes on receipts. The tax on property should be proportional or progressive, not regressive, as it is now, largely because the main tax on property — the council tax — bears proportionately far more heavily on lower-value housing.
Yet history is not on Atkinson's side. The egalitarianism of the mid-20th century occurred at a very particular time. The developed countries enjoyed a monopoly of industrial know-how. The two world wars and the Great Depression not only devastated private wealth, but also created a powerful sense that "we are all in it together". Moreover, capital flows were controlled and capitalism was predominantly national.
None of these conditions holds. Thus, while Atkinson's ideas are interesting, they will not be adopted, at least in the UK. Many of us do not share his nostalgia for the 1970s. The UK abandoned the corporatism of that era for rather good reasons. Moreover, the high taxes on incomes he proposes risk suppressing entrepreneurial risk-taking and increasing emigration of the talented.
Nevertheless, reforms that would render our societies both fairer and more efficient can be readily imagined. Among the most important is to concentrate resources on children, and particularly the children of the relatively disadvantaged. Also sensible, though politically difficult, is to tax ownership of land and other scarce natural resources more heavily. Furthermore, a tax on lifetime receipts of gifts and bequests, plus wider spreading of educational opportunities, seems to the only way to limit the cascade of unearned advantages across generations.
Accelerating reliance on robots and "intelligent" software would reinforce the need to consider the implications of concentrated ownership of productive capital. It is also important to reduce rent extraction, including by corporate management, and to improve co-operation over the taxation of income, particularly income from capital. A situation in which the world's wealthiest are among the least taxed is indefensible.
Yet much the biggest of all the related challenges is global: it is to eliminate extreme poverty. Globalisation is part of the answer. But it needs to be guided — by, for example, pushing developed countries to stop conniving with corruption and theft in developing countries. Targeted aid will also help.
Inequality is an important and complex subject. On the biggest issue of all — global inequality — the recent news has been good. The story on inequality within countries is less appealing, however. These books tell this complex story well. Bourguignon's provides an accessible overview, while Atkinson's offers the social democratic response.
This debate is just beginning. It will become louder.
Martin Wolf is chief economics commentator at the FT
 
 
Si los tratados de libre comercio son beneficiosos, ¿Por qué es tan difícil aprobarlos?
Por Greg Ip 
1 May 2015
The Wall Street Journal Americas
 
Los partidarios estadounidenses del libre comercio no han tenido muchos motivos para celebrar. El último acuerdo multilateral importante de libre comercio, la llamada Ronda Uruguay, tuvo lugar hace más de veinte años. Los últimos acuerdos bilaterales de Estados Unidos se firmaron en 2007.
El presidente Barack Obama quiere acabar con esa sequía con la firma del Acuerdo Estratégico Trans-Pacífico de Asociación Económica, más conocido como TPP. La alianza abarca a 12 países, entre los que figuran Chile, México y Perú.
El desafío es el siguiente: décadas de liberalización comercial han disminuido tanto los beneficios como los perjuicios económicos en el caso de economías grandes y abiertas como la de EE.UU. No obstante, los malos recuerdos siguen presentes en la memoria del público y muchos legisladores estadounidenses, lo que entorpece la aprobación de pactos de libre comercio.
Los economistas coinciden en forma casi unánime en que el intercambio comercial enriquece al mundo. Al permitir que los países se especialicen, el libre comercio aumenta la productividad de los trabajadores, les ofrece más opciones a los consumidores y reduce costos.
Esta lógica ha producido un declive sostenido de las barreras comerciales desde la Segunda Guerra Mundial. El arancel mundial promedio ha caído desde cerca de 15% en los años 60 a menos de 7% en la actualidad. Los aranceles en EE.UU., Japón y la Unión Europea son inferiores a 3%. Eso ha disparado el comercio transfronterizo, lo que ha elevado en forma dramática el estándar de vida en el mundo.
El problema es que los beneficios de seguir reduciendo los aranceles ya son pocos.
Los economistas indican que los beneficios del libre comercio son mayores para las economías pequeñas y proteccionistas, ya que el impacto de pasar a integrar un mercado mucho más grande es proporcionalmente mucho mayor para sus fabricantes y consumidores. Esta es una de las razones por las que el TPP incrementaría el ingreso real de Vietnam, uno de los países más pequeños y menos orientado al mercado del TPP, en 10,5% para 2025, según un análisis de los economistas Peter Petri, Michael Plummer y Fan Zhai.
EE.UU., en cambio, ha firmado pactos de libre comercio con seis del resto de las 11 economías que son parte del acuerdo, y su ingreso real apenas aumentaría 0,4%. Si se concreta el acuerdo, los ingresos reales de Chile, México y Perú crecerían 0,9%, 0,5% y 1,2%, respectivamente, hasta 2025. Eso ayuda a explicar el mayor apoyo al TPP en Vietnam que en EE.UU.
No hay que perder de vista, en todo caso, que la lógica económica raramente es la principal razón detrás de un acuerdo de libre comercio. México utilizó el Acuerdo de Libre Comercio de América del Norte a mediados de los años 90 para convencer a los inversionistas extranjeros de que las reformas de libre mercado que estaba implementando no tenían marcha atrás. El ingreso de China a la Organización Mundial de Comercio en 2001 tuvo el fin de reorganizar las empresas estatales ineficientes y someter a la economía a la competencia del mercado. El primer ministro japonés, Shinzo Abe, quiere que el TPP sirva como un arma para abrir a la competencia a ciertos sectores de la economía. Obama, asimismo, señala que el TPP es una defensa del liderazgo económico de EE.UU. contra el asalto de China, es decir está tomando en cuenta consideraciones geopolíticas para promocionar el libre comercio al igual que lo han hecho varios de sus antecesores.
No obstante, cuando los estadounidenses repasan lo ocurrido en la última década, se sienten arrepentidos. Mientras los consumidores se dieron un festín con una inundación de importaciones baratas provenientes de China, los trabajadores recibieron una paliza. Un estudio de Gordon Hanson, de la Universidad de California en San Diego, y cuatro colaboradores estima que entre 1999 y 2011 desaparecieron entre 2 millones y 2,4 millones de empleos de manufactura.
En un estudio separado, Peter Schott de la Universidad de Yale y Justin Pierce de la Reserva Federal indican que la simple amenaza de un alza de los aranceles aisló a muchos sectores en EE.UU. de la competencia china. Una vez que China se integró a la OMC y esa amenaza se desvaneció, esos sectores sufrieron pérdidas desproporcionadas.
No es sólo la OMC. Debido a que China mantuvo su moneda artificialmente baja, limitó el crecimiento de las exportaciones estadounidenses a China y el déficit comercial de EE.UU. se disparó.
"Es completamente entendible que las personas sientan una resaca de las experiencias de libre comercio de las últimas dos décadas", dice Hanson. "Pero el TPP no tiene que ver con las manufacturas. La globalización en ese sector es un hecho consumado".
Esa distinción podría determinar la aprobación o el fracaso del TPP.
Los negociadores dicen que el tratado especificará reglas para el resto del mundo en sectores como servicios y propiedad intelectual donde las barreras no arancelarias son onerosas. Esto debería beneficiar a EE.UU. mientras los servicios sigan constituyendo una parte creciente de las exportaciones del país y representan 4% del Producto Interno Bruto ahora comparado con 3% en 2000.
De hecho, si el TPP cumple con lo que promete, la economía de EE.UU. debería realizar mucho menos ajustes que las de otros países signatarios que tienen que cumplir estándares estadounidenses sobre el tratamiento de la inversión extranjera, la propiedad intelectual, las importaciones y los subsidios.
Para muchos estadounidenses, no obstante, tales beneficios siguen siendo abstractos y estrechos, además de beneficiar a empresas y trabajadores que ya han avanzado en medio de una creciente desigualdad. Las preocupaciones de que Japón inunde el mercado con autopartes baratas si se reducen los aranceles o que otros países manipularán sus divisas como la ha hecho China son mucho más tangibles.
La tarea de Obama es persuadir a estos detractores de que tales riesgos serán pequeños comparados con las ganancias que aporta el TPP y que una economía más rica y más grande está en mejores condiciones de costear el apoyo que los perdedores de la globalización necesitan. No será fácil.
