HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "International organizations urge eurozone to continue reforms
·         HYPERLINK \l "Argentina Proposes Solutions to WTO to Conclude Conflicts on Doha Round
·         HYPERLINK \l "India complains of Japanese delays at WTO
·         HYPERLINK \l "Unfazed by US objections, Centre to go ahead with buy-local rule for solar
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S., China WTO Consultations In latest Subsidy Dispute Still Lagging
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.K. Lawmakers Back Plain Packaging For Cigarettes, Tobacco Products
·         HYPERLINK \l "Russia considers softening food import ban, minister says
·         HYPERLINK \l "Latinoamérica reduce su venta de alimentos a Rusia pese al veto contra la UE
·         HYPERLINK \l "India plans anti-dumping duty on some steel from China, others
·         HYPERLINK \l "Iran boosts steel import duties as protectionism gathers pace
·         HYPERLINK \l "EU launches subsidy investigation over Indian iron pipes
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S. Negotiates IP Side Letters To Gain Support For TPP Pharmaceutical Demands
·         HYPERLINK \l "Chinese lawyer named first woman to head UN aviation body
 
International organizations urge eurozone to continue reforms 
11 March 2015
dpa International Service in English
 
Berlin (dpa) - Countries in the eurozone must pursue an "ambitious reform agenda," international financial institutions said following a meeting Wednesday in Berlin led by German Chancellor Angela Merkel.

The heads of the International Monetary Fund (IMF), World Bank and other agencies welcomed "ongoing efforts by many euro area countries to enhance their productivity, to raise employment and to improve fiscal positions," they said in a joint statement with Merkel.

Further efforts are "urgently needed across euro area member states" to address youth employment, social inclusion and structural reforms, the statement said.

The statement follows the latest round of eurozone crisis talks last month, after a new Greek government sought an end to austerity measures imposed as part of the country's international bailout.

Germany, as 2015 leader of the Group of Seven leading industrialized countries, hosted the meeting, which was attended by IMF managing director Christine Lagarde and World Bank President Jim Yong Kim, as well as Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development Secretary General Angel Gurria, World Trade Organization chief Roberto Azevedo and International Labour Organization Director-General Guy Ryder.

Europe is facing further economic and geopolitical risks arising from the the showdown between the West and Russia over Ukraine.

"Geopolitical risks have increased in various regions of the world - they constitute a significant burden for global economic development," the leaders said.

In Berlin, Lagarde announced that the IMF's executive board had approved a 17.5-billion-dollar loan for the Ukrainian government, which is battling pro-Russian separatists in eastern Ukraine. The money is meant to support the country's immediate economic stabilization and reforms aimed to restore growth and raise living standards, she said.

The European Central Bank this week launched a 1.1-trillion-euro (1.2-trillion-dollar) asset-buying programme in a bid to stave off deflation in the 19-member eurozone.

The statement from Merkel and the international institutions emphasized trade as "an important driver of global growth, development and employment," calling for advances in World Trade Organization (WTO) talks and openness "to new ideas to move WTO work forward."

The leaders expressed hope for "considerable progress" this year in free-trade negotiations on the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, between the European Union and the United States, and the Trans-Pacific Partnership between a dozen countries in the Americas and Asia, including the US and Japan.

The joint statement said that 2015 would be "of overarching significance for climate policy" with a major Paris conference in December on curbing greenhouse emissions.
 
 
Argentina Proposes Solutions to WTO to Conclude Conflicts on Doha Round
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, March 12, 2015
 
March 11 — Argentina has proposed resolving ongoing conflicts at the World Trade Organization on the 2001 Doha round by permitting members to consider a negotiation approach to bilaterally, plurilaterally or multilaterally strike deals to reduce tariffs restrictions on goods and services.
 
According to Argentina's proposal, circulated among WTO members this week, such deals then could be extended on a most favored nation (MFN) basis.
 
The proposal seeks to “overcome the main obstacles that have blocked progress” in WTO members' efforts to achieve the goals of the Doha Development Agenda and address the “fundamental shortcomings” with formula-based market access negotiations, Argentina said.
 
The proposal ultimately will help membership “build and keep an ongoing balance country by country with concrete demand-driven results,” Argentina said.
 
‘Innovative Ideas.’
 
Argentina's proposal would set a defined time period by which members may submit an initial request for specific trade terms. Each member may reply to each initial request by accepting, declining or offering a counter proposal.
 
The process of requests and offers would continue until bilateral agreements are reached or desisted, the proposal said. The terms of any bilateral, plurilateral or multilateral agreements would be submitted in written form to the WTO secretariat.
 
Once agreed by consensus, the result of the negotiations would be bound in members' schedules of concessions in goods and services, the proposal said.
 
The final proposed result of the negotiating process would be consolidated by the secretariat in a single draft legal instrument containing the draft schedules of concessions of the Doha Round and, in line with the MFN principle, extended to the whole membership, according to the proposal.
 
‘Win-Win Approach.’
 
A request and offer approach would permit all members “to tailor their requests on the basis of the specific and often limited list of products they export—or intend to export—while those members who want to negotiate bilaterally using any formula would be able to do it bilaterally without any ex ante requirement...to make cuts based on any formula,” the proposal said.
 
Under such an approach no member would be required to give market access if it is not satisfied with the market access to other members' markets offered in exchange, Argentina said.
 
Argentina said the proposal would simplify the negotiation process “since no exceptional provisions are required to address a request and offer negotiation at all.”
 
A request and offer structure would enable each member to “negotiate with certainty” because they will be directly involved in bilateral negotiations that permit them to ask for and offer what they need and can deliver, the proposal said.
 
The proposal also would enable members to address non-tariff import restrictions such as technical import barriers that cannot be dealt with under a formula approach, Argentina said.
 
Scope Parameters
 
The scope of Argentina's proposal includes goods negotiations of agricultural and non-agricultural products and services negotiations.
 
Request and offer goods negotiations would include: 
• bound tariffs, and/or

• bound tariff rate quotas, and/or

• MFN tariff rate quotas, and/or

• unbound tariffs.

Request and offer services negotiations would include: 
• commitments of sectors not bound in members' schedules,

• removal of existing limitations or reduction in the level of restrictiveness of modes so far unbound,

• undertaking additional commitments under Article XVIII of the General Agreement on Trade in Services, and

• termination of MFN exemptions.

Request and offer negotiations “shall neither be subject to any parameters or benchmarks of any kind, nor create new import restrictions,” the proposal said.
 
Special and Differential Treatment
 
Argentina's proposal would incorporate special and differential treatment for developing countries including less than full reciprocity, the proposal said.
 
Least-developing countries will be “neither required nor expected to undertake commitments in market access negotiation whereas these countries will have the opportunity of greater market access results through their requests and the MFN treatment,” the proposal said.
 
The same protections would apply to small and vulnerable economies, Argentina said. 
 
 
India complains of Japanese delays at WTO 
D. Ravi Kanth 
12 March 2015
Mint
 
Geneva, March 12 -- Even as India and Japan are forging strong trade and economic ties, Indian pharmaceutical companies and information technology (IT) services providers continue to face "specific" hurdles to enter the Japanese market because of its "stringent" and time consuming regulatory requirements.

India raised specific concerns faced by its companies in the Japanese market at the World Trade Organization (WTO) during the 12th trade policy review (TPR) of Japan which concluded on Wednesday.

The TPR process enables members to review the macro-economic and trade policies of a country under review. It also allows WTO members to raise their immediate trade policy concerns in the country whose trade policies are being examined.

Around 700 questions were raised by some 40 countries about the specific problems faced by their traders and companies in the Japanese market.

"In the pharmaceutical sector, Indian companies are unable to access the Japanese market due to stringent and time consuming regulatory requirements, including requirement for an Indian company to have joint venture with a Japanese company and the need for commercial presence for applying to Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices Agency," an Indian official said at the meeting.

India drew attention to the "the stringent maximum residue levels for chemical products, including agro-chemicals, additives for food products act as market entry barriers for our exporters".

Indian IT firms, according to the Indian official, face several hurdles in the Japanese IT services market due to the "Keiretsu" model that prohibits Indian IT entities from directly approaching customers in Japan.

"As a result, they often end up as tertiary service providers despite their competitive strengths in this sector," India complained. Several other countries spoke against Japan's trade-distorting agriculture policies, particularly high subsidies and tariffs, and non-tariff barriers.

A senior Japanese trade official assured members that Tokyo is "committed" to further trade liberalization. Japan is currently engaged in negotiations to conclude a total of 16 investment agreements.

Ahead of the review, the WTO secretariat issued a comprehensive report on the country under review. The WTO has praised Japan for pursuing bold economic policies to reverse deflation and revitalize its economy. The report spoke positively about the "three arrows" strategy-involving bold monetary policy, flexible fiscal policy, and growth strategies-being pursued by the Japanese government.
 
 
Unfazed by US objections, Centre to go ahead with buy-local rule for solar 
M Ramesh 
12 March 2015
Business Line (The Hindu)
 
3,000 MW of solar photo voltaic capacity up for grabs in Batch II of Phase II Undeterred by the ongoing battle at the WTO over the mandatory buy-local rule for solar power projects, the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy has decided to go ahead with similar provisions for the award of the next set of solar power projects.

Coming up next is Phase-II, Batch-II of the Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission, where 3,000 MW of solar photo voltaic capacity will be up for grabs through a bidding process. The chunk will be divided into lots and allocated to various States, and projects of at least 10 MW in size will be awarded to those bidders who offer to sell the power cheapest to the State-owned power trading company, NTPC Vidyut Vyapar Nigam (NVVN).

The guidelines for Phase II Batch II, released by the Ministry on Tuesday, said the Ministry will prescribe the “domestic content requirement” (DCR) for each State. As in the case of the previous round of bidding, (Phase II Batch I, where 750 MW of capacity was distributed to winners), bidders may bid for ‘DCR’ or ‘open’.

India’s DCR rule has particularly irked the US, leading it to complain to the WTO. The case is underway, but the Centre is unfazed. India’s defence stands on two legs — that the quantum of projects required to buy local cells and modules is very small, and that in any case it is only a State-owned company that is buying the power, and the WTO allows buy-local rules when applied to government procurement.

The guidelines said that for plants using crystalline silicon, the cells and the modules (modules are made with cells) should be produced in India. For ‘thin film’, the entire module must be made in India, though import of the substrate is permitted.

Narender Surana, Managing Director of module manufacturer Surana Solar, felt the guidelines should have been further refined. A part of projects to be awarded under the ‘DCR route’ should be permitted to use modules made in India using imported cells, he said.

CUF cap

A noteworthy feature of the guidelines is the Capacity Utilisation Factor (CUF) cap. The Ministry will prescribe a CUF ceiling, which practically means a cap on the number of kWhr of electricity generated. Generation beyond the limit will be paid only Rs. 3 a kWhr, though the plant owner can sell surplus power to third parties.

Experts such as Raveesh Budania of Headway Solar, a Delhi-based solar consultancy, have welcomed the move, noting that such a ‘cap’ will discourage the practice of developers building plants that actually have higher capacity than awarded, so that they generate more and earn more. After all, it is impossible for the Ministry to monitor the capacity of every plant. Hence it is saying, if you over-generate, we will pay you only Rs. 3.

It is good for the developers too because they may add to the capacity at any time and sell the surplus power directly to consumers, noted Budania.

The guidelines also fix a limit on the tariff — it shall not exceed that prescribed by the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission. The winners will have 210 days from the date of signing the power purchase agreement to construct the project.

India’s DCR rule has particularly irked the US, leading it to complain to the WTO.
 
 
U.S., China WTO Consultations In latest Subsidy Dispute Still Lagging 
11 March 2015
Inside US-China Trade
 
Posted: March 9, 2015 The United States and China have not yet scheduled the formal World Trade Organization consultations the U.S. administration requested over what it claims are prohibited export subsidies in six industry sectors and agriculture for firms operating in 178 industrial clusters known as "demonstration bases," according to the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative.

The U.S. formally requested consultations on Feb. 11 in what the administration touted as a major enforcement announcement. Under the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures (ASCM), a party can request a panel if a dispute over prohibited subsidies is not resolved within 30 days of the consultation request. But that timeline, which is half of what the ASCM sets for other subsidies disputes, can be extended by consensus of the disputing parties.

The 30-day period would expire on March 13, but a spokeswoman for the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative said the date for the consultations is still being finalized following a slight delay because of the Chinese New Year holiday. She declined to provide any other detail, including whether the consultations will be held next week before March 13.

In its consultations request, the U.S. is alleging that China is providing more than $1 billion in prohibited export subsidies to a number of sectors -- including textiles and agriculture -- through its "demonstration bases" program.

USTR did not include what it had previously alleged were prohibited export subsidies provided to the automobile and auto parts and which had been subject to WTO consultations in 2012. USTR said that China appears to have removed the key measures in the auto sector the U.S. had raised.
 
 
U.K. Lawmakers Back Plain Packaging For Cigarettes, Tobacco Products
By Alex Morales and Jillian Ward
WTO Reporter, March 12, 2015
 
March 11 — U.K. lawmakers voted to force Imperial Tobacco Group Plc, British American Tobacco Plc (BAT) and other cigarette manufacturers to sell their products in standardized packaging in an effort to reduce the appeal of smoking.
 
Lawmakers in the lower chamber, the House of Commons, on March 11 voted 367 to 113 in favor of the legislation, which would also apply to hand-rolled tobacco. The legislation also requires approval from the unelected upper chamber, the House of Lords, which is due to vote on Monday.
 
The vote is a blow to the $780 billion tobacco industry, which is grappling with declining smoking rates and growing use of e-cigarettes. The legality of removing brand imagery is still in question, with challenges moving through the World Trade Organization (38 WTO, 2/26/15).
 
“Plain packs are the single biggest regulatory threat out there because it threatens the pricing power that has made this industry so profitable for so long,” Philip Gorham, an Amsterdam-based analyst at Morningstar Inc., said in an e-mail.
 
Prime Minister David Cameron's government announced its intention in January to push through the legislation before the May 7 general election. If passed, the new rules will take effect in May 2016, bringing the country into line with Australia and Ireland. The proposed rules will require cigarettes and tobacco to be sold in dull brown packets with white interiors, with specified text only, such as the brand. The packs would continue to carry health warnings.
 
Legal Action
 
Bristol, England-based Imperial Tobacco, the largest U.K. cigarette maker, whose brands include Davidoff, said in an e-mail that while the legislation still needs the go-ahead from the Lords, the company would “defend our legal rights in court.”
 
Japan Tobacco Inc., maker of Camel cigarettes, and BAT also will challenge the policy through legal channels, the companies both said.
 
“This legislation is a case of the UK Government taking property from a UK business without paying for it,” Jerome Abelman, BAT's Corporate and Regulatory Affairs Director, said in a statement.
 
Plain packaging puts the brand identity of tobacco companies—and their corresponding ability to charge more for some brands than others—at risk, Morningstar's Gorham said. Smokers in Australia have traded down since plain packaging legislation was introduced in the country, he said.
 
The French and New Zealand governments have said that they want similar legislation, but most countries are holding off on passing new laws in anticipation of a ruling on the matter by the WTO, which isn't expected until the second half of 2016.
 
The smoking rate in the U.K. has fallen below 20 percent, the lowest in 80 years, scientists at University College London said last year. Across Europe, a third of people smoke.
 
The British government has responsibility for health care only in England, the largest of the four nations making up the U.K. The Welsh and Northern Irish governments say that they intend to apply the English regulations, while Scottish ministers say that they will put similar legislation before the Parliament in Edinburgh in May.
 
 
Russia considers softening food import ban, minister says 
11 March 2015
MTI - EcoNews
 
Budapest, March 11, 2015 (MTI-Econews) - RussianAgriculture Minister Nikolai Fyodorov said his ministry was considering softening its ban on food imports from a series of European Union countries, first of all from Greece, Hungary and Cyprus, and the move was close to implementation, Interfax news agency reported on Wednesday.

The embargo was introduced last August in response to Western sanctions imposed on Moscow for its role in the Ukraine crisis.

Moscow is "in intense discussions on different possibilities to answer the question of whether we can find a positive answer to liberalize shipments of products to our market. There are options, which we are discussing, there are two or three options,

which are close to possible implementation," the minister said, adding that Russia wants to find a solution which would not alienate the EU.

"We are actively investigating to see what civilised opportunities there are to their proposals," Mr Fyodorov told journalists in Moscow. "If we help them, we would not want to create problems for them in their relations with Brussels," Interfax quoted the minister as saying.

Russia's intention to soften the food embargo was first aired by Minister of Economic Development Alexey Ulyukayev two weeks ago.

Russia will explore ways of softening the food embargo for Hungary and Greece consistent with WTO norms, Russian news agencies TASS and RIA Novosty quoted Mr Ulyukayev on March 3.

Mr Ulyukayev emphasised the Russian government was looking into the matter after these countries asked it to revoke the ban.

"We need to find a decision consistent with WTO norms. It is impossible to simply make exceptions for particular countries," the Russian minister said, but added that "I cannot rule out we can even partly resort to unilateral measures if our partners properly perceive them."

Solutions are explored making possible for goods from these nations to enter the Russian market through processing or tolling mechanisms, Mr Ulyukayev said.

The Hungarian economy has suffered losses of nearly EUR 300,000 a day as a result of the Russian food embargo, Hungary's minister for foreign affairs and trade said in an interview with Slovak business daily Hospodarske Noviny published in October last year.

Russian President Vladimir Putin has paid an official visit to Hungary in February.

 
Latinoamérica reduce su venta de alimentos a Rusia pese al veto contra la UE
 
Madrid, 11 mar (EFECOM).- América del Sur ha reducido sus ventas alimentarias a Rusia, por la situación económica del país, y no ha llenado el "hueco" que dejó el veto de Moscú a productos occidentales, según el director general del Instituto Interamericano para la Cooperación en Agricultura (IICA), Víctor Villalobos.

Villalobos ha declarado, en una entrevista con Efeagro, que los problemas económicos en Rusia han influido más en las exportaciones latinoamericanas que las perspectivas que podían derivarse del boicot de Moscú contra los envíos agroalimentarios la Unión Europea (UE), Noruega o EEUU.

"Lo que ha ocurrido es que Rusia ha dejado de comprar productos de Sudamérica, sobre todo cárnicos", y esto ha repercutido en envíos de Uruguay o Argentina, para los que ese país era un destino prioritario, ha explicado.

A su juicio, "el hueco (generado por el veto ruso) no se ha llenado por razones económicas, porque no hay un flujo de recursos; Rusia sigue siendo un mercado importante, pero no en las proporciones o según las expectativas que había", según el mexicano Villalobos.

Esta situación ha afectado a la economía latinoamericana, ha señalado el responsable del IICA, "aunque a unos más que a otros".

En cuanto a negociaciones comerciales entre la UE y Mercosur (Argentina, Brasil, Paraguay, Uruguay y Venezuela), ha reconocido que uno de los aspectos más complejos es poner de acuerdo a los países del bloque latinoamericano.

Respecto al debate entre la UE y EEUU sobre un Tratado de Libre Comercio e Inversiones (TTIP, siglas en inglés) ha apuntado que les "preocupa" porque un acuerdo podría desplazar o sacar del mercado a productores agrarios de países como los de América del Sur.

Ha subrayado que en todas estas negociaciones bilaterales -Mercosur y EEUU- hay "ganadores y perdedores", tanto entre los países como entre los agricultores, por lo que, en su opinión, lo "ideal" sería un acuerdo multilateral dentro de la Organización Mundial del Comercio (OMC). 
 
 
India plans anti-dumping duty on some steel from China, others 
By Krishna N. Das 
 
NEW DELHI, March 11 (Reuters) - India's trade ministry has recommended anti-dumping duties ranging from $180 to $306 per tonne for some industrial-grade stainless steel imported from China, Malaysia and South Korea in a bid to protect local industry.

After a year-long investigation based on complaints from Jindal Stainless Ltd, the trade ministry said it found that the domestic industry was suffering "material injury due to such dumped imports" and that a definitive measure was required to stop it. (http://bit.ly/18AnkfU [http://bit.ly/18AnkfU])

The recommendations, made public on Wednesday, are expected to be implemented by the finance ministry within three weeks and will stem the flow of surging imports, N.C. Mathur, president of the Indian Stainless Steel Development Association, said.

Mathur said the grades subject to the dumping duty can cost $1,270-$2,070 per tonne and are used mainly to make equipment for industries like dairy, oil refinery and railways.

India consumes about 1 million tonne of this type of stainless steel and more than 40 percent of that is imported, mainly from China, a trade which is growing at up to 15 percent a year.

China's annual stainless steel surplus is more than 4 million tonnes, compared with India's annual demand of about 2.6 million tonnes and which leads to cheap supplies coming in from China, Mathur said.

Steelmakers from Asia to Europe are facing increasing pressure from a rise in cheap imports as Russia and Ukraine, armed with weaker currencies, join China in pushing surplus output on to world markets.

Many steel companies in India, such as Tata Steel, JSW Steel and Kalyani Steels, have seen profits come under pressure.

Jindal Stainless shares ended up 10 percent at 40.50 rupees on Wednesday on the duty recommendations, their highest closing price in 2.5 months.

Mathur said the steel industry also welcomed the government's decision to provide for an increase in the import duty on steel to 15 percent without any major procedural delays. Earlier, the government had set a limit of 10 percent while the actual duties are below that.

The provision will allow the government to raise the duty whenever it wants just with a notification, Mathur said. (Editing by Jane Merriman) 
 
 
Iran boosts steel import duties as protectionism gathers pace 
 
* Record China steel exports pressure over-supplied sector
* EU, Indonesia, India, Turkey have imposed duties in 2015
* Tehran bans importers from using official exchange rate

By Maytaal Angel

LONDON, March 11 (Reuters) - Iran has raised duties on certain steel imports to between 10 and 20 percent as protectionism in the global steel sector gathers pace amid a flood of sales from top producer China.

China's steel exports rose 50.5 percent last year to a record 94 million tonnes, or about a quarter of world exports. The increase has sparked a chorus of calls around the globe for action to protect local steel industries.

This year alone, measures taken to protect steelmakers have been taken in the European Union, Indonesia, India, Turkey, and now Iran.

"A steel import tax has been imposed ... to protect local steel mills against dumping of China, Russia and Turkey," said Keyvan Ja'fari Tehrani, head of international affairs at the Iranian Iron Ore Producers and Exporters Association (IRIOPEX).

There was no reply from Iran's Ministry of Mine, Trade and Industry to Reuters emails. Metal Expert, an information agency, showed Reuters a copy of the Iranian customs decree.

The duties, which will apply to products such as billet, hot rolled coil, wire rod and rebar, are in line with Iran's ambitious 2025 vision plan to quadruple its steel output.

They are also in line with a bid to diversify the country's economy away from oil, make it more self-sufficient, and shield it better from Western sanctions over Tehran's disputed nuclear programme.

"Some believe that duties of 20 percent on rebar and 10 percent on billets cannot stop the tide of subsidized Chinese steel exports, and higher tariffs are required," said Bahador Ahramian, a board member of IRIOPEX and the Iran Steel Producers Association.

Tehran is anxious to protect its steel and iron ore sector. It is seen as strategic in that it supplies dozens of related industries, including construction and oil.

In addition to raising steel import duties, Iran has banned importers from buying foreign currency at the official exchange rate, usually about 20 percent below the market rate. (Reporting by Maytaal Angel; Editing by David Clarke and Mark Potter) 
 
 
EU launches subsidy investigation over Indian iron pipes 
 
BRUSSELS, March 11 (Reuters) - The European Commission said on Wednesday it had launched an investigation into alleged illegal subsidies supporting imports of tubes and pipes of ductile cast iron from India. 
 
The complaint was lodged at the end of January by the pipe and drainage units of French construction group Saint-Gobain . 
 
The Commission said the complainants had provided evidence that appeared to show the Indian producers benefiting from a number of subsidies from the national government and the states of Gujarat, Jharkhand, Rajasthan and West Bengal. 
 
The alleged subsidies consist of: loans, loan guarantees and grants; exemption from certain taxes and duties; grants of mining rights and provision of land; as well as high-grade iron ore at sub-market prices. 
 
The Commission is already investigating Indian manufacturers for alleged dumping of the product -- selling it for export at prices below domestic levels or below the cost of production. 
 
 
U.S. Negotiates IP Side Letters To Gain Support For TPP Pharmaceutical Demands
World Trade Online
Posted: March 11, 2015 
 
Waikoloa, HAWAII – The United States is in the process of bilaterally negotiating secret side letters with several Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) countries, including Chile, that would provide them with favorable clarifications on key intellectual property (IP) issues in return for their cooperation in setting stringent IP rules in a final deal, according to informed sources.
 
Some sources said this side letter effort appears to be part of a “divide and conquer” strategy by U.S. negotiators intended to splinter what was once a united front of TPP countries opposed to U.S. demands on IP, particularly in the area of pharmaceuticals. On Tuesday (March 10), U.S. IP negotiators held bilateral meetings here with their counterparts from several TPP countries, including Australia and Canada.
 
One informed source said the side letters the U.S. is negotiating with other TPP countries may cover areas other than IP. This source emphasized that it is important for U.S. lawmakers to know the content of these side letters in order to evaluate the TPP agreement in its entirety.
 
In the case of Chile, the side letter under negotiation relates to patent linkage, which is a longstanding issue of contention between the two countries stemming from their 2004 bilateral free trade agreement.
 
The letter would clarify that, for Chile, the obligations on patent linkage in the bilateral FTA would take precedence over those included in a final TPP agreement, sources said. This effectively means that Chile would be exempted from the TPP provisions on patent linkage.
 
The TPP language on patent linkage is largely similar to the Chile FTA, but the side letter has the apparent benefit for Chile of allowing it to avoid pressure from the U.S. to make changes to its patent linkage system as a prerequisite for bringing the TPP into force.
 
The U.S. government and the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of American (PhRMA) have long argued that Chile has not complied with the patent linkage provisions in the bilateral FTA, a position that the Chilean government has rejected in the past. The planned side letter would not resolve that dispute over Chile's compliance with the FTA, according to one informed source.
 
Patent linkage generally refers to a system in which a country's health regulator holds off on granting marketing approval for a generic drug until the patent for the related brand-name drug expires or is found to be invalid through litigation. Typically, the decision on marketing approval is stayed until the completion of litigation between the generic and brand-name producers over whether the patent is being infringed upon.
 
Other TPP countries such as Mexico are also seeking favorable clarifications from the U.S. on specific IP issues, according to informed sources. They said it was conceivable these could be done in the form of side letters. 
 
For instance, Mexico has sought a clarification that its current patent linkage system would comply with the TPP obligations and therefore would not have to be changed. 
 
The main bone of contention with the Mexican linkage system relates to its scope of coverage. When Mexico initially implemented patent linkage via decree in 2003, it only applied to patents for new chemical entities, not to patents for new formulations or new uses.
 
Following a 2010 ruling by its Supreme Court, Mexico expanded the scope of its linkage system to apply to patents for new formulations. But Mexican health regulator COFEPRIS still retains flexibility not to apply linkage to patents for new uses.
 
The Office of the U.S. Trade Representative has not called for improvements in Mexico's patent linkage system in its annual Special 301 report on foreign countries' IP practices since 2012. However, PhRMA has pressed for Mexico to expand the scope of its patent linkage system to cover patents for new uses, and included this demand in its February submission to USTR for the upcoming 2015 Special 301 report. 
 
“PhRMA's members encourage Mexican authorities to establish uniform criteria consistent with Court precedents ordering the listing of use patents in the Official Gazette,” the group said. Such a listing is required for patents to be subject to the linkage system.
 
Another area that could be subject to demands for clarification by TPP countries is a proposed requirement that parties provide an additional three years of data exclusivity for “new clinical information” that is submitted in connection with an application for a new marketing approval based on a previously approved drug.
 
This is on top of the five-year exclusivity period that countries would be required to provide for test data initially submitted by a brand-name drug company to prove the safety and efficacy of its drug.
 
Some critics of this provision fear that brand-name drug companies would repeatedly submit new clinical information in an effort to extend their period of data exclusivity indefinitely – a form of so-called “evergreening.”
 
One way to ease these fears would be for the U.S. to clarify that this additional three-year period could only be invoked one time, meaning that the maximum term of data exclusivity for small molecule drugs would be eight years, according to an informed source.
 
The main dispute surrounding Chile's compliance with the FTA's obligation on patent linkage is that the Chilean system does not allow the health regulator to stay marketing approval of a generic drug unless there has been an injunction issued by a court.
 
According to an industry source, brand-name drug makers do not have legal standing to seek such an injunction in Chilean courts until the generic drug enters the market. As a result, PhRMA argues, Chile's system fails to meet the main goal of patent linkage, which is to provide brand-name drug makers recourse to challenge generic drugs as infringing before they enter the market.
 
Protecting Chile against U.S. demands on patent linkage in the context of TPP implementation would be helpful because the implementing legislation for the most recent U.S. free trade deals states that the agreement will not enter into force for a country until the U.S. president has certified the trading partner has complied with all its provisions.  
 
The Chilean government, Chilean lawmakers and stakeholders in the country have objected to this so-called “certification requirement” as giving the U.S. the ultimate authority in determining whether other trading partners' legislation brings them in line with the terms of the agreement and the leverage to demand changes to those laws by withholding entry into force.
 
 
Chinese lawyer named first woman to head UN aviation body 
11 March 2015
Agence France Presse
 
Chinese international, air and space law expert Fang Liu became the first woman to head the Council of the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), the UN agency announced Wednesday.

Liu, who has worked for the Montreal-based agency in various capacities since 2007, will start her three-year term as ICAO secretary general on August 1.

"She becomes the first woman ever to be appointed to the prestigious global position heading the United Nations specialized agency for civil aviation, and only the second ICAO secretary general from an Asia Pacific State," the ICAO said in a statement.

Liu previously held posts at China's aviation agency and APEC.

She succeeds Frenchman Raymond Benjamin, who has held the position since 2009.

The 191-member organization has been focused lately on improving aircraft tracking following the disappearance of Malaysia Airlines flight 370. The aircraft, with 239 people on board, has never been found, nearly a year on.

An international aviation summit in Montreal last month gave strong backing to plans to monitor flights in real time, making it easier to pinpoint the location of planes lost at sea.

The International Civil Aviation Organization Council is now expected to ratify the proposal in November, making it obligatory for all airlines starting in 2016.END
 


  ________________________________  
Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.