Headlines:
OECD trims growth forecast on back of China concerns
Worries over global growth weigh as Fed mulls rate hike
OECD Pegs India Growth at 7.2% in FY16
Obama says Pacific trade deal this year
Ministers to meet for Pacific trade pact talks in late Sept.
Kenya: Nairobi to host 'make or break' WTO ministerial meeting
India's farm subsidy programme may face fresh challenge at WTO
EU seeks to remove obstacle to trade deal
EU Proposes New Trans-Atlantic Court for Trade Disputes 
 
Details:
OECD trims growth forecast on back of China concerns
By Ferdinando Giugliano in London
17 September 2015
Financial Times
Paris-based group also warns that EU is not fully benefiting from commodities downturn
The combination of a sharp contraction in China and a shock in the financial markets has the potential to derail the global recovery, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD has cautioned, as it trimmed its forecast for global growth.
The Paris-based body also warned that the eurozone was failing to reap the full benefits from the steep fall in commodity prices and depreciation of the euro, cutting its medium-term forecasts despite a small improvement this year.
The warning follows a summer of turmoil on global markets, which have swung wildly over worries about the Chinese economy. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" US Federal Reserve is set to decide today whether to increase interest rates for the first time in nearly a decade, a choice that is adding to the climate of uncertainty. In its Interim Economic Outlook , the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD only marginally lowered its projections for global growth from three months ago, cutting its 2015 forecast from 3.1 per cent to 3 per cent and its 2016 prediction from 3.8 per cent to 3.6 per cent.
US growth forecast for this year was significantly increased from 2 per cent to 2.4 per cent, while there was a steep downgrade of the projection for Brazil, which is now expected to contract 2.8 per cent in 2015 and 0.7 per cent next year, about two percentage points lower than predicted in June.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD believes that the Chinese authorities will be able to avoid a hard landing and has reduced its growth forecasts for China both this year and the next only marginally. However, it warned that a sharp contraction in Chinese internal demand, combined with a large and widespread correction in global markets would have the potential to severely affect global economies.
"The key risk to global growth is a larger than expected slowdown in China. Combined with financial turmoil, potentially exacerbated by the first tightening step in US monetary policy, this would have serious repercussions on the global economy," it warned.
A decline in the growth rate of China's domestic demand by two percentage points for two years, combined with a reduction by 10 per cent in global equity prices, would reduce global growth by half a percentage point both in 2015 and in 2016. The simulation does not, however, take into account second-round effects, including a further decline in oil prices and a possible response from the monetary authorities around the world. Among the world's largest economies, Japan would be affected most harshly, with the euro area only weakening by around 0.25 percentage point per year.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD upgraded its growth forecast for the eurozone for this year, raising it from 1.5 per cent to 1.6 per cent. It cut medium-term projections, however, and now believes that Germany will only expand 2 per cent in 2015, 0.4 percentage points less than it thought just three months ago.
The outlook also warns that the eurozone is expanding by about one percentage point less than one could expect given the recent tailwinds, which include lower oil prices and the accommodative monetary policy stance from the European.
"[The eurozone] should have done better than it actually has", said Catherine Mann, the OECD chief economist. "It's like a student that you know can do better than he is doing."
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD blames the eurozone's disappointing growth rates on the inadequate strength of the banking system and insufficient progress in writing down bad loans. It says that the flow of credit from HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" the ECB is not reaching companies and consumers in the way it should, confining the single currency to lower growth rates than the US.
"Until debt burdens in the euro area are eased, even such credit as is available is unlikely to spur net new spending," the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD said. The Financial Times Limited 
Worries over global growth weigh as Fed mulls rate hike
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Paul Handley
17 September 2015
Agence France Presse
China's economic downturn and weak inflation pose a challenge to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" US Federal Reserve as it weighs raising interest rates for the first time in nine years on Thursday.
Analysts say the risks have risen for a slowdown in US growth that might persuade the Fed to hold off from a rate hike for a few more months.
Global markets remained cautious ahead of the decision, to be released at 1800 GMT Thursday. There were gains in most major stock markets Wednesday, but only slight shifts in the major currencies.
The decision, though, has been preceded by calls for the US central bank to move gingerly.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Bank has warned developing economies to prepare for more capital and currency market turmoil while the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD urged the Fed to move slowly and make its policy plans clear, whatever it decides.
Most analysts see the Fed again putting off the long-awaited increase to the benchmark federal funds rate, which has been locked at 0-0.25 percent since the 2008 crisis, giving the world a massive supply of cheap dollars.
While US growth has been strong, still-weak inflation and the recent China-driven turmoil in global markets "most likely mean that the FOMC will leave rates unchanged at this week's meeting," said Harm Bandholz of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UniCredit.
That was underscored by a downward turn in the US consumer price index on Wednesday, confounding Fed hopes of seeing a pickup in inflation.
Jim O'Sullivan, chief economist at High Frequency Economics, said he "expect officials to be risk-averse and to hold off on tightening for now" because of the challenges to world economic growth.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" The Fed has not raised rates in more than nine years, and what would probably amount to an increase of 0.25 percentage point would represent a momentous break with the extraordinary crisis stance it has adopted since the 2008-2009 recession.
It would begin what is expected to be a slow series of rate hikes towards a "normal" monetary policy stance of around 3 percent in the next two years.
But it would also make the dollar more expensive and hike borrowing costs for developing economies around the world.
After a lengthy build-up to Thursday's decision, analysts say what is more important is how Fed Chair HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Janet Yellen explains it in a post-decision press conference -- specifically, what she says about US growth, global risks and the path of rate hikes in the coming months and year.
"Uncertainty about this month's FOMC meeting is about to end, but don't expect uncertainty about Fed policy to disappear," O'Sullivan said.
Earlier Wednesday, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, the policy club of 34 advanced economies, said the strength of the US economy "warrants an upward interest rate path."
"The timing of the first rate hike is of secondary importance compared to the pace of increase. Clear communication of that pace will help to minimize financial market volatility." Agence France-Presse
OECD Pegs India Growth at 7.2% in FY16
17 September 2015
The Economic Times - Mumbai Edition
India is expected to be the fastest growing major economy over the next two years, the Paris-based HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD) said, even as it pared the country's growth forecast marginally citing sub-par global growth.
The think-tank of the 34 advanced economies expects the world economy to grow 3% in 2015, 0.1 percentage point lower than initially estimated, because of the recession in Brazil and uncertainty in China, and its consequences for the regional economies.
In 2016, the global growth is forecast to recover to 3.6%, 0.2 percentage point less than the June estimate, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD said in its interim economic outlook.
It cautioned that rising US interest rates or a sharper-than-expected slowdown in China could cause financial and economic turbulence in the vulnerable emerging economies, which could in turn exert a significant drag on advanced economies.
A day ahead of the anxiously watched HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" US Federal Reserve decision on interest rates, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD called for continued policy stimulus to support global demand, urging the advanced economies to continue with "accommodative monetary and fiscal policies to ensure that the recovery gains momentum". This is the second reduction in growth estimates after the organisation in June lowered the forecast, citing lower growth in the US.
The initial forecast was for a 4% global growth. "Global growth prospects have weakened slightly and become less clear in recent months. World trade growth has stagnated and financial conditions have deteriorated. The recovery is nonetheless progressing in advanced economies, but he outlook has worsened further for many emerging market economies," it said, summing up the outlook. India is pegged to grow at 7.2% in FY16 and 7.3% in FY17, lower 0.1 percentage points in each of these years from the earlier estimate. "India is expected to be the fastest growing major economy over the com ng two years," the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD said. China is expected to expand 6.7% in 2015 and 6.5% n 2016. Brazil faces the biggest cut of 2 percentage point with its commodities-dependent economy forecast to shrink 2.8% n 2015 followed by another 0.7% contract ion in 2016. "The marked slowdown in Chinese import demand has important spill over effects on global growth, particularly n emerging economies with close trade inks to China, and those that depend on commodities," the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD said, calling for more action to support global growth. It expects the US central bank to raise rates but urges for a slow pace increase. Bennett, Coleman & Co., Ltd. 
Obama says Pacific trade deal this year
AFP
17 September 2015
US President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Barack Obama has expressed optimism that a vast Pacific trade deal can be reached before the end of the year, despite disputes over rules for key sectors.
Discussing a 12-country pact that brings together large and growing economies as diverse as the United States, Australia, New Zealand, Japan and Vietnam, Obama told business leaders, he is confident they can achieve the deal and "get it done this year".
"Trade ministers should be meeting again sometime in the next several weeks; they have the opportunity to close the deal," Obama said on Wednesday.
"Most chapters have been completed at this point," he said, adding that the deal would "make sure that we have a level-playing field for businesses and American workers in the fastest-growing region of the world".
Already eight years in the making, the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) would be a huge bloc encompassing 40 per cent of global trade and part of Obama's much-vaunted "pivot" towards Asia in the face of an increasingly assertive China, which is not included.
The failure by trade ministers to wrap up the accord in August in Hawaii was a blow to Obama, who faces opposition to the deal from fellow Democrats, as it could see the TPP become campaign fodder ahead of November 2016 elections.
With Congress requiring 90 days to review any accord, a vote is now unlikely before 2016, even if a deal can be reached.
That raises the risks for Democrats already struggling to explain their vote in favour of negotiations to donors and constituents.
Efforts to move to a final round of ministerial talks have also been complicated by elections in Canada on October 19 and a change of prime minister in Australia.
Australia's new leader Malcolm Turnbull faces a stiff task to revive an economy at risk of suffering its first recession in 25 years.
He has already been portrayed by the opposition as an out-of-touch millionaire and will be under pressure to push a hard line ahead of elections expected next year.
In Canada, Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Stephen Harper faces a tough three-way re-election fight, and may also be forced to take a tougher stance on opening up Canada's dairy market to more competition.
None of Canada's three major parties publicly oppose the deal and US officials insist there is no reason why developments there or in Australia should scupper talks.
Nonetheless, negotiators may seek to play it safe and conclude an agreement before the October vote in Canada.
Informal talks are already under way to find a breakthrough on outstanding issues including rules for the auto trade and protection for drug-makers and dairy farmers. Australian Associated Press Pty Ltd
Ministers to meet for Pacific trade pact talks in late Sept.
17 September 2015
Kyodo News
TOKYO/WASHINGTON, Sept. 17 -- Twelve Pacific Rim countries will hold a ministerial meeting in late September in Atlanta, the United States, as they look to conclude years of negotiations on creating one of the world's biggest free trade zones, negotiation sources said Thursday.
A meeting of chief negotiators from the United States, Japan, Canada and nine other member countries involved in the U.S.-led Trans-Pacific Partnership talks will begin from Sept. 26 followed, by a two-day meeting of ministers from Sept. 30, one of the sources said.
Negotiators see the need for striking a deal ahead of the general election in Canada planned for Oct. 19 and before the national focus in the United States shifts later this year to the 2016 presidential election, as politicians in the countries will find it hard to concentrate on TPP issues, political analysts said.
U.S. President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Barack Obama on Wednesday raised hopes that the 12 countries could conclude the sweeping free trade agreement "in the next several weeks" through another round of ministerial talks.
"The trade ministers should be meeting again sometime in the next several weeks. They have the opportunity to close the deal," Obama told a meeting with business leaders in Washington.
Obama said he was "confident" that the member countries can get a TPP done this year.
Obama's administration has called the TPP deal a key element that embodies its policy of focusing on the Asia-Pacific region. A TPP would cover some 40 percent of the global economy with the United States and Japan accounting for about 80 percent of gross domestic product in the TPP economies.
Ministers from the 12 countries failed to reach a broad agreement on the initiative during their talks in late July in Hawaii.
Japanese Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Shinzo Abe said recently that it would take only one more ministerial meeting to conclude the TPP negotiations but it remains uncertain whether some countries will be able to bridge the big gaps on issues such as how long new drug data should be protected.
The United States, Japan, Canada and Mexico held a series of meetings on TPP-related issues such as automotive trade last week in Washington.
The four countries, however, failed to see a clear path to concluding the overall TPP talks anytime soon, according to Takeo Mori, a senior Foreign Ministry official who represented Japan in the four-way meeting.
The original TPP negotiations were launched in 2010 involving the United States, Australia, Brunei, Chile, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore and Vietnam. Malaysia, Mexico, Canada and Japan joined the talks later. Kyodo News
Kenya: Nairobi to host 'make or break' WTO ministerial meeting
16 September 2015
PANAPRESS - Pan African News Agency
Nairobi, Kenya (PANA) - Trade ministers from the 161 members of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) will meet in Nairobi 15-18 December for a decisive session of the trade body’s ministerial conference whose success or failure would decide the fate of the Doha Round of trade negotiations.
There is no consensus on the work programme of the 10th ministerial conference due in Nairobi but governments around the world agree on the need for informal talks on a range of issues--agriculture, development of regulations to govern the service sectors and development issues.
WTO Spokesperson Keith Rockwell said most African delegations believed progress so far made in hammering new deals on market access for agricultural produce should be extended to all other sectors of negotiation as the world moved to complete the pending deals under negotiations.
There are many African countries which believe the agriculture text of negotiations should form the basis for any agreements. New proposals have come forward on issues of trade and the environment,” Rockwell told reporters in Nairobi on Wednesday.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO has taken pride for the continuation of global trade when the world suffered a major global financial crisis.
Rockwell said because of the existence of the rule-based trading arrangements” being monitored by the global trading body, the world managed to stay off a major financial and economic recession.
The appetite for further protectionism diminished because we successfully argued that the trade had little to do with the decline in other economies which affected employment. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO stopped the world from relapsing into a full-blown global economic recession because of the anti-protectionism measures,” Rockwell said.
World trade negotiations have collapsed a number of times because African countries have been demanding the opening of markets and the reduction of lavish agricultural subsidies that make it impossible for crop and livestock producers from the continent to penetrate new markets globally.
This is because of the normally high cost of production in Africa, which still suffers from high cost of transport, lack of electricity supply to major producers of agricultural goods and high cost of credit.
The domestic support for agriculture is the most difficult issue. There are different points because the interests of the producers and the interest of consumers differ. The producers worry about competition globally but consumers worry about the cost of products,” Rockwell explained.
There is fear if no binding agreements are reached at the talks in Nairobi, the future of the global trade talks, which have been on the brink of collapse since 2001, might be sealed completely.
African countries largely support the Doha Round of talks, which advocates for a level global playing field, including bringing a reduction of tariffs, elimination of domestic subsidies for farmers which distort the global market prices and ensuring fair competition for all players around the world.
While the ministers of trade around the world are talking on issues of trade, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO officials say there appears to be no narrowing of the differences that led to the collapse of the previous rounds of talks.
Most of the conferences have been marred by the mass walk out of the African ministers since the Cancun, Mexico, ministerial conference. Panafrican News Agency
India's farm subsidy programme may face fresh challenge at WTO
D. Ravi Kanth
17 September 2015
Mint
Geneva, Sept. 17 -- India's market price support and input subsidy programmes for millions of resource-poor farmers are in serious jeopardy if an unofficial proposal from the US gains currency ahead of a crucial HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) ministerial meeting in Nairobi in three months' time.
Effectively, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Narendra Modi government will be forced to curtail the public distribution programme, which is based on market price support, and other input subsidies given to poor farmers if the US non-paper finds its way to Nairobi.
A non-paper is a discussion paper that does not necessarily represent the official position of the institution or country that drafted it.
Also, New Delhi's demand for a permanent solution to public stockholding programmes for food security by the Nairobi ministerial meeting has almost been consigned to the dustbin in the face of roadblocks created by major industrialized countries.
On Tuesday, Washington circulated a two-page draft of the non-paper at a meeting of senior trade officials from industrialized and developing countries.
Officials from the US, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union (EU), China, India, Brazil, Australia and Japan, along with WTO director general HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevedo, took part in the closed-door meeting to discuss a package of deliverables for the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's 10th ministerial conference in Nairobi on 15 December.
The confidential paper, accessed by Mint, calls for avoiding using "market price support and input subsidies for agricultural products". It says "each member shall, with respect to agricultural products, undertake commitment(s)" not to increase either "the applied administrative price for any agricultural product receiving market price support" or "its budgetary outlays for, or the scope of, product-specific input subsidies for agricultural products above the (existing) level".
The draft gave the examples of four areas where it said members must undertake commitments to do away with market price support and input subsidies-fertilizer, seeds, electricity and diesel fuel.
Effectively, the US is asking countries to undertake commitments to reduce "market price support and input subsidies" regardless of their current categorization as industrialized, developing and least-developed countries.
The US does not provide input subsidies, but offers market price support for just one commodity-sugar. The EU, too, does not provide market price support and input subsidies. In short, the two trade majors do not have to undertake any commitments under this proposal, but developing countries such as India will be forced to undertake substantial commitments even though they are not required to under the existing HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO agriculture rules or the Doha negotiating parameters.
The US has proposed these commitments in the non-paper notwithstanding the exemption of input subsidies and market price support under Article 6.2 of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's agreement on agriculture for developing countries.
Further, the US paper goes against what was negotiated in the ongoing Doha agriculture talks, especially the July 2004 framework agreement, the 2005 Hong Kong ministerial declaration, and the unsettled 2008 revised draft modalities. Developing countries have been exempt from undertaking any commitments under these ministerial declarations as well as the 2008 revised draft modalities.
At the meeting on Tuesday, China and India dismissed the US proposal as unacceptable under any circumstances. The two countries told the US that its proposal was an attempt to avoid arriving at credible outcomes in the Doha agriculture package in which the US is required to cut its farm subsidies to below $14.5 billion, according to people familiar with the meeting.
"Clearly, the US non-paper is targeted at China and India, who are asking for credible outcomes in agriculture," a trade official said.
Both China and India provide only de minimis (negligible) support. China provides 8.5% while India provides 10% under product-specific and non-product support. The two countries, along with other developing countries, are exempt from reducing their de minimis support under the Doha negotiating mandates, particularly the 2005 Hong Kong ministerial declaration.
"This is a most destructive proposal and it spoils the whole negotiating climate before the Nairobi meeting," a trade official said, on condition of anonymity.
The US maintains its non-paper offers "a new idea"-rather than a one-size-fits-all approach, the proposal would allow explicitly for differentiated contributions, but all subsidizers would be expected to make a contribution, a US official maintained. Published by HT Syndication with permission from MINT.
EU seeks to remove obstacle to trade deal
By Christian Oliver in Brussels and Shawn Donnan in Washington
16 September 2015
Financial Times (FT.Com)
Brussels is promising more transparency in a controversial system companies use to sue governments, as it seeks to remove one of the most intractable political obstacles to a landmark EU-US trade deal.
Hopes have faded that the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, potentially the world’s biggest trade deal, will be concluded this year, primarily because of opposition from politicians and campaign groups, particularly in Germany and Austria.
Among their biggest complaints is that large corporations could use provisions of the trade deal to bypass national courts and take investment disputes to international tribunals, undermining European standards in health, food and the environment.
Cecilia Malmström, EU trade commissioner, conceded on Wednesday that the so-called Investor-State Dispute Settlement system needed to be overhauled to ensure successful conclusion of the TTIP negotiations.
“It is clear from the debate that there has been a fundamental lack of trust by the public about the impartiality and fairness of the old ISDS system,” she said. “European countries are the most frequent users of the current system, so it is logical that we from the EU side took the lead in . . . modernising this system.”
Ms Malmström said the EU was proposing a new investment court that would comprise five judges each from the EU, US and elsewhere.
Cases would be presided over by a trio of judges representing each of the trading blocs.
Ms Malmström also insisted that all court proceedings would be open to the public and that documents would be posted online.
“Some will argue that the traditional ISDS model is a kind of private justice. What we are setting out here is a public justice system,” she said.
The court would be convened only when needed and would have no specific base.
However, that proposal, first made to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Parliament this year, has drawn a sceptical response from many in the global business community. They argue such a court exists in the form of the World Bank’s International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes, which has presided over such cases since 1966.
The US, which on Wednesday said it welcomed the proposals as a way to resume negotiations on investment that have been suspended since early 2014, also appears unlikely to support the proposal, having proposed its own reforms.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" US Chamber of Commerce said it recognised “the EU has a political problem relating to future investment treaties” but rejected the new proposals, arguing that they were the response to a debate that “is not grounded in the facts”.
“The distortions in this debate cannot be allowed to trump sound policy,” the chamber said. “If the EU still regards the TTIP as a serious objective, today’s proposal is deeply flawed. Tough negotiations lie ahead, and the reforms the United States has undertaken in recent years in its own investment agreements represent a far superior starting point for these important deliberations.”
The current ISDS system emerged in the early 1960s as a result of bilateral investment treaties pushed by Germany and other western economies as a way to offer legal protections to companies doing business in the developing world.
Without ISDS, some businesses say they would not otherwise risk making sizeable investments in countries with weak judicial systems. Although US companies have been held up as the bigger threat by campaign groups opposed to TTIP, European companies have filed more ISDS cases.
While the new system has been proposed primarily for TTIP, EU officials stressed that it could be adapted for other possible trade deals, including with Japan, or even China.
Ms Malmström said that Germany had played an important role in helping to shape the EU’s proposal. The commission must now finalise it with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Parliament and the 28 member states before presenting it to the US for discussion.
While the commission’s proposals enjoy broad support among the main political groupings in the European parliament, they still face resistance from critics of the system among groups on the left opposed to TTIP.
“Cosmetically changing the mechanism but keeping the same prerogatives for corporations is a marketing stunt, which fails to address the core problems of ISDS. We cannot allow the commission to simply put lipstick on the ISDS pig,” said Ska Keller, a green lawmaker in the European parliament.
Ms Malmström argued there was a block of antitrade activists who would continue to oppose any new framework.
“If you said ‘free ice-cream for everyone’, they would still not like the proposal,” she said.
The Financial Times Limited (AAIW/EIW) 
EU Proposes New Trans-Atlantic Court for Trade Disputes 
By Tom Fairless
16 September 2015
Dow Jones Institutional News
BRUSSELS--The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union has proposed a new international court system that would settle disputes between investors and national governments, and could help defuse tensions over a sweeping trade deal with the U.S.
The plan, anticipated by an EU concept paper in May, would replace an existing dispute-resolution mechanism that has been sharply criticized by top EU officials and threatened to undermine a planned trans-Atlantic free-trade deal. Campaigners claim that the current system constrains governments and leaves policy makers vulnerable to legal proceedings from overseas investors.
But U.S. business representatives hit back swiftly at the EU's plan, calling it "deeply flawed" and "not grounded in the facts."
Known as the investor-state dispute settlement, or ISDS, the decades-old framework offers a facility for investors to seek compensation when foreign governments seize their property, impose regulations that violate a trade agreement, or treat a company unfairly. It allows investors to apply directly to a tribunal for arbitration in disputes in which it believes governments have breached agreements.
Under the EU's plan, which must be ratified by national European governments and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Parliament, the ISDS would be replaced by an Investment Court System modelled on other permanent international courts such as the International in The Hague.
"We want to establish a new system built around the elements that make citizens trust domestic or international courts," the EU's trade commissioner, Cecilia Malmstrom, said. "No one can claim it is a system of private justice."
Presently, arbitrators on ISDS tribunals are chosen by the investor and the defending state on a case-by-case basis, and the same individuals can act as lawyers in other ISDS cases. The ad hoc nature of the system raises concerns around the arbitrators' independence, and their financial incentives to multiply cases, according to the EU.
The new system aims to operate more like traditional courts, with judges appointed permanently, their qualifications matching those of national judges, and introducing an appeal system.
Ms. Malmstrom said she hoped the permanent International Investment Court would replace ISDS in all existing and future EU investment negotiations, including a putative trade deal with the U.S. known as the trans-Atlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, or TTIP. She said she hadn't yet consulted U.S. negotiators about the proposal.
The new system wouldn't, however, apply to a free-trade deal between the EU and Canada that was agreed last year. "The Canadian agreement is closed, we are not reopening that," Ms. Malmstrom said.
Emma McClarkin, a European lawmaker representing Britain's ruling Conservative party, said she hoped the EU's plan would "allay some of the legitimate concerns" around ISDS, but warned that "the devil will be in the detail."
"The elements agreed in TTIP are likely to form a gold standard for future trade agreements, so it is essential that we work on getting this right," Ms. McClarkin said.
But the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" U.S. Chamber of Commerce, which represents U.S. businesses, published a statement that sharply criticized the EU's plan.
"The U.S. business community cannot in any way endorse today's EU proposal," said Marjorie Chorlins, vice president for European affairs at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" U.S. Chamber of Commerce. "The reforms the United States has undertaken in recent years in its own investment agreements represent a far superior starting point for these important deliberations."
Proponents say the current ISDS system is a routine part of trade deals that ensures companies or even individual investors can invest abroad without worrying about discriminatory treatment in local judicial systems.
When Yukos, Russia's largest oil company a decade ago, was hit with tens of billions of dollars in back-tax claims, its main assets were sold off to state-controlled Russian companies. Yukos shareholders sued Russia through their offshore holding companies in Europe, and last year an international arbitration panel awarded the investors $50 billion.
But opponents warn that large U.S. companies could use the dispute-resolution mechanism to challenge European laws and regulations on labor, food and the environment.
Germany's Deputy Chancellor Sigmar Gabriel has indicated that he would reject any deal that included the ISDS clause.
In the U.S., opponents of the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal between the U.S., Japan and 10 other countries have expressed similar concerns, warning that the dispute-resolution provision favors corporations and undermines national sovereignty. Dow Jones Newswires
Free trade makes, not takes, jobs
Amanda Saunders
17 September 2015
The Australian Financial Review
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" BHP Billiton chief executive HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Andrew Mackenzie says free trade does not kill jobs, it creates them, and has called on the United States to repeal its 40-year-old crude oil ban and dismantle trade barriers with China, India and other emerging economies.
Speaking in Washington on Wednesday, Mr Mackenzie said opponents of open markets were wrong to argue that they harmed workers and their families, and "we need not fear" the global trade making the growth of Asia possible.
"I say free trade doesn't take jobs, it makes them," he said in a speech provided to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Fairfax Media.
"Protectionism is the grit in the engine. It reduces efficiency, and if nothing's done you stall."
Australia has just signed a free-trade agreement with China - which has been attacked by unions and the Labor opposition as a threat to local jobs - and has another on the table with India.
Mr Mackenzie said if the US was to eliminate the remaining trade barriers to China, India and other emerging markets, the economy would "grow by hundreds of billions of dollars and 1.5 million jobs".
It would be a "stand for open markets" if the US repealed its crude oil export ban and revised its policies on natural resources trade, he said.
His call came less than 24 hours after the White House said it did not support a move in Congress to repeal the country's ban on exports of crude oil.
"The ban is a legacy of the 1970s oil shock, that today cuts jobs, pay, and profits in the US and worldwide," Mr Mackenzie said.
"Repeal would add hundreds of thousands of jobs to the US economy and research shows that prices at the pump would fall. Importantly, it would show the world that the US remains committed to economic freedom and the promotion of global growth."
The US is in negotiations over an Asia-Pacific trade agreement, called the Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement (TPPA), as well as the Trans-Atlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union.
Trade liberalisation had added $US1.5 trillion ($2.1 trillion) to the US economy since 1945, Mr Mackenzie said. But the global financial crisis, seven years ago this week, spawned more trade barriers and "added to the clamour for protectionism". Since 2007, global trade had grown more slowly than gross domestic product.
A misplaced fear of scarcity of commodities had led to growing resource nationalism that hurt resources players and consumers, he said.
It was a "fallacy" that producer countries got better prices by restricting commodity exports.
"Higher prices encourage the development of new supply outside of the country with restrictions. Prices rise briefly, then return to long-term levels and the market share of those that held back capacity falls.
"We've seen this repeatedly in oil, with HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OPEC undermined by deep-water drilling in the 1980s and the US shale revolution more recently. And it looks like the penny has finally dropped in Saudi Arabia, which is now acting more like a low-cost, free-market producer of iron ore, coal or copper."
Mr Mackenzie used similar logic to argue against billionaire HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Andrew Forrest's attempt to get a federal iron ore inquiry in Australia.
In addition, import restrictions were not the answer to protecting domestic industry, he said.
Fairfax Media Management Pty Limited
END
 
Josep Bosch, Information Officer
Information and External Relations Division
+41227395681
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.