WTO negotiators scrambling in lead-up to Nairobi
Govt. will protect farmers’ interests in WTO talks 
Afghanistan expects boost from W.T.O. membership 
WTO: Trade restrictions continue piling up
Kenya to inject 26mln USD into economy from WTO conference 
China regrets U.S. aircraft tax consultation request 
Open, multilateral trade essential to growth: Global Governance Group 
Taiwan keen to see conclusion of WTO information technology pact
Africa - What Africa Can Learn From China's Special Economic Zones [analysis] 
Natural-Food Makers Face Off Over Labels 
 
 
WTO negotiators scrambling in lead-up to Nairobi
Politico, By Victoria Guida, 12/09/2015 02:48 PM EDT -- It's slow going for World Trade Organization negotiators looking to narrow enough differences among them to give their ministers a chance of agreeing to something next week in Nairobi. At an informal meeting of services negotiators today in Geneva, none of the pending proposals on transparency were accepted as a starting point for the talks. The proposals being discussed include requirements for the publication of certain laws and regulations, and for providing notice-and-comment periods. Meanwhile, negotiators have had slightly more luck on rules of origin discussions aimed at providing better market access for least developed countries. On Tuesday, the chairman of those talks said he would prepare a document with different proposals in brackets that will serve as a negotiating text for ministers. Any outcome would relate to thresholds that determine when goods qualify as coming from a country that receives unilateral preferences under such programs as the Generalized System of Preferences or the African Growth and Opportunity Act. Specifically, it would make it easier for poor countries to export duty-free goods to developed countries even when a major percentage of the goods aren't actually made in that country. WTO members haven't agreed on whether there should be a set percentage in any final agreement. Least developed countries are pushing to be allowed up to 75 percent of a good to be made elsewhere, but other countries have rejected that as too high. An outcome could also make it easier for some of the qualifying content to come from other countries in the same region, know as "cumulation," to help preserve regional supply chains.
 
Govt. will protect farmers’ interests in WTO talks 
National Bureau, The Hindu, 10 December 2015, NEW DELHI,BUSINESS -- The government is committed to the cause of farmers and has taken a consistent stand at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation (WTO) to protect their interests, Commerce Minister Nirmala Sitharaman said on Wednesday in a written reply to the Rajya Sabha. “For example, under the relevant rules of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO, if procurement for public stock-holding programmes for food security purposes is done at administered prices, rather than at market prices, then the subsidy element, if any, has to be kept within certain prescribed limits,” she said. However, she added, to ensure this rule does not adversely impact food security programmes of the developing countries, India successfully negotiated an outcome safeguarding India’s minimum support price operations and making HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members commit to finding a permanent solution on the issue. The Minister’s statement in Parliament comes days ahead of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO’s meeting of ministers from its 162 member countries at Nairobi in Kenya slated for December 15-18 for negotiations towards an agreement to liberalise global trade. India has already said it wants the Nairobi meet to take up on a priority basis issues including an effective Special Safeguard Mechanism (or SSM, a trade remedy allowing developing countries to temporarily hike duties on farm products to counter sudden import surges and price falls, thereby protecting the interests of poor farmers), and a permanent solution to the issue of public food stockholding in developing countries for the purpose of food security. The WTO Director-General HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevedo, in his report to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO General Council on December 7, said several consultations have been held on the SSM issue. The consultations have continued to show entrenched and widely divergent positions, he said, adding that, therefore, the negotiations on this issue have reached an impasse, but work in various formats continues. On the issue of public stockholding, he said India and other developing countries have called for a permanent solution to be adopted this year in Nairobi. The latest consultations, based on the proposed texts, have not so far taken us much closer to convergence, but as with the SSM, work continues in various formats, Azevêdo said. 
 
Afghanistan expects boost from W.T.O. membership 
David Jolly, International New York Times, 10 December 2015 -- Its chief export is opium and its main ‘‘import’’ is international aid. But Afghanistan is about to join the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization, in what officials hope is a sign of better things to come for this impoverished, war-ravaged country. Afghanistan, along with the West African nation of Liberia, is expected to get the approval of member nations at a ministerial conference of the trade organization next week in Nairobi, Kenya. It may be hard to see how membership would make much of a dent in Afghanistan’s economic woes. But optimists hope that the trade body’s seal of approval would provide a lift for Afghanistan, which gets three-quarters of its gross domestic product from foreign aid and derives more than half of the remainder from the production and export of opium and related products like heroin. Most of the rest comes from agriculture and services. ‘‘This is really positive news for Afghanistan and the W.T.O.,’’ the director general of the trade body, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevêdo, said in a statement. ‘‘W.T.O. membership will help to create new trading opportunities and boost economic development.’’ President Ashraf Ghani of Afghanistan said membership would create ‘‘a catalyst for domestic reforms and transformation to an effective and functioning market economy that attracts investment, creates jobs and improves the welfare of the people of Afghanistan.’’ Still, the crucial roadblock to economic rebirth is the perilous security situation: The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Taliban, the group waging war with the government, have control of more territory than at any time since before the United States-led coalition ousted them in 2001, and road travel is unsafe in much of the country. Other challenges include endemic corruption and a lack of basic infrastructure. As the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" International Monetary Fund put it succinctly in a recent report, Afghanistan ‘‘remains a poor, fragile state far from self-reliance.’’ The country ranks 194th of 213 countries by income per capita, the report said, while ‘‘a large illicit narcotics sector, difficult security conditions, corruption and weak institutions undermine development, constrain growth, and weigh on poverty reduction.’’ While economists generally agree that more trade is a good thing, there are concerns that in desperately poor countries, the benefits of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization membership can come at a substantial cost. A United Nations study found that membership would not be an unalloyed positive. While consumers would benefit from lower prices as tariffs on imports fall, the study found, the country’s emerging producers would suffer from new competition, even as government revenue might decline on lower tariff receipts. If approved, Afghanistan and Liberia would become the 163rd and 164th members of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization, and two of the poorest countries to join. The trade group itself might have little else to celebrate at the Nairobi meeting. The so-called Doha round of talks, begun with great fanfare in 2001 and meant to achieve lower trade barriers for all members, has been stalled for years. 
 
WTO: Trade restrictions continue piling up
POLITICO, By Doug Palmer, 12/09/2015 03:33 PM EDT -- World Trade Organization members imposed 178 new trade restrictions during the latest annual reporting period, or an average of just under 15 new measures a month, according to a HYPERLINK "http://go.politicoemail.com/?qs=3fb3d9856064c2d8143a4ffb202a4fabf511ae02c68d94753fd5e305ef11fd00" report released today. The pace is nearly identical to what it was during the previous year. However, since the WTO started monitoring such restrictions in October 2008, while the world was in the midst of a financial crisis, the pile of those that remain in place has continued to grow. There were 1,915 in place during the most recent period (mid-October 2014 to mid-October 2015), up 17 percent from the previous year, the WTO says "Of the 2,557 restrictions (including trade remedies) recorded by the monitoring exercise since October 2008, only 642 have been removed," WTO Deputy Director-General Yonov Frederick Agah said. "The addition of new trade-restrictive measures, combined with a slow removal rate, remains a persistent concern."Trade remedies include anti-dumping and countervailing duties on imports that some national authority, like the U.S. Commerce Department, has determined are unfairly priced or subsidized. Other types of restrictions include import and export tariffs, quotas and taxes and problematic customs procedures."More encouragingly, the report finds that a total of 222 measures aimed at facilitating trade were taken - a monthly average of almost 19 measures - the second highest number since the beginning of the monitoring exercise," the WTO said. The steady rise in trade restrictions comes amid a downturn in global trade. The WTO Secretariat recently recently lowered its forecast for world merchandise trade volume growth in 2015 from 3.3 percent to 2.8 percent and reduced its estimate for 2016 from 4.0 percent to 3.9 percent.
 
Kenya to inject 26mln USD into economy from WTO conference 
Last Updated: 2015-12-10 09:32 | Xinhua -- The World Trade Organization (WTO) tenth Ministerial Conference slated for Nairobi next week is expected to inject about 26 million U.S. dollars to the economy, a government official said on Wednesday.Tourism Cabinet Secretary Najib Balala said the preparations were 98 percent complete, noting that the government expects more than 7,000 delegates from all over the world to attend the Dec. 15-18 global conference. "We expect an average delegate spend of 3,750 dollars. This should inject approximately 26 million dollars to the Kenyan economy through the multiplier effect," Balala said after inspecting the preparations of the conference in Nairobi. "This is the biggest conference ever to be hosted in Sub-Saharan Africa and we are not taking chances in ensuring that we meet the international standards," he added.The December conference will also showcase the dynamic development that is taking place in Africa. The biennial event was last held in Indonesia in 2013 where ten agreements were concluded. Balala termed the conference as an eye-opener of other upcoming conference and added that Kenya has what it takes to host huge conferences. Balala termed the conference as one of the showcase of Kenya's preparedness on conference tourism. He said his ministry has identified conferencing as one of the niche tourism products that will generate revenues to the economy besides other tourism products. The ministry, he pointed out, positions Kenya as the preferred destination for global meetings through bidding to host world conferences in Kenya. Balala expressed his optimism that Kenya's brand equity continues to improve with the country hosting key international events. "They have also contributed to profiling of Kenya as a safe destination and have endorsed Nairobi as a regional business hub," he noted.
 
China regrets U.S. aircraft tax consultation request 
Wangyoulin chengjing, Xinhua's China Economic Information Service, 10 December 2015 01:23, 
BEIJING -- The Ministry of Commerce (MOC) has expressed regret over the United States formally requesting consultations with China over its different taxing of foreign and domestically produced aircraft. China has always abided by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) rules on aviation manufacturing development, said the MOC in a statement on Wednesday. Earlier in the day, U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman said China imposes 17-percent VAT on imported aircraft weighing under 25 metric tons while exempting such aircraft made in China from the tax. The United States has launched dispute settlement proceedings at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO by requesting consultations with China, Froman said. China has received the request and will handle the issue according to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO dispute settlement procedures, said the MOC. Consultations are the first step in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO dispute settlement process.  If the United States and China are not able to reach a mutually agreed solutions, the United States may request that the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO establish a dispute settlement panel to examine the matter.
 
Open, multilateral trade essential to growth: Global Governance Group 
Channel NewsAsia, 10 December 2015 03:56, SINGAPORE: There needs to be an open, rules-based multilateral trading system under the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation's (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) to promote sustainable and balanced global growth, said the Global Governance Group (3G) following the G20 Leaders' Summit in Turkey last month. It also welcomed the G20's recognition of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO as the backbone of the multilateral trading system and the central role of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO in promoting economic growth and development, according to the press release issued on Thursday (Dec 10). The 3G is an informal coalition among United Nations member states, including Southeast Asian nations such as Singapore, Brunei, Vietnam, Malaysia. The full statement is as follows: "The Global Governance Group (3G) takes note of the outcomes of the G20 Leaders’ Summit held in Antalya, Turkey, from Nov 15 to 16, 2015. The 3G recognises that continued decisive action on the part of all countries as well as regional and international organisations is required to help ensure the continued stability of the international economic system, including financial markets, and to ensure that growth is strong, sustainable and balanced, and creates better jobs and promotes labour force participation. We welcome the steps taken by the G20 towards greater inclusiveness and transparency, and commend the outreach efforts undertaken by Turkey during its 2015 G20 Presidency. We look forward to the continued commitment of the G20 under the 2016 Chinese Presidency to go beyond consultations with non-G20 members and groupings, including the 3G and relevant regional organisations, and find ways to incorporate their input into G20 outcomes. This would contribute to reinforcing the complementarity between the G20, multilateral organisations and other key stakeholders, while reaffirming the role of international organisations with universal membership in global standard setting. The 3G supports the commitment by the G20 to implement sound macroeconomic policies and to apply fiscal policies flexibly to take into account near-term economic conditions. We are also encouraged by the G20’s resolve to undertake actions in a manner that mitigates uncertainty, minimises negative spillovers and promotes transparency. We welcome the assurance in the G20 Leaders’ Communiqué of the G20’s commitment to achieving its ambition of lifting collective G20 GDP by an additional 2 percent by 2018, as announced in Brisbane last year. We note the analysis by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Bank Group that the G20’s implementation of commitments so far represents more than one third of the G20’s collective growth ambition, and are hopeful that the adjusted growth strategies and implementation schedules for key commitments as outlined in the Antalya Action Plan will contribute to the implementation of remaining commitments. Global unemployment continues to increase while global labour force participation and productivity growth rates remain relatively low. The 3G commends the commitment by the G20 to create quality jobs for all, invest in skills and reduce inequalities to promote inclusive and robust growth. We welcome the G20 goal of reducing the share of young people who are most at risk of being permanently left behind in the labour market by 15 per cent by 2025 in G20 countries, taking into account national circumstances. We also welcome the G20 Framework on Promoting Quality Jobs as well as actions to improve and invest in skills through the G20 Skills Strategy. We further appreciate the G20’s efforts in tackling global infrastructure investment shortfalls, as well as the work done on facilitating SME financing. 
To promote sustainable and balanced global growth, an open, rules-based multilateral trading system under the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation (WTO) is essential. Bilateral, regional and plurilateral trade agreements should also complement one another, and be transparent, inclusive and consistent with HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO rules. 
The 3G welcomes the G20’s recognition of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO as the backbone of the multilateral trading system and the central role of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO in promoting economic growth and development. In particular, the 3G appreciates the commitment by the G20 to increase efforts to implement all elements of the Bali Package, as well as to undertake the prompt ratification and implementation of the Trade Facilitation Agreement. We support the G20’s commitment to work together for a successful 10th WTO Ministerial Conference in Nairobi, Kenya. The 3G is also encouraged by the G20’s commitment towards open trade and investment, reducing barriers to trade and resisting protectionism in all forms. World leaders adopted the landmark 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (2030 Agenda) in September this year, which seeks to eradicate poverty in all its forms and dimensions and to achieve sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, building on the Millennium Development Goals and completing what these did not achieve. The 3G commends the strong commitment expressed in the Antalya Communiqué to implement the outcomes of the 2030 Agenda, and welcomes the G20’s decision to develop an action plan in 2016 to further align its work with the 2030 Agenda. We are encouraged by the efforts by the G20 in areas such as energy access and food security and nutrition, including the G20 Energy Access Action Plan: Voluntary collaboration on Energy Access, the G20 Voluntary Toolkit of Voluntary Options for Renewable Energy Deployment and the G20 Action Plan on Food Security and Sustainable Food Systems. The 3G further agrees with the G20 that the private sector has a role to play in development and poverty eradication, and supports the G20 Call on Inclusive Business. 
Representing over 75 per cent of global carbon emissions, the G20 should make a decisive contribution to the success of the 21st session of Conference of Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UNFCCC COP-21) in Paris, France, in 2015. There is an urgent need for strong and effective action to address climate change. The 3G notes the affirmation of the G20’s determination to adopt a protocol, another legal instrument or an agreed outcome with legal force under the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UNFCCC that is applicable to all Parties, and welcomes the G20’s commitment to work together for a successful outcome of the COP-21. The 3G appreciates Turkey’s Presidency of the G20 in 2015 and looks forward to continuing our constructive engagement with the Chinese G20 Presidency in 2016. The 3G reiterates its position that the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN is the only global body with universal participation and unquestioned legitimacy, and emphasises that actions by the G20 should complement and strengthen the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN system. We support efforts to ensure that non-G20 representatives are included in the G20 process in application of the principle of “variable geometry”, and look forward to Turkey updating the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN membership on the outcomes of the Antalya Summit."  
 
Taiwan keen to see conclusion of WTO information technology pact
Focustaiwan.tw, 2015/12/09 18:32:28, Taipei, Dec. 9 (CNA) Taiwan is hoping that the negotiations on a global information technology agreement will be finalized at the World Trade Organization (WTO) conference next week, the Ministry of Economic Affairs (MOEA) said Wednesday. The Information Technology Agreement 2 (ITA2) will remove tariffs on 201 tech products, which will effectively help Taiwanese exporters of such products, the MOEA said. Annual trade in the 201 products listed in the ITA2 is valued at over US$1.3 trillion, accounting for around 7 percent of total global trade, according to the WTO website.
Taiwan's Economics Minister John Deng (???) said his ministry is also hoping for quick implementation of a Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA) in the respective WTO member states, which will facilitate increased global trade and lower customs clearance costs for Taiwanese companies. Negotiations on the TFA was concluded in 2013. The agreement could reduce worldwide trade costs by between 12.5 percent and 17.5 percent, according to the 2015 Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development Trade Facilitation Indicators. Deng is scheduled to attend the 10th WTO Ministerial Conference, which will decide on matters related to multilateral trade agreements at its meeting in Nairobi, Kenya, Dec. 15-18. 
(By Huang Chiao-wen and Christie Chen)
 
Africa - What Africa Can Learn From China's Special Economic Zones [analysis] 
By Yejoo Kim, All Africa, 10 December 2015 08:19, (Forum on China-Africa Cooperation/All Africa Global Media via COMTEX) -- China and its African partners want to scale up industrialisation on the continent in addition to China's infrastructure development projects – the "Three Major Network" of railway, road and regional aviation. China's own experience in industrial development through the special economic zones offers valuable lessons. Special economic zones are geographically designated trade areas that are used to attract foreign investors and boost industrialisation. They generally have trade laws that differ from the rest of the country and companies are offered tax incentives to set up operations. For African countries, setting up special economic zones can boost the diversification of their economies and promote manufacturing. China's experiences indicate that for zones to succeed, African governments must improve infrastructure and technology and have an educated and competent labour force as well as efficient and effective administration. 
What China did 
China introduced special economic zones in the 1970s as part of its policy to open up to international trade. Deng Xiaoping's economic reforms became the turning point towards a market-oriented economy. A series of experiments, including the establishment of special economic zones, became the driving force for growth. China set up zones in Southern coastal areas as part of the economic reforms under the open door policy. They were very successful and led to unprecedented growth.Shenzhen, a small fishing town, became the first special economic zones. It is now the most prominent manufacturing hub on the globe. 
This inspired African countries and became the rationale to establish the so-called Chinese led-SEZsin Egypt, Mauritius, Nigeria, Zambia and Ethiopia in the mid-2000s. More African countries are planning to establish special economic zones. In South Africa, the Special Economic Zones Act was passed recently and ten were selected. While physical infrastructure and modern facilities at SEZs can contribute to the modernisation of industrial processes in the country, soft infrastructure is as important when it comes to attracting investors. In the case of China, investment in human resources and local industry has played a significant role. Cooperation between the central and provincial governments under the overarching long term plan was also crucial. The Chinese cases show that the zones have brought about spillover effects like forward-backward linkages with domestic enterprises. This contributed to the development of entire provinces, as well as the country. In addition, the country was able to provide abundant and skilled labour to sustain the zones. Over the years, China has also continuously upgraded its SEZs. One example is the creation of the Shanghai Free Trade Zone. Shanghai is one of the largest metropolises in China. In 2013 it ranked third in China's economy in terms of GDP. It boasts the world's biggest container port and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Shanghai Pudong International Airport is an international hub. Heavy and chemical industries have become one of the mainstays of the city's economy. Its versatile manufacturing sector ranges from cars to household appliances and textiles. The establishment of the Shanghai free trade zone is in line with China's reform process. Shanghai is the country's first special customs supervision zone and enjoys the status of a free trade area like Hong Kong. Shanghai already has a high quality financial services sector. This will further enhance Shanghai's competitiveness and can create jobs and absorb new workers that enter the job market. The hope is that the Shanghai free trade zone will reignite regional and national economic growth just as Shenzhen did nearly three decades ago. There are challenges. The slowdownin China's economy has affected development. The prospect of cheap labour that once enabled the country to attract foreign investors is no longer there. Another concern is that right after the establishment of the Shanghai free trade zone 12 cities and provinces expressed interest in having the same arrangement. In the original plan, the focus was on Shanghai alone, but it seems that competition between provinces and other free zones has intensified. 
What African countries need to get right 
Special economic zones have become a popular buzzword in many developing countries and competition is intense. Most countries think that special economic zones will be a panacea for their economic woes. 
There are an estimated 3,500 SEZs operating in 130 countries globally. The zones are in serious competition with each other. In response to the growing competition each zone is trying to specialise so that it can take advantage of local conditions. In Africa, many countries have provided unprecedented fiscal and non-fiscal incentive packages to attract foreign direct investment into special economic zones. But those that have been established have not delivered what was expected. The reason, among others, is that governments made poor location choices and lacked effective strategic planning and management. On cost and benefits, the initial cost, for instance fiscal and non-fiscal incentives for investors, is often higher than the gain. In addition, benefits are not automatically generated after a zone has been established. In many cases, policy makers have not set up long term plans and there is a lack of consultation with local communities. 
To benefit from the zones African governments must set up and implement sound policies. African governments should note that the Chinese government improved the regulatory environment and tax policies for trade and investment. Many African countries produce similar raw materials. This means that there is strong competition between them. Host countries should therefore develop strategies based on competitive advantage that can maximise potential. And host governments often think only about attracting investors and of short-term gains. Long-term assessment is often not conducted properly before construction starts. African governments have already shown willingness to pursue industrial development, and policy frameworks and infrastructure are underway. They should now improve the general investment conditions to circumvent existing bottlenecks. But special economic zones are only a stepping stone in a bigger strategy for industrialisation and the diversification of any economy. Promoting strategic competition remains crucial to any government action when it comes to industrial development zones. 
Disclosure statement 
Yejoo Kim, Stellenbosch University. Yejoo Kim does not work for, consult, own shares in or receive funding from any company or organization that would benefit from this article, and has disclosed no relevant affiliations beyond the academic appointment above. 
 
Natural-Food Makers Face Off Over Labels 
Jacob Bunge , Annie Gasparro, The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition), 10 December 2015, 
Natural-foods makers have spent years going after the industry establishment. Now, they are taking on each other. Surging sales of foods marketed as made without genetically modified crops are outpacing sales of food labeled organic in U.S. grocery stores. That is frustrating some organic companies and farmers, who invest significant sums to meet government organic standards and to get their foods certified. The organic industry is responding with marketing campaigns touting that its foods -- in addition to being made without genetically modified organisms, or GMOs, as such crops are known -- also abide by other requirements. For example, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" U.S. Department of Agriculture, which has certified organic foods since 2002, requires that producers also keep out most synthetic pesticides and certain fertilizers, and that animals used to produce organic food can go outdoors year-round and aren't given hormones or antibiotics. 
"Organic is non-GMO," said HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Cathy Calfo, executive director of California Certified Organic Farmers, a trade group that recently started promoting a new label to highlight the difference. "Non-GMO is not organic." 
The federal government doesn't regulate non-GMO labeling. Instead, certification is done by private groups, mainly the Non-GMO Project. The Bellingham, Wash., nonprofit doesn't prohibit the use of synthetic pesticides on crops used as ingredients, or ensure animal-welfare standards. But it says it tests more stringently to ensure GMOs aren't inadvertently mixed into ingredients during transportation or production. The distinctions might seem like hairsplitting, but they matter for companies. Earning the Non-GMO Project's imprimatur or the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" USDA's organic certification can take months or years, depending on the item and the applicant backlog. Each can cost thousands of dollars initially, and must be renewed annually -- a significant expense for smaller producers. Prices for organic and non-GMO ingredients also are significantly higher than regular ones. GMOs have become a focus of skeptical consumers. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" U.S. government agencies and international bodies including the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Health Organization long have said that GMOs -- whose DNA is altered to withstand pests or weedkilling sprays -- are safe. But the technology's critics say it facilitates harmful use of pesticides and that GMOs' safety for human consumption isn't proven. That doubt has driven rapid growth for non-GMO foods, which this year are on pace to surpass those of food bearing the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" USDA's certified organic seal, according to data compiled by research company Spins LLC. Non-GMO sales soared by an average of about 70% annually from 2013 through this year, and are expected to top $13 billion this year. That is five times the rate for food tracked by Spins that bears the organic seal, sales of which total nearly $11 billion for the 52 weeks ended Nov 1. The Spins data don't include sales from HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Whole Foods Market Inc., a major seller of both categories. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" USDA's organic certification applies to foods that are 95% or more organic. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Organic Trade Association, whose numbers include estimates of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Whole Foods sales and some other retailers not measured by Spins, touts the much larger figure of $35.9 billion in 2014 for foods containing 70% or more organic ingredients. One category's growth can come at the expense of another's, since specialty foods often compete for the same limited shelf space in supermarkets. Last year, foods labeled non-GMO claimed 3.7% of total food sales in U.S. grocery stores, more than the 3.5% for organic items, according to market-research firm HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Nielsen NV. About 49% of consumers polled by Nielsen called non-GMO an important factor in food-and-beverage shopping, versus 47% for organic. Organic-food companies say many consumers are confused about the labels' different attributes. Vernon Peterson, owner of Abundant Harvest Organics in Kingsburg, Calif., says he often receives inquiries about the peaches, persimmons and other crops that his company distributes to customers including HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Kroger Co. and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Whole Foods. "Even though we [are] a 100% organic company, I get a question or two a week, 'is any of your produce genetically modified?'" he said. "We see the consumer putting a higher value on the non-GMO than the organic label." Megan Westgate, executive director of the Non-GMO Project, said the "relationship between non-GMO and organic is probably the most politically sensitive thing we deal with, and we're careful not to undermine consumer trust in the organic label." She said consumer confusion around the definition of organic predates the Non-GMO Project, but she acknowledged that some organic-food producers have expressed concerns about her group infringing on their turf. Rising non-GMO food sales are "a two-edged sword," said HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Oren Holle, a longtime organic farmer in Bremen, Kan. While some consumers may migrate from those to organic foods, Mr. Holle said he worries about "a perception out there that if I buy the non-GMO it's a little less costly when you run up to the checkout counter, and it's just about as good." Mr. Holle last year participated in an online-video campaign trumpeting organic food's purported superiority over items that are only non-GMO. The Organic Farmers' Agency for Relationship Marketing Inc., a cooperative that funded the campaign, is now discussing marketing materials that brand organic as "the real non-GMO." California Certified Organic Farmers, based in Santa Cruz, Calif., debuted its new label in March that boasts "Organic is non-GMO & more." The labels are designed to attract shoppers looking for non-GMO foods while highlighting organic's curbs on synthetic fertilizers and pesticides, said Ms. Calfo. Mr. Peterson hopes the new label, which he has added to Abundant Harvest products, will clarify things. "When you have a confused public, it's never good," he said. Some bigger organic brands are more sanguine. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" George Siemon, chief executive of Organic Valley, the largest U.S. cooperative of organic farms, said that while some consumers may find non-GMO easier to understand, it ultimately will boost organic-food sales by drawing more attention to how food is produced. 
Still, Mr. Siemon said that Organic Valley is considering adding a non-GMO label to some of its products. 
 
 
END


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.