HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S. Congress victory moves Obama's Pacific trade pact forward
·         HYPERLINK \l "Obama’s big Pacific trade gambit: What comes next
·         HYPERLINK \l "Senate Approves TAA Package, Wraps Up Trade Votes With Customs Bill Conference Motion
·         HYPERLINK \l "Will Azerbaijan lower  bound-tariffs in the negotiations with the WTO?
·         HYPERLINK \l "Ukraine can sign Government Procurement Agreement at WTO - minister
·         HYPERLINK \l "Japan, S. Korea Remain Apart at WTO over Seoul's Fish Import Ban
·         HYPERLINK \l "Sen. Stabenow Proposes Meat Labeling Alternative to Solve WTO Dispute
·         HYPERLINK \l "Voluntary COOL won’t stop tariffs, critics say
·         HYPERLINK \l "US, China bridge some economic differences in Washington talks
·         HYPERLINK \l "EU industry group says trade defences against China must stay
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S. looks into imports of corrosion-resistant steel
·         HYPERLINK \l "Offshore tax zones cost developing countries $100 bln a year -UN
·         HYPERLINK \l "India leads FDI in S.Asia with 34 bn investment in 2014:report
·         HYPERLINK \l "IMF boss Lagarde says ready to 'consider' 2nd term
·         HYPERLINK \l "Omani pavilion in Geneva promotes tourism
·         HYPERLINK \l "Working Toward Sustainable Global Fisheries
 
U.S. Congress victory moves Obama's Pacific trade pact forward 
 
* Win comes after six-week congressional battle
* Clears way for Trans-Pacific Partnership deal
* Little resistance seen in final House hurdle
* Senate passes worker aid bill, sends it to the House

By Krista Hughes and Richard Cowan

WASHINGTON, June 24 (Reuters) - Legislation vital to securing the largest U.S. trade deal in decades was passed by the Senate on Wednesday by a comfortable margin, advancing President Barack Obama's efforts to strengthen U.S. economic ties around the Pacific Rim.

After a six-week congressional battle including two brushes with failure, some fancy legislative footwork and myriad backroom deals to keep the legislation alive, the Senate voted 60 to 38 to grant Obama "fast-track" power to negotiate trade deals and speed them through Congress.

The bill next goes to the president for his signature.

That could propel the 12-nation Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), a central element of Obama's foreign policy pivot to Asia, over the finish line, while also boosting hopes for completing an ambitious trade deal with the European Union.

U.S. labor groups, which fought fast-track, said they will redouble their efforts. "We will vigorously oppose TPP if it continues on its current course," AFL-CIO President Richard Trumka wrote in a letter to lawmakers.

The TPP, potentially a legacy-defining achievement for Obama, would be the biggest free trade agreement in a generation and rank with the North American Free Trade Agreement, which liberalized trade between the United States, Canada and Mexico, while also serving as a counterweight to the rise of China.

To complete the TPP, ministers of the various countries involved still have tricky issues to resolve, ranging from monopoly periods for next-generation medicines to the treatment of state-owned enterprises.

Some countries, including Japan and Canada, wanted fast-track to be approved before making final offers on the trade deal, which would cover 40 percent of the world economy and raise annual global economic output by nearly $300 billion.

Negotiators say a deal on the TPP could be wrapped up within weeks once countries are sure that Congress will not pick the deal apart, which fast-track would prevent.

"We are optimistic that (fast-track) will lead the way for many new market-opening agreements, including the Trans-Pacific Partnership," said Doug Oberhelman, chief executive of Caterpillar Inc, which welcomed the vote of approval, as did technology companies Intel Corp and International Business Machines Corp, and insurer Metlife Inc.

Japan's Prime Minister Shinzo Abe welcomed the progress and Economy Minister Akira Amari hopes to clinch the TPP trade deal next month.

"I hope ministers (from TPP negotiation nations) can reach an agreement with the end of July as a deadline," said Amari.

He also said Japan and the U.S. will resume two-way trade talks on the remaining issues, seen as a crucial step toward an agreement on TPP, once President Obama signs the bill.

WORKER AID BILL

Fast-track authority, letting lawmakers set negotiating goals for trade deals but restricting them to yes-or-no votes on final agreements, will last for up to six years and will extend to any trade deals negotiated by Obama's successor, who would take office in January 2017.

Wednesday's vote came as Congress was trying to finish up four parts of a trade legislation package: fast-track negotiating authority, aid for workers who lose their jobs as a result of trade, an Africa trade preferences bill, and a customs enforcement measure.

Fast-track was forced back to the Senate floor after a revolt by Democrats in the House of Representatives resulted in it being split from the worker aid measure.

That bill received unanimous approval and now will return to the House, where many Democrats who previously opposed the aid program now plan to support it. Their initial opposition was part of a ploy that failed to derail fast-track legislation.

Passage of worker aid in the House on Thursday would allow both measures to go to Obama for approval this week, before lawmakers go on a week-long break.

The bruising congressional battle pitted Obama against many in his own party, including House Democratic leader Nancy Pelosi, and prompted blood-letting among Republicans after party leaders lashed out at conservatives who refused to back the trade agenda.

Opinion polls show a majority of Americans support trade in general, but congressional approval has been a slog given pressure from unions and activists warning of job losses and vowing to retaliate against Democrats who support trade.

The front runner for the party's presidential nomination in 2016, Hillary Clinton, said Democratic critics had legitimate concerns but has so far reserved judgment on the TPP. (Editing by Kevin Drawbaugh, additional reporting by Ami Miyazaki and Kaori Kaneko in Tokyo; Editing by Michael Perry) 
 
 
Obama’s big Pacific trade gambit: What comes next
Shawn Donnan, World Trade Editor
Financial Times
June 24, 2015 6:17 pm
 
The US Congress on Wednesday put the final stamp on legislation giving President Barack Obama the “fast-track” authority to complete the most ambitious regional trade deal in recent history.

The Trans-Pacific Partnership would include two of the world’s three biggest economies — the US and Japan — and with ten other countries involved would cover some 40 per cent of the global economy. That would make it the biggest trade deal completed since the Uruguay Round in the 1990s which created the World Trade Organisation. 
 
The TPP is intended to be the first of a new series of “mega-regional” trade agreements to update the rules of commerce for the 21st century. Its signatories would agree to abide by a vast new set of guidelines on everything from the free flow of data across borders to how state-owned enterprises compete with private sector companies. 
 
The deal aims to strengthen the economic bonds between the US and its Pacific allies while attempting to forge a new global economic rule book before China does.

So what comes next? 
 
The ministers gather

For months US and other TPP negotiators have been waiting for Congress to give Mr Obama what is formally known as Trade Promotion Authority. The reason is simple: it limits the US legislative branch to simple yes or no votes on trade agreements and ensures that deals hatched at the negotiating table are not unwound in Congress. 
 
With Mr Obama securing that authority on Wednesday, the focus for negotiators is to resolve a handful of outstanding issues. The latest plan is for trade ministers to gather at a still secret location in the US at some point in mid-July for a likely week-long meeting. 
 
What’s still outstanding?

The biggest elephants in the room relate to tariffs and politically-sensitive industries. 
 
For 18 months, the US and Japan have been working out just how much tariffs will be reduced on products ranging from auto parts to beef and rice. A deal there is close to being done, negotiators say. But then, to the frustration of some other countries, Canada has yet to put its own offer on the table for sensitive areas like its dairy sector.

Other sticking points include questions about intellectual property and how long certain pharmaceuticals should be protected from competition from generic drugs. Also, what sort of state owned enterprises should be covered by the rules and what exclusions there might be for certain countries. 
 
The good news, however, is that the difficult issues have not changed much in 18 months and everyone knows where the compromises are likely to land. Hence why Andrew Robb, Australia’s trade minister, last week declared: “We are literally one week of negotiation away from completing this extraordinary deal.”

Another fight in Congress — and in other parliaments too

Even if trade ministers are able to declare victory next month the deal must still be ratified by all of the member countries’ parliaments. 
 
Under the legislation set to be approved by Congress the Obama administration will have to publish the TPP text 60 days before the president signs the deal.

The administration’s goal is to get the TPP back to Congress for approval before the end of the year and before the 2016 political campaigns heat up. Because of the recent delays in Congress, officials say this is an ambitious target. Meanwhile, environmentalists, labour unions and other special-interest groups are gearing up to fight their corner. 
 
An even bigger TPP

There are 12 countries in the TPP: Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore, the US and Vietnam. 
 
But other economies such as Colombia, South Korea and Taiwan have expressed an interest in joining. 
 
The biggest potential future member is China. After initially viewing the TPP with suspicion Beijing has begun to soften its language. 
 
In a recent US radio interview Mr Obama said China had “already started putting out feelers about the possibilities of them participating at some point”.
 

Senate Approves TAA Package, Wraps Up Trade Votes With Customs Bill Conference Motion
World Trade Online
Posted: June 24, 2015 
Following the approval of Trade Promotion Authority (TPA) legislation Wednesday afternoon (June 24), the Senate passed a bill renewing Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) and tariff preferences for developing countries, and moved to initiate a conference with the House to reconcile differences over a customs and enforcement bill.
 
The TAA-preferences package, H.R. 1295, was approved by a voice vote on final passage, after a cloture vote of 76-22. The House is expected to take up and approve the bill on Thursday. House Speaker John Boehner (R-OH) had committed to ensure the bill was approved in order to give Senate Democrats confidence it would become law before voting on a standalone TPA or fast-track bill.
 
Immediately after that vote, the Senate approved by voice vote a motion to go to conference on the customs and enforcement bill. The initially-scheduled cloture vote on that motion was withdrawn in an effort to expedite the process of wrapping up the trade votes, which the Senate did one day earlier than anticipated.
 
The approved legislation would renew TAA for six years, and provide training and assistance to workers whose jobs were displaced by trade regardless of whether it was from an FTA partner. However, it does not provide benefits to public sector workers and funds the program at $450 million annually. Unions and their congressional allies had pushed for $575 million.
 
In a June 24 letter to all members of the House and Senate, the AFL-CIO criticized both the substance of the bill for inadequate funding and failure to cover public service workers, but stopped short of recommending members vote against it. It also conceded that it had lost the congressional fight over TPA.
 
“We cannot endorse the current TAA legislation, given its shortcoming,” AFL-CIO President Richard Trumka said in the letter. “We would oppose TAA in a heartbeat if by doing so we could be assured that we could slow or stop a flawed trade agenda from moving forward and we are confident that we would have the votes to defeat it."
 
But Trumka said the AFL-CIO recognizes that members are reluctant to vote against TAA given that it would imperil the passage of the African Growth and Opportunity Act, one of the preference programs with which TAA was packaged. Members may also reasonably lack confidence that the Republican leadership will give them a chance to vote for an improved TAA bill, and the AFL-CIO doubts that the White House would hold out for a stronger bill if this TAA were to fail, Trumka said.
 
“We therefore urge you to vote your conscience, and we will respect your decision, whatever it may be,” he said. Trumka also charged that President Obama has left behind his repeated assurances that he would not sign TPA without TAA. Instead, he has made clear his “only priority” in the trade agenda is the passage of fast-track, regardless of what happens on currency manipulation, trade enforcement, human trafficking, immigration policy or climate change, “let alone assistance to dislocated workers,” he wrote.
 
In addition to AGOA, the TAA-preferences package included a renewal of the Generalized System of Preferences until the end of 2017 and tariff preference programs for Haiti. The bill also includes provisions aimed at strengthening U.S. trade remedy law known as the Leveling the Playing Field Act.
 
House Democrats are also planning to support the bill, although they voted against it earlier this month in a tactical move to bring down the TPA bill that was then packaged with TAA. The worker retraining program has long been supported by congressional Democrats and Republicans in industrial states.
 
If the House approves the TAA-preferences package on June 25 as expected, the only trade bill outstanding will be the customs and enforcement bill. The House and Senate versions differ and must be reconciled in conference.
 
House Ways & Means Committee Chairman Paul Ryan (R-WI) has said he expects a quick conference to do so, but other sources believe any momentum for doing so will fizzle once the other trade bills are law. That conference is expected to begin the week of July 6 after Congress returns from a week-long recess.
 
 
Will Azerbaijan lower  bound-tariffs in the negotiations with the WTO? 
24 June 2015
Turan Information Agency (Azerbaijan)
 
Potential partners of Azerbaijan on the World Trade Organization (WTO) are waiting for the country's new proposals on tariffs for industrial and agricultural products, told reporters Deputy Foreign Minister Mahmud Mammadguliyev. According to him, the most active in this issue show US, EU countries and Norway.

The president has repeatedly voiced a problem in the way that the task of the national government in the negotiations on WTO membership is a maximum protection of local businesses and, above all, manufacturers. Azerbaijan is in the process of accession to the WTO so far offered an average rate of primary-Bound tariffs (to be applied after the entry into the organization) at the level of 13.2%, the average rate of final payment (after a transitional period) - at the level of 11.7%.

In addition, the average tariff on agriculture was proposed by Azerbaijan at the level of 14.1%, while in developed countries the figure is 22.8%, in developing countries - 12.7 percent. By the way, the average tariff in the country is 9.4% - 9.6% in the developed world, 17.7 percent - in the underdeveloped countries. Bound-fare is the maximum rate of customs duty on the import of certain goods, recorded in the country's obligations under the WTO, which cannot be changed by the importing country unilaterally.

Azerbaijan has been observer at the WTO since 1997, when, and a working group on Azerbaijan under the WTO secretariat was set up. The government started negotiations with the WTO member countries in 2004, and currently it is in the process of negotiations with 19 countries.

Negotiations and protocols were signed with Turkey, the Sultanate of Oman, the United Arab Emirates, Georgia and Kyrgyzstan. On the stage of signing are protocols of China and Moldova. --17D-
 
 
Ukraine can sign Government Procurement Agreement at WTO - minister 
 
KYIV, June 24 /Ukrinform/. Ukraine can sign the agreements GPA WTO (Government Procurement Agreement) which will allow Ukrainian companies to bid for contracts in the market worth $1.7 trillion.

Deputy minister of economy of Ukraine Maksym Nefiodorov has made a statement during the meeting at the ministry of economic development, an Ukrinform correspondent reports.

"We plan to sign the agreement for performing operations by year end. The operations are global standards for the public procurement process that has 44 members," he said.
 
 
Japan, S. Korea Remain Apart at WTO over Seoul's Fish Import Ban 
 
Geneva, June 24 (Jiji Press)--Japan and South Korea held talks on Seoul's import ban on Japanese fishery products in Geneva Wednesday under dispute settlement procedures of the World Trade Organization but failed to iron out their differences.

The two sides, however, agreed to continue the talks on Thursday. The talks were arranged after Japan filed a complaint with the WTO on May 21 over the import ban.

After the meltdown accident at Tokyo Electric Power Co.'s <9501> Fukushima No. 1 nuclear power plant crippled by the March 2011 earthquake and tsunami, South Korea banned imports of some marine products from Japan's eight prefectures including Fukushima. In September 2013, the country expanded the ban to cover all seafood from the eight prefectures.

Japan took the matter to the world trade watchdog because South Korea did not agree to the Japanese argument that the ban lacks scientific evidence.

If the two sides remain at odds in Thursday's talks and cannot reach an agreement by the July 20 deadline for the bilateral consultations, Japan is to seek an adjudication by a dispute settlement panel.
 
 
Sen. Stabenow Proposes Meat Labeling Alternative to Solve WTO Dispute
By Catherine Boudreau
WTO Reporter, June 25, 2015 
 
June 24 — Country-of-origin labeling (COOL) requirements for beef and pork would be repealed under draft legislation released by Sen. Debbie Stabenow (D-Mich.), ranking member of the Agriculture Committee.
 
The draft, which has attracted opposition, also would create a voluntary “Product of the U.S.” label for producers that want to distinguish their products from imported livestock. The measure was released June 24, a day before the Agriculture Committee holds a hearing on the impact of an international trade dispute over U.S. COOL regulations on farmers, ranchers and businesses.
 
“COOL serves an important role for consumers and industry,” Stabenow said in a statement. “However, the [World Trade Organization] has been clear that we must find a solution that is consistent with our international trade obligations.”
 
But House Agriculture Committee Chairman Michael Conaway (R-Texas) told Bloomberg BNA that he is concerned that a voluntary program could be transformed into a mandatory program.
 
 
“I don't want the government involved. Let the producers themselves deal with marketing.”
 
Rep. Michael Conaway (R-Texas)
 
“I don't want the government involved,” Conaway said, adding that voluntary labeling should handled by the meat industry. “Let the producers themselves deal with marketing.”
 
The House on June 10 passed legislation (H.R. 2393) that would repeal mandatory COOL for beef, pork and chicken (113 WTO, 6/12/15).
 
Conaway, lead sponsor of that bill, said he's confident that the House and Senate will find a common solution because retaliatory measures are imminent.
 
WTO Dispute
 
The WTO ruled last month that COOL, which requires meat producers to indicate on retail packaging where each animal was born, raised and slaughtered, discriminates against imported cattle and hogs. The case was brought by Canada and Mexico (96 WTO, 5/19/15).
 
Canada and Mexico have requested a combined $3.2 billion in retaliatory trade measures against the U.S. if COOL isn't brought into compliance with the WTO decision.
 
The U.S. objected to those estimates during meetings with the WTO Dispute Settlement Body, referring the issue to arbitration that delays—by at least another 60 days—Canada and Mexico's ability to seek sanctions (121 WTO, 6/24/15).
 
Chairman of the Senate agriculture panel Pat Roberts (R-Kan.) said he has opposed COOL and appreciates Stabenow's attempt to find a solution.
 
“This is a positive step forward in a dialogue that we must have to find a resolution that prevents retaliation,” Roberts said.
 
 
Voluntary COOL won’t stop tariffs, critics say
By Bill Tomson and Victoria Guida 
POLITICO
6/24/15 8:42 PM EDT
Sen. Debbie Stabenow’s plan to make country of origin labeling voluntary in the United States won’t be enough to stop Canada from pursuing retaliatory tariffs against U.S. goods, a top lobbyist for Canadian cattle ranchers and several U.S. agriculture industry groups are warning.
Stabenow, ranking member of the Senate Agriculture Committee, surprised many Wednesday by announcing her intention to introduce a bill that would make it voluntary for U.S. producers of beef and pork to use labels declaring the livestock sourced to make their products were born, raised and slaughtered in the United States. The Michigan Democrat’s legislation would continue to keep COOL mandatory for ground beef, ground pork and chicken.
The bill runs counter to the legislation introduced by House Agriculture Committee Chairman Mike Conaway and passed by a 300-131 vote in the lower chamber last week. Conaway’s bill, H.R. 2393, would repeal COOL altogether.
And John Masswohl director of government and international relations for the Canadian Cattlemen’s Association, said Stabenow’s bill wouldn’t solve the problem that led Canada and Mexico to bring a case against the U.S. law at the World Trade Organization in the first place, as it leaves open the possibility that imported Canadian and Mexican cattle and swine would have to be segregated at U.S. feedlots and slaughterhouses.
Following a May 18 ruling by the WTO, Canada has asked for approval of a plan to slap $2.5 billion worth of retaliatory tariffs on a wide range of U.S. goods. Mexico is seeking $713 million worth of retaliatory tariffs.
“What we need in Canada to not proceed with retaliation is a guarantee that there will not be segregation,” Masswohl said.“Unless we have that guarantee, you can count on those tariffs coming.”
Masswohl’s comment echo those made by Gerry Ritz, the Canadian minister of agriculture, in a statement released a week ago by the Senate Agriculture Committee. “The only way for the United States to avoid billions in retaliation by late summer is to ensure legislation repealing [COOL] passes the Senate and is signed by the president,” he said.
The Senate Agriculture Committee is preparing to discuss its legislative options for dealing with the WTO COOL ruling at a hearing Thursday morning. In a statement provided to POLITICO, Sen. Pat Roberts, the committee chairman, held the door open to consider Stabenow’s bill.
“I have consistently opposed COOL during its failed tenure,” Roberts said. “However, I appreciate Ranking Member Stabenow’s attempts to find a solution. This is a positive step forward in a dialogue that we must have to find a resolution that prevents retaliation,” he said, adding the caveat: “The United States’ day in court is over. Canada and Mexico have won in the WTO and only they can turn off retaliation. Any action we take in Congress must meet their approval.”
Conaway had hoped that the Senate hearing would help rally support for his bill, and expressed disappointment Wednesday with the Stabenow measure.
“Any conversation about a voluntary program must be preceded by a full repeal of COOL, as we have an obligation to our trading partners to come into compliance,” he said. “…  By leaving in place a host of federally mandated requirements, Sen. Stabenow’s bill still creates unnecessary compliance costs and prolongs this failed experiment. After four World Trade Organization rulings against the U.S. for mandatory COOL, it is time to abandon this program and ensure certainty in the marketplace.”
Even Stabenow isn’t 100 percent confident the bill has the support needed to get through the committee as is. The measure was designed to test the waters to see if there is enough support for legislation short of a complete repeal of COOL, a committee aide told POLITICO.
“The proposal serves as a starting point for the conversation,” the aide said.
The bill has a few friends in the agriculture industry.
“A voluntary approach for beef and pork is a prescriptive solution to a very narrow problem identified by the World Trade Organization,” National Farmers Union President Roger Johnson said. “Furthermore, this approach is in concert with Canada’s own voluntary meat labeling process.”
“The assurance provided by stipulating a product labeled as a ‘Product of the U.S.’ is truly that, is a basic right deserving of both consumers and those in the industry, from the cow-calf producer to the meat market owner,” Leo McDonnell, an executive officer at the United States Cattlemen’s Association, is prepared to tell the Senate Agriculture Committee hearing on Thursday. “Through providing certainty on a voluntary label, the U.S. cattle industry is honoring a right that should inherently be given.”
However, the R-CALF United Stockgrowers of America, an original backer of COOL, is skeptical any kind of voluntary program would work.
“Our members flatly oppose this voluntary proposal and we reject the notion that a voluntary program would somehow be better than no COOL at all,” R-CALF CEO Bill Bullard said in response to the Stabenow bill.
But that may be for the best outcome when it comes to avoiding trade retaliation from Canada and Mexico, said Simon Lester, a trade policy analyst at the Cato Institute who used to work at the WTO Appellate Body.
“You might have to wait and see how people respond to the law,” he said. “If people did respond to the law and use labeling, it would have a similar impact. If nobody labels, Canada and Mexico don’t really care and nobody really cares whether it’s a violation.”
Avoiding tariffs is the primary motivator behind Congress’ effort to address COOL.
“Retaliation by Canada and Mexico would do hundreds of millions of dollars in damage to the U.S. wine industry virtually overnight and it would take years to reclaim this lost market share,” said Robert Koch, President and CEO of Wine Institute.
And only a full repeal, such as was called for in Conaway’s bill, is what both the National Cattlemen’s Beef Association and American Farm Bureau Federation both said they want. Craig Hill, president of the Iowa Farm Bureau Federation, is expected to say the same thing when he testifies Thursday.
 
 
US, China bridge some economic differences in Washington talks 
Paul HANDLEY 
25 June 2015
Agence France Presse
 
US and Chinese negotiators bridged some differences over economic policy in annual bilateral talks Wednesday, even as the two countries continue to wrestle with major strategic disagreements.

Both sides suggested they closed gaps in talks on a bilateral investment treaty (BIT) following the talks.

And Washington appeared more ready to support a major step in the internationalization of the Chinese yuan, its inclusion in the basket underpinning the International Monetary Fund's SDR currency.

But there was little sign that Washington was ready to embrace China's new Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, which the US says risks undermining social and environmental standards for loans established by the World Bank.

US Treasury Secretary Jacob Lew said at the end of the two-day US-China Strategic and Economic Dialogue that China had agreed to hold off on interventions in the foreign exchange markets to manage the yuan's value except in situations of "disorderly market conditions."

China also agreed "to actively consider" additional steps to move the yuan, which the US has long criticized is forcefully kept undervalued, to a market-based exchange rate.

Lew also welcomed China's commitment to begin publishing economic data to meet a key IMF standard by the end of 2015.

"It is in China's own interest to adopt the transparency standards of major reserve currencies."

Earlier this year Beijing asked the IMF to consider including the yuan, also called the renminbi, in the basket on which the SDR is based. That would constitute a major recognition of the yuan as one of the 10 most important currencies in the world.

Chinese Vice Premier Wang Yang confirmed that Washington had shown support for the yuan's consideration by the IMF, a decision likely to take place only next year.

Wang also said the two sides had placed high priority on the BIT, as they weigh each others' proposed "negative list," a register of business sectors they want to keep protected from foreign investment.

The two sides committed to "improve the negative list offer with a view to reaching a mutually beneficial and high-standard treaty," he told reporters after the meeting.

The talks, which deal with a broad range of often technical issues, appeared to avoid flashpoint economic issues, like the AIIB that Beijing has launched, and the Trans-Pacific Partnership, the US-driven free trade area that notably excludes China, the second-largest US trade partner.

A key new complaint at the top of the US list in economic and trade issues, cyber-spying and cyber-theft of secrets and intellectual property from US companies that is allegedly backed by the Chinese government, was discussed, according to Lew.

The two sides "had candid conversations about standards of behavior in cyberspace. We agree that there is value in bilateral and international cooperation on these issues," he said.

Wang meanwhile said that Washington had acknowledged its complaints about US economic policy, and would weigh the impact of its expected monetary tightening on the rest of the world.

"The United States will pay attention to the impact of monetary policy on international financial systems and promised increased investment, national savings, a reduced deficit... and fiscal sustainability over the medium term," Wang said.
 
 
EU industry group says trade defences against China must stay 
By Philip Blenkinsop 
 
BRUSSELS, June 24 (Reuters) - European businesses from bicycles to steel will release a report on Thursday concluding that China has a state-led and subsidised economy and should not benefit from a change of global trade rules next year.

The alliance of more than 25 European industry associations, called Aegis Europe, believes China should not be granted market economy status at the end of 2016, as Beijing expects, and that to do so would threaten the survival of many European companies.

World trading powers including Europe are in a bind over whether a World Trade Organization protocol demands they treat China as a more market-based economy -- a status that would make it harder for the European Union to protect local industry.

The issue is likely to be at the centre of an EU-China summit taking place in Brussels next week.

Aegis Europe's 372-page report, conducted by Munich-based consultancy Think!Desk, says the Chinese Communist Party plays a central role in the economy, with 71 five-year government plans and 22 national industrial-sector plans.

"The classification of China as a non-market economy constitutes a necessary 'air-lock' mechanism shielding the European market system from alien, distorting influences," the report concludes.

China joined the World Trade Organisation (WTO) in 2001, recognising that its local prices were not set by market forces.

WTO members can normally apply "anti-dumping" tariffs on others only if their export prices are below those in the exporter's home market. But with China, the EU and others have been able to ignore low domestic prices and set tariffs to make Chinese exports as expensive as products in wealthier countries.

Those WTO limitations on China appear to expire on Dec. 11, 2016, though there is some room for interpretation.

China has already warned the EU to abide by WTO rules and not to resort to what it would consider protectionism.

Europe must take a decision soon on designating China a market economy, because granting that status will require legislative changes that must be approved by the European Parliament and translated into the bloc's 23 official languages.
 
 
U.S. looks into imports of corrosion-resistant steel 
 
WASHINGTON, June 24 (Reuters) - The U.S. Department of Commerce will look into a complaint about imports of corrosion-resistant steel from China, India, Italy, South Korea and Taiwan in a process that could end in import duties.

United States Steel Corp, Nucor Corp, Steel Dynamics, Inc., ArcelorMittal USA, AK Steel Corp and California Steel Industries complained the imported goods were being sold too cheaply and benefited from unfair government subsidies.

 
Offshore tax zones cost developing countries $100 bln a year -UN 
 
GENEVA, June 24 (Reuters) - Developing countries are losing around $100 billion a year in revenues because foreign investors are channelling profits through offshore zones to avoid tax, a study by U.N. think-tank UNCTAD said on Wednesday.

"Tax avoidance practices therefore are responsible for a significant leakage of development finance and resources," UNCTAD Secretary-General Mukhisa Kituyi told a news conference.

The economic and trade body published the $100 billion figure in its annual World Investment Report, which analyses how much foreign direct investment (FDI) is flowing across borders in search of corporate takeovers and start-up ventures.

It calculated the amount by applying an average tax rate of just over 20 percent to around $450 billion of corporate profits shifted out of developing economies every year.

For several years, UNCTAD has flagged a growing trend of FDI money going into tax havens or countries that offered companies the chance to set up "special purpose entities" (SPEs) with a low tax rate.

Investment flows into the British Virgin Islands (BVI), used by UNCTAD to model tax haven trends, have averaged more than $60 billion annually since 2009. The inflow peaked at an estimated $92.3 billion in 2013 before falling back to $56.6 billion last year, UNCTAD data shows.

But countries hosting SPEs, chiefly the Netherlands and Luxembourg, are far bigger channels for investment, the report said. Those two countries, along with Hungary, accounted for $600 billion of investment into SPEs in 2011, while only $90 billion went into tax havens.

In 2012, companies held investments worth around $21 trillion in countries that were not offshore centres. But more than 30 percent of those investments, worth $6.5 trillion, had been channelled through tax havens and SPEs, the report said.

James Zhan, head of UNCTAD's investment and enterprise division, said there were now more than 3,600 double taxation treaties and 3,200 bilateral investment treaties, and such proliferation had encouraged investors to go "treaty shopping".

He said international action was needed to stop countries using tax as a lever to attract investors

"It looks like it's a national issue but you need a cross-border effort. Otherwise you have free riders. It has to be a collective effort," he told Reuters, saying developing countries also needed help to build up their tax collecting capabilities.

The UNCTAD report recommended removing aggressive tax planning opportunities as a way of promoting investment, considering the impact of anti-avoidance measures on investment, and partnership between host, home and conduit countries. (Reporting by Tom Miles; Editing by Ruth Pitchford) 
 
 
India leads FDI in S.Asia with 34 bn investment in 2014:report 
From Shreerupa Mitra-Jha

Geneva, Jun 24 (PTI) India leads regional inflow of Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in South Asia accounting for USD 34 billion investment during 2014 and the upward trend is likely to continue this year also, according to a UN report which placed China as the world's largest FDI recipient.

"FDI inflows to the country (India) surged by 22 per cent to about USD 34 billion" improving its position to 9th top host country for FDI in 2014, over its rank of 15th in 2013, the UNCTAD's World Investment Report 2015 says.

India is likely to maintain an upward trend in 2015 as economy recovery gains ground, the report adds.

FDI inflows to South Asia rose to USD 41 billion in 2014, primarily owing to good performance by India, it says.

"In terms of the sectoral composition of FDI flows, manufacturing is likely to gain strength, as policy efforts to revitalise the industrial sector are sustained, including, for instance, the 'Make in India' initiative launched in mid-2014," the report says.

The top five recipients in South Asia of FDI inflows were India, followed by Iran, Pakistan and Bangladesh (USD 2 billion each) and Sri Lanka (USD 1 billion).

In the UN report, Asia is divided into three sub-regions: East and South East Asia, West Asia and South Asia.

According to the report, China became the world's largest recipient of FDI (USD 129 billion) toppling the US (USD 92 billion).

However, "global FDI inflows fell by 16 per cent to USD 1.23 trillion in 2014, mostly because of the fragility of the global economy, policy uncertainty for investors and elevated geopolitical risks and new investments were also offset by some large divestments," it says.

The groups of countries negotiating the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership and Trans-Pacific Partnership saw their combined share of global FDI inflows decline.

Asia overall bucked the global trend with historically high levels of inward FDI to developing economies at USD 681 billion marking a 2 per cent rise.

Among the top 10 FDI recipients in the world, five are developing economies.

India was also the biggest investor in outward FDI in South Asia with USD 9.8 billion marking an increase of 486 per cent over 2013. However, India does not figure in the first top 20 countries for FDI outflows.

"There was an abnormal decrease (in outward FDI investment in India) in 2013 because of macro economic uncertainties when some of the Indian MNCs divested. The figures are now back on track but still lower than figures (of outward FDI investment) in 2009, 2010 and 2011," said Guoyong Liang, UNCTAD Asia head of the Investment Division.

The US had the largest outward flow of FDI (USD 337 billion) followed by Hong Kong-China (USD 142 billion) and China (USD 116 billion). PTI SRM ZH

 
IMF boss Lagarde says ready to 'consider' 2nd term 
24 June 2015
Agence France Presse
 
Christine Lagarde has said she is ready to consider a second term as head of the International Monetary Fund in an interview with a French magazine to be published Thursday.

If the members of the IMF "wish that I continue to serve, it's certainly something I would consider," she told the magazine Challenges.

Lagarde's mandate expires in July 2016.

In the interview, she also takes aim at the "myth of the IMF as a grand-daddy, intransigent and inhuman" -- accusations that have been raised during its tense negotiations over Greece's debt.

"Invective and insults don't advance the debate," she told the magazine, defending the IMF's track record of "resolving crises around the entire world for 70 years".

Lagarde has clashed with Greek Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras in recent months, with the IMF boss saying a deal was impossible without "adults in the room" in an apparent sideswipe at Athens officials.

For his part, Tsipras said the IMF bore a "criminal responsibility" for the Greek economic crisis.
 
 
Omani pavilion in Geneva promotes tourism
June 24, 2015 | 8:51 PM
by ONA
 
Geneva: An Omani pavilion showcased country’s tourist sites and distributed brochures and CDs at the World Trade Organisation in Geneva.
 
The pavilion also showcased Omani handicraft products, like silver ornaments, cloth, Omani food and other Omani products, including dates and Omani coffee, sweets and incense.
 
Oman participated in the Open Day of the WTO to celebrate the 20th anniversary of the establishment of the body in Geneva, in the presence of Abdullah bin Nasser Al Rahbi, Permanent Representative at the WTO. The Celebration titled (Thank You Geneva) aimed at highlighting the organisation’s work and meetings with representatives of Member States.
 
Roberto Azevedo, Director General of WTO, and Michael Moore, Director General of the United Nations Office in Geneva paid a visit to the Sultanate's pavilion and were briefed on the Omani environment and potentials of the Sultanate.
 
It is worth mentioning that the Sultanate is the only Arab country to participate in this event, which was attended by a number of Member States in the presence of 3,000 visitors from a number of different nationalities.
 

Working Toward Sustainable Global Fisheries 
By Susi Pudjiastuti and Jane Lubchenco 
25 June 2015
The Wall Street Journal Asia
 
The ocean is a frontier for sustainable growth. It offers increased food security, economic growth and value-added investment opportunities to nations willing to develop maritime resources without using them up. Yet there is an urgent need to deal directly with declines in the value and harvest of wild-capture fisheries around the world.

Globally, marine fisheries support 260 million jobs, add more than $270 billion to global gross domestic product and provide 3 billion people with nutritious sources of protein. But half of these fisheries produce less seafood, jobs, value and biodiversity than they could otherwise. This is primarily due to perverse incentives, weak laws, poor enforcement, unreported harvests and widespread poaching.

Specific political and economic measures and investments are required to deal with these challenges. Governments need to reduce overfishing, enforce regulations of illegal fishing and enable those with the legal right to manage these resources. There is growing evidence that the benefits of such incremental investments far outweigh the costs. Countries that understand this are taking action.

In Indonesia, overfishing is rampant. Illegal, unregulated and unreported fishing costs the economy more than $20 billion each year. The government has responded with a series of important measures, including a prohibition on the use of all trawl and seine nets, size limits and restrictions on important species that are in decline, a moratorium on new fishing licenses for foreign built vessels, and the destruction of illegal vessels that threaten Indonesia's sovereignty and prosperity.

Underscoring the demand for seafood, during the first quarter of 2015 Indonesia's fisheries industry grew at twice the national rate. Catches for certain fish are also up, with Indonesia's tuna yield increasing 80% from April to May of this year. Now the challenge is to ensure that these fisheries are sustainable, otherwise such benefits will quickly erode.

There are examples to suggest that this goal can be achieved. Over the past 14 years, the U.S. has accomplished a dramatic reversal in the state of fisheries in its federal waters by improving governance, empowering responsible domestic fishermen, discouraging poachers and increasing transparency. It has slashed the number of overexploited stocks to 37 from 92, while increasing the number of rebuilt populations. The number of fishing jobs in recent years has increased 23% while revenues are up 30%.

There's every reason to believe that other countries can bring about similar transformations in their waters, and there are compelling incentives to do so. New research shows we can increase profits in the global fishing sector by $74 billion a year if fisheries are managed sustainably. Even though fisheries are currently being heavily harvested in most countries, global fish production could rise by 14% if we fished smarter, not harder. This transition to ocean prosperity could also come fast, unfolding on average within a decade. While it isn't free, the benefits from transitioning from business-as-usual far outweigh the costs, on the order of 10 to one.

The same research, however, suggests that the alternative scenario of continuing with business as usual is a dark one -- a dramatic fall in fish production and a steady erosion in profits until the sector becomes a net money loser, unable to survive without substantial subsidies from the government.

There is no reason to passively accept this narrative. What is required are for more leaders to work with fishers and private-sector partners to achieve investment opportunities that implement reforms and unlock the value fisheries hold for those that rely on them.

---

Ms. Pudjiastuti is Indonesia's minister of marine affairs and fisheries. Ms. Lubchenco is on the faculty at Oregon State University and was from 2009 to 2013 the administrator of NOAA and under secretary of commerce for oceans and atmosphere. END


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.