WTO talks stuck again as ministers prepare to meet, Azevedo says
No outcomes guaranteed in Nairobi: WTO chief
L'OMC s'attend à un "combat difficile" pour des résultats à Nairobi
Russian govt to work out economic retaliation for Turkey
WTO norms allow Russia to introduce restrictions against Turkey - economy minister
Thailand ignoring WTO cigarette deal, Philippines  alleges
Italy says no agreement made at G20 to extend Russia sanctions
Japan's Abe seeks extra fiscal spending to revitalise economy
EU to remove auto tariffs if Japan opens farm market: negotiator
Indonesia to press ahead with proposal in upcoming WTO summit

 
WTO talks stuck again as ministers prepare to meet, Azevedo says
By Tom Miles
26 November 2015
Reuters News
GENEVA, Nov 26 (Reuters) - World trade talks are deadlocked and ministers are unlikely to find a way out of the impasse when they meet in Nairobi next month, World Trade Organization Director-General HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevedo said on Thursday.
"We clearly are stuck in the negotiations at this point in time," Azevedo told a news conference. "I think it will be very difficult to reconcile the views. I would say impossible at this point in time."
The Geneva-based HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO has been trying and failing to agree on a worldwide package of trade reforms since a meeting in Doha in 2001 hatched an ambitious plan for knocking down trade barriers.
Since then the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO has still managed to agree a few changes to the global trading rules.
Two years ago it agreed to standardise and streamline customs procedures, and Nairobi could still see agreements on other issues, such as an end to tariffs on $1.3 trillion of IT exports.
Brazil and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union are also leading a push to end agricultural export subsidies at Nairobi.
But differences over completing the so-called Doha round have never ceased and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's 10th ministerial conference, which opens in Nairobi on Dec. 15, is not about to produce a common view on how to take the talks forward.
"I think that's very unlikely to happen," Azevedo said.
Azevedo said the biggest potential winners from a global trade deal would be the poorest countries, most of whom are excluded from regional trade talks going on elsewhere, such as the U.S.-led Trans-Pacific Partnership.
Among the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's 161 members, which will grow to 162 when Kazakhstan joins on Monday, some insist on focusing on Doha to the exclusion of all else, while others want to tackle trade reforms in a completely different way, Azevedo said.
"There is no agreement among HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members on what they want to do. I just work there," he said. "I think even after Nairobi we're going to spend some time trying to figure out how we can best interact in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO that would allow us to deliver with the negotiating function of the organisation." 
Thomson Reuters (Markets) LLC
No outcomes guaranteed in Nairobi: WTO chief
Woodburn
26 November 2015
Xinhua News Agency
GENEVA, Nov. 26 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xinhua) -- Speaking ahead of the 10th World Trade Organisation (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) Ministerial Conference in Nairobi, WTO Director-General HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevedo told press on Thursday that "if anything comes out of Nairobi, we will have to fight for it and fight hard for outcomes."
The first such conference held in Africa, Nairobi will host ministers from across the globe from Dec. 15 to Dec. 18 to determine whether a future consensus on trade can be reached.
"Given where we are now in terms of economic growth and challenges, we need a more coordinated approach," Azevedo explained.
"The worst case scenario is to have an environment which is so corrosive and contaminated that we spend a long time after Nairobi figuring how to move forward," said the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO head, who also celebrated the filing of the 500th dispute settlement by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO this year.
"The best case scenario is one where we can deliver on some outcomes, especially for the Least Developed Countries and also in areas where there is potential for convergence," he added, while warning that a common view on the future will be hard to attain.
"Countries need to talk more about how decisions on fiscal and monetary policies affect growth globally, and talk more about how trade measures affect global value chains," he highlighted.
Concerning the Trans-Pacific Partnership, a trade agreement reached by 12 economies in October this year, and other regional trade covenants, Azevedo maintained that many of the issues covered by the latter are based on "HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO DNA."
"The essence of these agreements is very much compatible and very much in line with HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO discipline," he maintained.
He warned however that initiatives also venture into new areas which could be of concern as they may neglect the voices of developing countries who will may be unable to shape future agendas.
The proliferation of standards, some of which are not necessarily compatible with each other, could furthermore burden businesses, especially those of a global nature.
"It's fair to say that there are no easy pickings at this point in time," Azevedo cautioned.
"For MC10, what you do there is as important as what you do after. It is about deliverables, we need to find ways of delivering," he concluded, while iterating HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's commitment to realising the Doha Development Agenda. 
Xinhua News Agency
L'OMC s'attend à un "combat difficile" pour des résultats à Nairobi
26 November 2015
AWP Swiss News
Genève (awp/ats) - Aucun progrès n'a été observé dans les négociations avant la ministérielle de l'OMC prévue en décembre à Nairobi. "Nous devrons nous battre sérieusement" pour atteindre un résultat et réfléchir à "notre avenir", a reconnu jeudi le directeur général Roberto Azevedo.
La réunion ministérielle du 15 au 18 décembre sera la première organisée en Afrique. Tout un symbole, selon le directeur général de l'Organisation mondiale du commerce (OMC). "Nous voulons obtenir des succès pour l'Afrique et les pays en développement", a dit à Genève devant la presse M. Azevedo.
Il espère notamment des progrès sur le paquet pour les pays les moins avancés (PMA). Au total, 46 Etats, dont la Suisse, ont déjà notifié un traitement préférentiel pour ces pays. Des améliorations sont possibles sur ce point et sur l'harmonisation des règles d'origine, selon M. Azevedo.
Mais aucune avancée n'est garantie d'ici Nairobi, notamment sur la concurrence agricole, malgré une nouvelle proposition américaine, ou la sécurité alimentaire. Des divisions importantes restent à combler. Selon des sources proches du dossier, l'Inde et l'Afrique du Sud rejettent catégoriquement les propositions sur le commerce des services.
DOCUMENT ATTENDU
"Les négociations restent toutefois fluides", a indiqué le Brésilien. Les facilitateurs doivent présenter vendredi un texte consolidé sur la base des nombreuses suggestions faites par les Etats.
Autre préoccupation, la mise en oeuvre de l'Accord sur la facilitation du commerce (TFA) décidé à Bali sera difficile d'ici la conférence de Nairobi. Seuls 52 Etats l'ont ratifié, alors que deux tiers des 161 membres sont nécessaires.
Au-delà des thématiques, la question de la poursuite des négociations sur le cycle de Doha et de quelle manière devra-t-elle être réglée par les Etats membres. Les fronts sont opposés et le débat devrait se poursuivre après Doha.
Mais "il y a un consensus pour dire que ce qui a été négocié à Doha ne peut pas être remis en cause", souligne M. Azevedo. Il souhaite que "la capacité de négociation de l'OMC et sa contribution au commerce mondial" soient préservées, mais les Etats décideront.
DEUX NOUVEAUX MEMBRES
De plus en plus d'accords régionaux sont adoptés entre groupes d'Etats, comme la récente conclusion du Partenariat transpacifique (TPP) entre 12 Etats. Sur de nombreuses questions, le TPP reprend des éléments évoqués à l'OMC, mais il va aussi parfois plus loin. "Les disciplines développées multilatéralement sont très rarement issues du secteur multilatéral". Elles reviennent lorsqu'elles ont atteint une masse critique.
Mais l'OMC devra être attentive à ce type d'initiatives. Notamment parce qu'elles n'intègrent pas les pays en développement, en particulier les PMA, pour lesquels les négociations multilatérales restent la seule plate-forme. Par ailleurs, ces accords régionaux provoquent une prolifération de standards qui ne sont pas toujours compatibles entre eux, souligne M. Azevedo.
Plus globalement, M. Azevedo souhaite un changement de la donne dans l'économie mondiale. Il faut passer "de la phase de stabilisation des économies intérieures à la phase de stabilisation de l'économie globale", a-t-il dit.
A relever, par ailleurs, que le Liberia et l'Afghanistan devraient eux venir étoffer les rangs de l'OMC à Nairobi. L'organisation totalisera alors 163 membres.
awp Finanznachrichten AG
Russian govt to work out economic retaliation for Turkey
26 November 2015
Prime News
MOSCOW, Nov 26 (PRIME) -- Russian Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Dmitry Medvedev has ordered the government and ministries to work out economic and humanitarian retaliation against Turkey’s unfriendly act as soon as possible, Medvedev said at a government meeting Thursday.
On Tuesday, Russia’s Sukhoi Su-24 bomber was shot down by an air-to-air Turkish missile and crashed in Syria. Russian President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Vladimir Putin said it was “a stab in the back” from “accomplices of terrorists” and promised serious consequences in relations between Moscow and Ankara.
“I would like to tell you about the economic measures (for Turkey). We have discussed this issue with the president yesterday in Yekaterinburg. As a result, the government has been ordered to work out a system of retaliation measures in the economic and humanitarian spheres for the act of aggression. The decision will be based on the law on special measures adopted on December 30, 2006,” he said.
The measures may include suspension or termination of Turkish investment projects and talks on preferences for the country’s services and investments, suspension of programs for economic cooperation and restrictions in financial and trading spheres, prohibition of operation of Turkish companies in Russia, and restrictions of food supplies, Medvedev said. It may also cover customs duties and restrictions on financial operations, he added.
All measures should have no time limit, their terms should depend on development of relations with Turkey and an international situation, he said.
Economic Development Minister Alexei Ulyukayev said that all possible measures will comply with regulations of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO). The regulations stipulate that such sanctions are possible in case of a threat to national security, he said.
Russian retaliatory measures may also concern construction of the Turkish Stream gas pipeline and the Akkuyu nuclear plant, as both projects fall within the scope of the law on special measures, Ulyukayev said.
Russia may impose restrictions on both regular and charter flights to Turkey, Ulyukayev said. The Transport Ministry will submit its proposals on restrictive measures in its sphere to the government on Friday, Minister Maxim Sokolov said, but declined to comment on whether the ministry will propose a ban on air travel between the countries.
Ulyukayev also said that Russia may suspend work on establishment of a joint investment fund with Turkey, as well as preparation of an agreement on free trade and investments, and implementation of a 5-year program of economic and research and technology cooperation.
Oleg Safonov, Director of the Federal Agency for Tourism, said that the countries’ tourism cooperation is likely to be suspended as well. The agency earlier asked national tour operators to halt selling package tours to Turkey.
ZAO PRIME
WTO norms allow Russia to introduce restrictions against Turkey - economy minister
26 November 2015
Interfax: Ukrainian General Newswire
MOSCOW. Nov 26 (Interfax) - The norms of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) allow Russia to implement economic restrictive measures against Turkey, Russian Economic Development Minister Alexei Ulyukayev said at a government session on Thursday.
"Really, in strict accordance with Russian legislation, with the federal law on special economic measures, on the basis of the development of regulatory acts in the form of a presidential order and a Russian governmental order, measures aimed at ensuring the security of the country and the defense of lawful interests, rights of freedoms of its citizens may be introduced," he said.
In this regard the minister outlined a number of areas for restrictions: bans on financial transactions or imposing restrictions on them, the prohibition of foreign trade operations, ie trade and investment or imposing restrictions on their implementation, suspension of the implementation of all or part of the programs in the field of technical and economic assistance and cooperation.
Ulyukayev also spoke about the possible termination or suspension of the activities of international trade agreements between Russia and other international contracts in terms of foreign economic relations, the establishment or modification of import and export duties, prohibition or restriction for vessels to Russian ports of call or the use of Russian airspace.
Additionally, there is also talk about establishing restrictions on tourist activities, banning or refusing to participate in international, scientific and technical programs.
"I want to say that such restrictions are in full compliance with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO rules, the 21st article of the GATT agreement of 1994 allows for the introduction of all of these restrictive measures on trade in goods and services and investments in the event that there is a threat to national security, such a condition that we are experiencing now," he said.
"Of course, we will have to determine exactly the positions that are most effective in terms of not damaging Russian companies which conduct business activities with Turkish companies and entrepreneurs. We will prepare such proposals very soon," he said.
Interfax Information Services, B.V. 


Thailand ignoring WTO cigarette deal, Philippines  alleges
Victor V. Saulon
27 November 2015
BusinessWorld
THE GOVERNMENT said Thailand is not complying with rulings issued by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) by continuing to impose rules that unfairly place imported cigarettes at a disadvantage.
In a statement submitted to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's dispute settlement body on Nov. 25, the Philippines said it is "deeply concerned" about two issues that undermine the recommendations and rulings relating to Thailand custom's treatment of imported cigarettes, and the resulting agreement between the two countries.
"First, the Philippines remains deeply concerned with the Thai Attorney General's decision to prosecute the importer of Philippine cigarettes for alleged under-declaration of customs value," the statement reads.
"Second, the Philippines is also deeply concerned about a separate Thai BoA [Customs Board of Appeals] ruling rejecting transaction value for 20 entries from Indonesia that were covered by the rulings and recommendations in the original proceedings in this dispute," it said.
The complaint stemmed from concerns first raised by the country in February 2008 that highlighted a number of Thai fiscal and customs measures affecting cigarettes from the Philippines.
The measures include Thailand's customs valuation practices, excise tax, health tax, TV tax, VAT regime, retail licensing requirements and import guarantees imposed upon cigarette importers. The Philippines claims that Thailand administers these measures in violation of provisions under the 1994 General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT).
The Philippines made separate claims about various Thai customs valuation measures affecting cigarette imports. It also claimed that Thailand's ad valorem excise tax, health tax and TV tax, on both imported and domestic cigarettes, are inconsistent with a GATT provision that requires the publication of trade laws and regulations of general application.
The country also pointed to an inconsistency in Thailand's value-added tax regime, a dual license requirement that orders tobacco and cigarette retailers to hold separate licenses to sell domestic and imported cigarettes. It said the licensing requirement results in a less favorable treatment for imported products.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO created a panel to study the dispute, which in November 2010 sided with many of the issues raised by the Philippines. Thailand appealed the panel's report but an appellate body in June 2011 upheld most of the previous findings.
In August 2011, Thailand said it intended to implement the recommendations and rulings of the dispute settlement body, and that it would need a reasonable period of time to do so. About a month later, the Philippines and Thailand informed the body that they had mutually agreed on the period of compliance.
In January 2013, Thailand said it had completed the final outstanding steps in its implementation process, which the Philippines disputed. Thailand said in June 2014 that it did not have to take any further action to implement the dispute settlement body's rulings.
In its latest statement, the Philippines said it "remains open to bilateral discussions with Thailand to resolve the outstanding compliance issue."
BusinessWorld Publishing Corporation
Italy says no agreement made at G20 to extend Russia sanctions
26 November 2015
Reuters News
ROME, Nov 26 (Reuters) - No agreement was reached among leaders at this month's HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Group of 20 summit in Turkey to extend sanctions against Russia over its intervention in Ukraine, Italian Foreign Minister Paolo Gentiloni said on Thursday.
A senior European diplomat told Reuters this week that Western leaders at the G20 in Antalya agreed on the margins of the meeting to extend the sanctions, which are due to expire in January, by six months to until July next year..
"No decision regarding the sanctions was taken at the G20 in Turkey," Gentiloni told the Chamber of Deputies.
Gentiloni said the issue of the sanctions was likely to be addressed in "a very broad discussion" at a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union summit in December.
Italian Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Matteo Renzi has repeatedly stressed the need to avoid isolating Russia and to involve it in attempts to resolve international conflicts, though he has not spoken publicly about whether the sanctions should be extended. (Reporting by Gavin Jones and Francesca Piscioneri; 
Japan's Abe seeks extra fiscal spending to revitalise economy
27 November 2015
Reuters News
By Tetsushi Kajimoto
TOKYO, Nov 27 (Reuters) - Japanese Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Shinzo Abe on Friday made a widely expected decision to roll out additional fiscal spending - the latest attempt by Tokyo to revitalise a sputtering economy that has failed to break out of decades of stagnation.
Abe directed his cabinet earlier in the day to compile an extra budget for the current fiscal year, which will focus on steps to cushion the blow on some sectors following the Trans-Pacific Partnership free-trade deal, Finance Minister Taro Aso said.
"While aiming to achieve our goal of halving the primary budget deficit this fiscal year, we will compile measures that will lead directly to resolve problems Japan faces," Aso told reporters.
The government unveiled two separate packages of steps aimed at tackling Japan's shrinking population and easing farmers' worries over the TPP deal.
The extra budget will focus on these measures as well as other urgent steps such as disaster restoration, Aso added.
The government has not decided on the size of the extra budget but sources told Reuters last month that a supplementary budget worth over 3.1 trillion yen ($25.29 billion) would be considered, without issuing extra bonds to fund the spending.
The extra budget will be compiled next month along with an annual budget for the next fiscal year starting in April 2016. In the last fiscal year, the government complied a 3.1 trillion yen supplementary budget.
The additional fiscal impulse comes at a time of growing economic strains, with Japan's relapse into recession in the third quarter and a cooling China stoking uncertainty about the outlook.
With the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Bank of Japan's 2 percent inflation goal seemingly more elusive than ever, Abe has been under pressure to step up support for an economy that has stagnated for decades.
"We will raise the sales tax again in two years and we need to make sure the economy is on solid footing beforehand," Economics Minister Akira Amari said, referring to the sales tax hike planned for April 2017.
"Right now we are in a critical period as we try to meet our economic growth target."
Thomson Reuters (Markets) LLC
EU to remove auto tariffs if Japan opens farm market: negotiator
Loreline Merelle Loreline Merelle
26 November 2015
Kyodo News
BRUSSELS, Nov. 26 -- The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union will abolish its tariffs on automobiles only if Japan liberalizes its agricultural sector under a free trade agreement currently being negotiated, EU Trade Commissioner Cecilia Malmstrom has said.
"The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU is ready to eliminate its tariffs on automobiles provided that concessions received in return will be sufficient. One of the areas where we definitely need to see liberalization on the Japanese side is the agriculture sector, especially food and drinks," the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU trade chief stressed in a recent written interview with HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Kyodo News.
In the negotiations, Tokyo is seeking the elimination of a 10 percent duty imposed by the bloc on Japanese cars, while Brussels is aiming to expand exports by reducing tariffs on agricultural products such as pork, cheese and wine.
Malmstrom also said Japan has to take into account the interest of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU car sector and find a solution "to longstanding non-tariff measures, NTMs, that have hampered the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU's exports."
"The speed of the elimination of tariffs on automobiles by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU will depend," she added, "on how far and how fast Japan can solve these NTMs issues."
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union also wants Japan to make progress on removing non-tariff barriers not only on motor vehicles, but also on agricultural products, processed food and beverages "before the end of the negotiation," she wrote.
As for the Trans-Pacific Partnership deal struck in early October by Japan, the United States and 10 other Pacific countries, the European commissioner warned that the TPP is a "useful reference" and "not a template for the EU-Japan FTA."
"The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU has different interests from those of the U.S. and other TPP members," especially on food and drinks, she said. "The export patterns of the U.S. and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU when it comes to agriculture are not the same and, therefore, the EU-Japan FTA cannot just copy the TPP."
On the issue of public procurement, she welcomed Tokyo's offer as "a noticeable improvement." The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union and Japan exchanged public procurement offers at negotiations from late October to early November in Brussels.
"However, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU's expectations on procurement by local authorities and utilities providers at national and regional level in Japan are higher, and in return, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU is ready to offer large access to its own procurement market," she said.
As for access to the Japanese railway market, Malmstrom welcomed Japan' new proposal without elaborating as an "opportunity to bring an end to a long-lasting trade irritant between the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EUand Japan" and a "step towards substantive market access negotiations on railway procurement."
According to a source, Japan has proposed removing the so-called operational safety clause, which the European railway industry claims limits access to the Japanese market. The proposal may force Japan Railway companies to open their tenders to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU entities.
Asked about a Japanese request to include the cultural field in the FTA agreement, Malmstrom cited a need to protect cultural diversity and concerns over "audiovisual services that the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EUtraditionally excludes from any liberalization, as well as libraries, archives and museums, and also betting services, in which the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU generally avoids taking commitments."
Regarding the prospect of the bloc and Japan striking a broad FTA deal by year-end as once hoped, Malmstrom said the two sides' "positions are still far apart in many areas, and the negotiations will move well into next year."
Japan and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union, which agreed to launch FTA talks in March 2013, are set to hold their next negotiations from Monday in Tokyo, which will be the last round this year, according to Malmstrom.
Kyodo News

Indonesia to press ahead with proposal in upcoming WTO summit

26 November 2015
The Jakarta Post
Indonesia will defend the interests of developing nations by demanding a special safeguard mechanism and subsidy scheme on certain agricultural products during the upcoming HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTOministerial conference in Nairobi, Kenya, despite possible resistance from developed countries, a senior official has said.
The trade minister's special staff member for global trade policy enhancement, Iman Pambagyo, said on Wednesday that Indonesia would field a proposal arranged with other developing nations that were grouped into the G33.
"I'm not sure that the proposal will be agreed [to by all HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members] in Nairobi, but at least there will be an effort to include the proposal as a subject for discussion, post-Nairobi," he said after a forum held by the Trade Ministry.
Iman said that the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's 10th ministerial conference in Nairobi, which will take place next month, would likely provide no chance for discussion of the proposal, let alone to start negotiations on it, as developed countries still insisted on sticking to the status quo for the long-stalled Doha Development Agenda (DDA).
Negotiations related to subsidies or special safeguards for agricultural products have often sparked major debates between developing and developed nations, in which developed nations demanded the reduction of trade barriers although they still insisted on providing subsidies to their own agriculture sectors.
US domestic agricultural subsidies have surged from an average of US$33,437 per farmer in 2008 to $57,000 this year, according to Iman, who is a former Indonesian ambassador to the WTO.
That figure is far higher than the subsidies given by China and India to their respective subsistence farmers, which only amount to $192 and between $120 and $200 per farmer, respectively.
The G33 proposal is aimed at addressing at least three key issues, namely public stock holding, special safeguard mechanisms (SSM) and special agricultural products.
The public stock holding issue is about seeking possibilities for developing nations to buy agricultural products from their farmers without the payments being considered subsidies.
The SSM, meanwhile, is meant to provide an easier mechanism for developing countries to implement safeguard measures for certain agricultural products. Safeguard measures are currently allowed under the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO system if a surge in imports of certain products harm local producers.
The mechanism to apply one, however, is considered to be so difficult and complicated that often only developed nations are able to use the facility.
Yose Rizal Damuri, the head of the department of economics at the Centre for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), said that while the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO had been an international organization that reached its goal of promoting free trade, the negotiation process in the organization remained slow.
"I think there will be no great prospects in Nairobi [in regards to the DDA]," he said.
Yose argued that the emergence of new trade negotiations or trade pacts was partly driven by the inability of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO to help its member countries solve new issues, such as the global value chain.
He said that the US-led Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) had become an example of how developed countries tried to find a solution for the global value chain issue without using the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO.
PT Bina Media Tenggara
