WTO backs agricultural reforms, split on Doha
 
World Trade Organisation puts stalled Doha round behind it
 
WTO in groundbreaking accord to eliminate agricultural subsidies
 
WTO Nairobi meeting ends with major breakthrough on global trade
 
WTO agriculture deal 'remarkable': Robb
 
India rues WTO outcome skirting Doha
 
WTO talks conclude; India says ‘disappointed’ on Doha issues
 
WTO Ministerial Conference Declaration Adopted in Nairobi 'Balanced Deal'
 
Pakistan rejects amendments in WTO agreement
 
L'OMC maintiendrait les aménagements de la Suisse
 

WTO backs agricultural reforms, split on Doha
 
By Edith Honan
 
NAIROBI (Reuters) - The World Trade Organization reached deals on agricultural export subsidies,
food aid and other issues on Saturday, capping a ministerial conference in the Kenyan capital where rich and poor countries had been split over the path of trade reform.
 
Members said the Nairobi deal had drawn a line under years of stalemate over the direction of global trade negotiations.
 
"Our work in Nairobi marks a turning point for the World Trade Organization," U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman said in a statement. The negotiations "started a new phase in the WTO's evolution" and showed "what is possible when the multilateral trading system comes together to solve a problem." 
 
The Geneva-based WTO, which invited Liberia and Afghanistan to become its 163rd and 164th members, has been trying and largely failing to agree on a worldwide package of trade reforms since a meeting in Doha in 2001 hatched an ambitious plan for knocking down trade barriers.
 
The four-day Nairobi conference was extended by a final non-stop 24-hour negotiation between the major trading powers, who agreed on a package that included phasing out agricultural export subsidies and restricting agricultural export credits.
 
But they agreed to disagree about the potential for success in the Doha round of talks.
 
Both India, which had insisted on completing the existing Doha talks before any further negotiation, and the United States, which wanted to move on from Doha, had had to give ground, an EU official said. 
 
The compromise means that more issues can be loaded onto the negotiating agenda, the EU official said. 
 
Trade experts greeted the deal on the talks, also known as the Doha Development Agenda (DDA), with scepticism. 
 
"DDA = Doha Dead Again?," Richard Baldwin, professor of international economics at Geneva's Graduate Institute, said in a tweet.
 
Kenya's Foreign Minister Amina Mohamed, who had described the WTO's negotiating function as broken at the summit's opening, said she was confident that the Nairobi talks had actually "strengthened" the body over the week.
 
"For me, Nairobi will be remembered as having made that leap from a time when we were divided along this developed and developing divide," she said. 
 
The meeting, the first ministerial meeting to be held in Africa, had earlier hailed an agreement to remove import tariffs on 201 information technology products, marking the first major global tariff-cutting deal in 19 years.
 
In addition, more countries signed on to the Trade Facilitation Agreement, which eases the passage of goods between countries. 
 
(Reporting by Edith Honan, additional reporting by Tom Miles in Geneva; Editing by Andrew Bolton
 
 
World Trade Organisation puts stalled Doha round behind it
 
Focus will be on narrowly-focused negotiations rather than monolithic global agreements
 
December 19, 2015 
by: Shawn Donnan, World Trade Editor
 
Trade ministers from around the world have put what may be the final nail in the coffin of the long-stalled Doha round of negotiations, clearing the way for the World Trade Organisation to start focusing on smaller agreements with a better chance of success.
 
In a victory for the US and EU, which have been pushing for a new path forward for the WTO, trade ministers from its 162 member countries meeting in Nairobi on Saturday failed to “reaffirm” the Doha Round for the first time since it was launched amid great fanfare in 2001. They also opened the door to the discussion of new issues at the WTO such as the digital economy and investment.
 
The moves came alongside approval for a smaller package of measures including a ban on export subsidies for agricultural products, new guidelines for the financing of agricultural exports and new access to developed markets for poor cotton-producing countries.
 
The decision on Doha amounts to a fudge that came out of deep-seated differences within the WTO over how to proceed. The WTO operates by consensus and as a result of the membership failing to agree on the path forward the US, which had called for the WTO to remove the “strictures of the Doha Round” in the lead-up to the Nairobi meeting, got the result it was seeking.
 
“While opinions remain divided among the WTO Membership, it is clear that the road to a new era for the WTO began in Nairobi,” said Mike Froman, the US trade representative.
 
That new era is likely to see the WTO move towards more narrowly-focused negotiations rather than the large monolithic global agreement targeted in the Doha round, something the US has been pushing for alongside other WTO members in recent years.
 
The US in October concluded negotiations with Japan and 10 other countries on a Pacific Rim trade deal. It is pursuing a similar regional deal with the EU and sectoral agreements on services and the trade in environmental goods with small groups of WTO members. 
 
India and civil society groups, however, said the result in Nairobi was a blow to the world’s poor, arguing that by walking away from the Doha round, which put at least a rhetorical emphasis on development, the WTO was betraying its poorest members.
 
"Doha has been very dear to us and it remains very dear,” India’s commerce and industry minister, Nirmala Sitharaman, told her fellow delegates during a closing session on Saturday.
 
Roberto Azevedo, director-general of the WTO, said while major divisions still remained among members the package of measures agreed in Nairobi remained significant and a sign that the WTO could still deliver results. The elimination of export subsidies, he said, was the “most significant” thing the WTO had delivered in the important area of agriculture in its 20-year history, noting that the issue was a major one for many WTO members at the birth of the Doha round in 2001.
 
But he also called for the WTO’s members to be “clear-sighted” about “the situation that we are in”.
 
“We have to face up to this problem. We have to address it,” he told ministers. “The world must decide what the future of this organisation is.”
 
WTO in groundbreaking accord to eliminate agricultural subsidies
 
Published December 19, 2015
EFE
 
The World Trade Organization, or WTO, reached a groundbreaking accord here Saturday which obliges developed countries to eliminate subsidies for their agricultural exports as requested by the least developed nations to protect their farmers.
 
This is the "most significant outcome on agriculture" in WTO history because it ends one of the greatest distortions in the market, WTO Director-General Roberto Azevedo said with regard to the statement approved at the end of the organization's Ministerial Meeting in Nairobi.
 
This and other decisions contained in the ministerial statement are intended to promote the Doha Development Round, though developing economies like India, Cuba and Venezuela feared that it didn't go far enough and could have "serious consequences" for those countries.
 
Providing subsidies for the export of agricultural products by developed countries has curbed their imports of goods from developing economies, for which reason the elimination of this price-cutting financial aid has been one of the WTO's historic demands in order to level the playing field.
 
According to the agreement adopted on agricultural exports, developing countries must also eliminate their subsidies, but not until 2018, and with some exceptions until 2023.
 
The WTO Ministerial Meeting ended Saturday in Nairobi after overcoming serious discrepancies that had rich and poor countries at odds to such an extent that the summit had to continue for an extra day. EFE
 
 
WTO Nairobi meeting ends with major breakthrough on global trade
 
NAIROBI, Dec. 19 (Xinhua) -- The 10th Ministerial Conference of the World Trade Organization (WTO) in Nairobi came to an end on Saturday after an extended negotiating period with a new Nairobi Declaration that promises to keep the international trading system alive.
 
Key outcomes out of the conference included an agreement on the elimination of agricultural export subsidies, expansion of the list of information and technology products for tariff reduction, and the accessions of Liberia and Afghanistan into the world trade body.
 
"We are creating a new habit of success," said WTO Director-General Roberto Azevedo, referring to the first major successful conclusion of a ministerial conference since 2001.
 
"The decisions will improve the lives of the people of Africa. The process was not perfect but we have delivered," he said.
 
According to the WTO Nairobi Declaration adopted at the conference, developed members shall immediately eliminate their scheduled export subsidies and all members shall not seek to raise their export subsidies beyond the average of the past 5 years on a product basis.
 
Azevedo said the outcome of the conference on eliminating the domestic support to large scale producers of food was historic.
 
"The decisions are most historic. The elimination of the export subsidies is extremely important. It removes distortions and helps create a level playing field," Azevedo said.
 
Celebrating the successful outcome of the Conference, Kenyan foreign minister and the conference's chairperson Amina Mohammed, said the outcomes were significant.
 
Nairobi, she added, would be remembered for overcoming the 14-year disagreement on the next course of action on a global trade regime.
 
WTO agriculture deal 'remarkable': Robb
 
REUTERS 
6:21am December 20, 2015 
 
The World Trade Organization has reached deals on agricultural export subsidies, food aid and other issues, capping a ministerial conference in the Kenyan capital which Australian Trade Minister Andrew Robb praised as "remarkable and historic".
 
Mr Robb said the decision to abolish agricultural export subsidies would have significant implications for Australian farmers.
 
Speaking from Nairobi, he said the "unexpected" deal was a win for the country's meat, dairy, sugar, grain, wine, cotton and vegetable producers.
 
"We'll have a much more level playing field for Australian farmers across every field of endeavour," the minister told AAP on Sunday morning.
 
"Export subsidies are the most destructive form of assistance and the WTO members have agreed unanimously that we will not in the future have them distorting agriculture in every part of the world."
 
Mr Robb said at present some $15 billion worth of subsidies were available worldwide.
 
"(But) the WTO meeting has agreed to eliminate them ... and that's been a major objective of Australian trade policy since the 1970s."
 
However, the agriculture deal is only one part of the bigger Doha trade reform agenda.
 
And there remains no realistic prospect of concluding the remaining issues, Mr Robb admitted.
 
"There is (therefore) merit in exploring new approaches to global trade liberalisation and reform," he said in a statement.
 
Other WTO members said the Nairobi deal had drawn a line under years of stalemate over the direction of global trade negotiations.
 
"Our work in Nairobi marks a turning point for the World Trade Organization," US Trade Representative Michael Froman said in a statement.
 
The negotiations "started a new phase in the WTO's evolution" and showed "what is possible when the multilateral trading system comes together to solve a problem".
 
The Geneva-based WTO, which has invited Liberia and Afghanistan to become its 163rd and 164th members, has been trying and largely failing to agree on a worldwide package of trade reforms since a meeting in Doha in 2001 hatched an ambitious plan for knocking down trade barriers.
 
The four-day Nairobi conference was extended by a final non-stop 24-hour negotiation between the major trading powers, who agreed on a package that included phasing out agricultural export subsidies and restricting agricultural export credits.
 
But they agreed to disagree about the potential for success in the Doha round of talks.
 
Both India, which had insisted on completing the existing Doha talks before any further negotiation, and the United States, which wanted to move on from Doha, had had to give ground, an EU official said.
 
The compromise means that more issues can be loaded onto the negotiating agenda, the EU official said.
 
© Reuters 2015
 
India rues WTO outcome skirting Doha
 
The Hindu
December 19, 2015 22:53 IST | Updated: December 19, 2015 22:53 IST  NEW DELHI,  December 19, 2015  
 
India on Saturday opposed the WTO’s Nairobi Ministerial Declaration not entirely reaffirming the development mandate of the ongoing Doha Round negotiations aimed at opening up global trade. The Tenth Ministerial Conference of the WTO was held at Nairobi from December 15-19.
 
The Indian delegation was led by Commerce Minister, Nirmala Sitharaman.
 
The Ministerial Declaration circulated on Saturday reflects the division amongst the WTO membership on the issue of the reaffirmation of the Doha mandate, according to an official statement.
 
India, along with other developing countries, especially most members of the G-33, LDCs, the Africa Group and the ACP, wanted a reaffirmation of the mandate of the Doha Round, it said.
 
While the majority were in favour of such reaffirmation, a few members opposed the reaffirmation of the Doha mandate, it added.
 
This marks a significant departure from the fundamental WTO principle of consensus-based decision making, the statement said.
 
Notwithstanding the difficulty in the negotiations, the draft Declaration reflects India’s demand for a reaffirmation from all members to work towards a permanent solution on public stockholding, it claimed.
 
Further, it also provides a Ministerial affirmation that till such time a permanent solution is found, the peace clause shall continue to be in place, the commerce ministry statement said.
 
The draft Declaration also reflects India’s demand for a Ministerial decision to develop a special safeguard mechanism for agricultural products that will be available for developing countries.
 
 
WTO talks conclude; India says ‘disappointed’ on Doha issues
 
Posted at: Dec 19 2015 9:59PM
PTI
 
Nairobi, December 19
 
 India today expressed its “thorough” disappointment over non-reaffirmation to conclude 14-year-old Doha Round pacts, even as the five-day WTO meeting here managed to win a commitment to allow developing nations to use special safeguards to protect farmers against import surges.
 
 After hectic negotiations for five consecutive days here -- exceeding the scheduled closing by almost 24 hours -- the WTO Trade Ministers concluded their talks this evening without any commitment on rich countries being asked to check their domestic subsidies.
 
 Besides, rich nations refused to budge on their long-standing position of putting the onus on developing countries with regard to duties.
 
 India's trade minister Nirmala Sitharaman said India put across its position very clearly on the table and strongly "protested" against the failure to reach unanimity on "reaffirmation" to conclude over 14-year-old Doha round to safeguard developing nations' interest.
 
 However, the members of the global trade body agreed on a commitment for giving the developing nations a right to take recourse to Special Safeguard Mechanism to protect their farmers -- a long-standing demand of India.
 
  Lobbying by India and other developing countries also led to reaffirmation to decisions taken earlier at WTO (World Trade Organisation) on the issue of public stockholding.
 
 "We ensured that the Bali and the General Council's November 2014 decision on public stockholding which gives protection to my farmers have been reaffirmed in no uncertain terms.
 
 "The decisions taken here will form the part from where work will begin on it to give a permanent solution," Trade and Commerce Minister Nirmala Sitharaman told PTI.
 
 "We have done our best that we can in such a situation.
 
 Most of the commitments given by the WTO to us are carried forward with complete assurance and we have not lost any ground," she added.
 
 Sitharaman, however, said, "India is disappointed that notwithstanding a large group -- India, China, G33, African Union -- all of us insisting that Doha has to be reaffirmed, the reaffirmation has been divided. We are thoroughly disappointed on this core".
 
 "It was a fight to safeguard India's interest on all these three scores which we have gained according to me," Sitharaman said.
 
 She said the Ministerial Declaration, circulated tonight after completion of the talks, "reflects the division amongst the WTO Membership on the issue of the reaffirmation of the Doha mandate".
 
 "India, along with other developing countries, especially most members of the G-33, LDCs, the Africa Group and the ACP, wanted a reaffirmation of the mandate of the Doha Round.
 
 "While the majority were in favour of such reaffirmation, a few Members opposed the reaffirmation of the Doha mandate.
 
 This marks a significant departure from the fundamental WTO principle of consensus-based decision making." 
 
 "Notwithstanding the difficulty in the negotiations, the draft Declaration reflects India's demand for a reaffirmation from all Members to work towards a permanent solution on public stockholding.
 
 Further, it also provides a Ministerial affirmation that till such time a permanent solution is found, the peace clause shall continue to be in place. The draft Declaration also reflects India's demand for a Ministerial Decision to develop a special safeguard mechanism for agricultural products that will be available for developing countries.
 
 The five-page declaration at the Nairobi meeting, which also marked the 20th anniversary since the establishment of the WTO, underlined the crucial importance of the multilateral rules-based trading system and reaffirmed the principles and objectives set out in the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the WTO.
 
 The Ministers also reaffirmed "the pre-eminence of the WTO as the global forum for trade rules setting and governance".
 
 "We note with concern the slow and uneven recovery from the severe economic and financial crisis of 2008, resulting in lower global economic growth, depressed agricultural and other commodity prices, raising inequalities, unemployment and significantly slower expansion of international trade in recent years.
 
 "We acknowledge that international trade can play a role towards achieving sustainable, robust and balanced growth for all. We pledge to strengthen the multilateral trading system so that it provides a strong impetus to inclusive prosperity and welfare for all Members and responds to the specific development needs of developing country Members, in particular the least-developed country Members."
 
 Acknowledging that the majority of WTO Members are developing countries, the declaration said, "We seek to place their needs and interests at the centre of the work in the WTO."
 
 It also reiterated that the WTO will remain the main forum to negotiate multilateral trade rules. 
 WTO also said the Dispute Settlement Understanding (DSU) continues to offer a means for the settlement of disputes among Members that is unique in international agreements.
 
 The decisions adopted at the Session included Work Programme on Small Economies (Draft Ministerial Decision), TRIPS Non-violation and Situation Complaints (Draft Ministerial Decision), and Work Programme on Electronic Commerce (Draft Ministerial Decision).
 
 On Doha Development Agenda, the declaration said it welcomes "the progress in the DDA" and listed out decisions on Special Safeguard Mechanism for Developing Country Members, Public Stockholding for Food Security Purposes, Export Competition and on Cotton.
 
 It also listed decisions on Preferential Rules of Origin for Least-Developed Countries and Implementation of Preferential Treatment in Favour of Services and Service Suppliers of Least Developed Countries and Increasing LDC Participation in Services Trade.
 
 "We strongly commit to addressing the marginalisation of LDCs in international trade and to improving their effective participation in the multilateral trading system," it added.
 
 It also talked about the need to ensure that Regional Trade Agreements (RTAs) remain complementary to, not a substitute for, the multilateral trading system.
 
 "We recognise that many Members reaffirm the Doha Development Agenda, and the Declarations and Decisions adopted at Doha and at the Ministerial Conferences held since then, and reaffirm their full commitment to conclude the DDA on that basis.
 
 "Other Members do not reaffirm the Doha mandates, as they believe new approaches are necessary to achieve meaningful outcomes in multilateral negotiations. Members have different views on how to address the negotiations. We acknowledge the strong legal structure of this Organization," the draft declaration said.
 
 "Nevertheless, there remains a strong commitment of all Members to advance negotiations on the remaining Doha issues.
 
 This includes advancing work in all three pillars of agriculture, namely domestic support, market access and export competition, as well as non-agriculture market access, services, development, TRIPS and rules.
 
 "Work on all the Ministerial Decisions adopted in this Declaration will remain an important element of our future agenda," it added. — PTI
 
WTO Ministerial Conference Declaration Adopted in Nairobi 'Balanced Deal'
 
MOSCOW (Sputnik) — A World Trade Organization (WTO) declaration, which was approved at the ministerial conference in Kenya's Nairobi on Saturday, appears to be a balanced and realistic agreement, conference chairwoman Amina Mohamed said.
 
"I think it's a very balanced deal, a very realistic deal," Mohamed said at a press conference.
 
Kenya's President, Uhuru Kenyatta addresses delegates on December 15, 2015 at the official opening of the Tenth World Trade Organisation (WTO) ministerial conference in the Kenyan capital, Nairobi
 
The declaration is due to eliminate developed countries' agriculture export subsidies. The agreement also recognizes developing countries' right to special safeguard mechanism aimed at protecting their farmers.
 
The declaration also enshrines different approaches to the Doha Development Agenda aimed at addressing the needs of less developed countries in their economic development. The agenda has long been debated between developed and developing nations over such issues as agriculture, services and tariffs
 
Pakistan rejects amendments in WTO agreement
 
By Mehtab Haider, The News
December 19, 2015
 
Print : Top Story
 
ISLAMABAD: Pakistan has nullified efforts to make amendments in the Agreement of Agriculture at World Trade Organisation (WTO) that could benefit a few countries at the cost of others.
 
The Ministry of Commerce made public announcement here on Friday that Islamabad has successfully nullified efforts to make amendments in the Agreement on Agriculture, which would benefit a few on the cost of the others.
 
The permission for public stock holding of agriculture commodities for exporting purposes was allowed in the Bali ministerial meeting of WTO in 2013 under certain monitoring and evaluation to support the resource poor farmers of the developing countries and ensuring their food security.
 
Some countries misused the facility by exporting the commodities kept in public stock in massive amounts which has a negative effect on international trade. Pakistan sought the support of Cairns Group of the WTO to further its case in this matter.
 
Pakistani side maintained that the Public Stockholding proposal in its current form has already had serious and adverse unintended consequences for its economy. Future negotiations on the subject must be grounded in verifiable data and evidence, and ensure that public stockholding does not transgress into trade-distorting export subsidies that hurt farmers in other countries.
 
Pakistan will support a robust post-Nairobi working programme keeping in view all perspectives of food security on the table. Pakistan has demanded elimination of production and export subsidies on all agricultural products particularly cotton, wheat and sugar by developed and large developing countries.
 
Cotton is the life line of Pakistan’s economy, and once subsidies are removed, the entire increase in value of cotton would be reflected in both textile and clothing sector.
 
Further, Pakistan has also offered to provide capacity building and training to the African Cotton growing countries as a gesture of goodwill, the Minister for Commerce said while addressing the Plenary Session of the 10th WTO Ministerial Conference in Nairobi, Kenya.
 
The Minister welcomed Afghanistan’s joining of World Trade Organisation with a hope that it would further cement relations between the two countries. Growth in Afghanistan’s economy is likely to benefit Pakistan’s exports since Afghanistan is amongst the largest export destinations of Pakistani products.
 
He emphasised that Pakistan is poised to be the economic and trade hub of Central Asia and South Asia, and will open new doors to the rest of the world. .
 
L'OMC maintiendrait les aménagements de la Suisse
 
La Suisse disposerait de cinq ans pour démanteler ses subventions à l'exportation. Elle pourrait aussi abandonner en une seule fois sa «loi chocolatière».
 
Un accord a été trouvé samedi à Nairobi à la 10e Conférence ministérielle de l'OMC, selon de nombreuses sources convergentes, au terme d'une réunion des chefs des délégations. Les détails n'étaient pas connus dans l'immédiat, mais un volet porte sur l'agriculture.
 
Des contre-propositions américaines sur les subventions à l'exportation ne mettraient pas en cause le délai de 2020, évoqué jeudi, pour la fin de «loi chocolatière» suisse.
 
Etats-Unis, Chine, Inde, UE et Brésil se sont rassemblés dans la nuit, après quatre jours d'intenses consultations entre Etats membres à la 10e Conférence ministérielle de l'Organisation mondiale du commerce (OMC).
 
Selon des sources concordantes, la note défendue par la Suisse et qui figurait dans le projet de texte sur l'agriculture présenté jeudi par le facilitateur du Lesotho ne serait pas attaquée par les Etats-Unis. La Suisse, mais aussi le Canada et la Norvège, disposeraient de cinq ans pour démanteler leurs subventions à l'exportation.
 
Des subventions qui viennent d'être votées
 
Et Berne pourrait aussi abandonner en une seule fois cette «loi chocolatière», comme elle le souhaitait. Certes, elle n'obtiendrait pas les sept ans qu'elle demandait pour une mise en oeuvre. Mais le compromis proposé serait considéré comme «acceptable» pour la délégation dirigée par la secrétaire d'Etat à l'économie Marie-Gabrielle Ineichen-Fleisch.
 
La Suisse subventionne les exportations de produits agricoles transformés à base de lait et de céréales. Le Parlement fédéral vient de voter un montant de près de 95 millions de francs.
 
En revanche, les Etats-Unis se sont attaqués aux subventions à l'exportation indiennes. Le délai pour l'Inde serait ramené à 2023, au lieu de 2028, comme pour les autres pays en développement.
