HEADLINES:
 
·         Solar panel row on Modi US menu 
·         Flawed TPP in danger of being floored by compromises: critics 
·         All certified GM foods on market 'are safe' 
·         China freezes outbound investment quotas as outflows hurt yuan
·         Bangladesh firms eye global fish fillet market 
·         UAE- Oil ministries undersecretaries to mull unifying oil prices in GCC countries 
·         UK manufacturing hit by turmoil in China  
·         Taiwan can benefit from Agreement on Trade Facilitation: ministry
·         China could walk away from FTA if deal blocked 
 
Solar panel row on Modi US menu 
The Telegraph, 7 September 2015 -  The issue of level-playing field for US solar equipment manufacturers following the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization's (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) ruling against India will be taken up during Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Narendra Modi's visit to the US later this month. A HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO panel has ruled in favour of US on a complaint filed by it against New Delhi's solar power programme that limits the use of imported equipment.
Commerce ministry officials said India was likely to appeal against the dispute settlement panel's ruling, which could offer a two-year breather to India. There can also be a bilateral arrangement with the US because it is an important trading partner. Modi will be in the US from September 24-30. The government's imposition of domestic content requirements for solar cells and modules had angered the US, which had taken New Delhi to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization in February last year. The government has offered financial support of up to Rs 1 crore per megawatt (MW) to the implementing agency placing orders with domestic manufacturers.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members are not supposed to insist on national content requirements that discriminate against foreign products. The governments are also required to provide "national" treatment, under which imports must be treated on a par with locally manufactured products. Officials maintained that the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO ruling would not have an impact on the ambitious target to raise solar power generation capacity by five times to 1,00,000MW by 2022 at an investment of around Rs 6 lakh crore. After reaching the target, India will become one of the largest green energy producers, surpassing several developed countries. The US is keen on grabbing a slice of this market.
"Of the total 100,000MW planned, 40,000MW is rooftop projects with the balance being land-based projects. Domestic content requirement is only for those projects wherein the government provides a subsidy. This is 5,000MW each for rooftop and land-based projects," they said. Analysts said, "The government could remove the restriction on capacity to be auctioned by the Centre. However, auction by the government-owned entities such as NTPC and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Indian Railways could have clauses of domestic content, which is allowed under HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO regulations." The current installed capacity of domestic solar cell manufacturing is around 1,386MW, of which less than 30 per cent are operational. The annual demand for solar cells is around 4,000MW, but the operational capacity is just 200MW. Domestic manufacturers are nowhere close to meeting this demand with the government scaling up targets.
India Ratings said it expected a strong growth in solar power installations over the next 4-5 years, driven both by the government impetus of 100GW of solar power by 2021-22 (60GW through grid connected solar projects) and a decline in generation costs.
 
Flawed TPP in danger of being floored by compromises: critics 
Anthony Rowley, Business Times Singapore, 7 September 2015, Tokyo - Any deal that emerges from long-delayed negotiations could be be very different from that originally envisaged. SUPPORT is growing for a ministerial meeting on the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), according to Japan's minister of economy, trade and industry Akira Amari. But any agreement that emerges from the long-delayed negotiations could be be very different from that originally envisaged. The original aim of the TPP was "to eliminate tariffs" but since Japan joined the negotiations in July 2013 that vision has "deteriorated", according to Kazuhito Yamashita, research director of the Canon Institute for Global Studies in Tokyo and an expert in agricultural policy. Japan's push for exempting "sensitive" agricultural products including rice, wheat, beef and pork, dairy products and sugar from tariff elimination has compromised a fundamental principle of the TPP and that could reverberate into other areas of the agreement, says Mr Yamashita. In a briefing last week, the former director of the GATT Division and deputy director-general of the Rural Development Bureau at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Japan's Ministry of Agriculture claimed that Japanese politicians are not presenting a true picture of what the TPP means for Japan. By insisting on continuing tariff protection for agriculture they are not, as they claim, protecting the future security of food supply in a rapidly ageing nation like Japan but instead are putting that supply at risk, he suggests. Everything hinges on the method of supporting farmers. Currently, for example, rice farmers - including many thousands of small and relatively inefficient (but politically powerful) ones among their vast numbers - can make a living by virtue of the fact that imports are restricted and domestic rice prices consequently high. Were the Japanese government to liberalise imports of rice, the price would fall but farmers could be compensated with direct support payments of the kind practised in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union and to some extent in the United States, says Mr Yamashita. There would be a "fiscal burden" on taxpayers as a result but they already bear one in the form of high rice prices, and this hits the poor harder than it does the wealthier in proportion to income. If Japan switched to fiscal supports, reform of its agricultural system would become easier. Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Shinzo Abe is attempting reform through an attack on the powerful JA Zenchu agricultural cooperatives movement which champions the current system. JA, as it is known, handles the earnings of myriad small farmers and has become Japan's second-largest megabank as a result. Even so, Japanese negotiators acting on instruction from Japanese politicians (whose power in rural areas depends upon smaller farmers) appear to be fighting hard against agricultural tariff liberalisation, as far as can be discerned from the highly opaque TPP negotiations. And the fact that Japan is reportedly considering exempting certain food items from the highly unpopular national sales tax suggests not only that Mr Abe is unhappy about his sagging voter ratings but also that he is not planning to liberalise tariffs and allow food prices to fall, some say. New Zealand is not alone among the 12 countries negotiating entry to the TPP to be deeply unhappy about compromising the principle of tariff elimination within the Asia-Pacific trade pact, according to Mr Yamashita. If "flexibility" is applied in one area it could be demanded in others. For example, the US - according at least to Mr Yamashita's interpretation - plans to define the TPP's treatment of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) with reference to those in "Vietnam, Malaysia and Singapore" in readiness for the day when China's giant economy will join. China, he says, is the "shadow player" in TPP negotiations even though it is not a direct player, because many of the trade and other disciplines being readied for the agreement are seen as needed for the time when the Asian whale joins smaller Asian nations as a TPP member. But if compromises are made on agricultural tariffs, how could negotiators refuse to soften US demands that SOEs be stripped of subsidy protection in order to ensure a "level playing field". These SOEs are also "sensitive" in terms of employment in some countries. This, allied with the necessity of securing agreement on the TPP before US President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Barack Obama's "fast-track" negotiating authority from Congress expires, or before the Canadian general election in October, suggests that compromises will have to be made all round. No one is predicting (openly at least) that the TPP could go the same way as the ill-fated Doha Round of global trade negotiations under the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation and bog down to the point where it becomes irrelevant. But no one is betting on TPP success either, analysts add. Japanese negotiators acting on instruction from Japanese politicians appear to be fighting hard against agricultural tariff liberalisation. 
 
All certified GM foods on market 'are safe' 
By Wang Xiaodong, China Daily-US Edition, 7 September 2015 - All certified genetically modified foods that are sold on the Chinese market are safe, according to the Ministry of Agriculture. China has established a safety supervision system that covers the complete chain of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" GM products, including research, production and trading, the ministry said. The ministry will cooperate with other departments to improve legislation concerning HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" GM products and their testing technologies to ensure the safety of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" GM products, the ministry said in a reply to a March proposal by 10 members of China's top political advisory body on improved safety management of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" GM foods. The reply, posted on the ministry's website, said that China and other countries have done much research on the safety of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" GM foods that proved certified HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" GM foods are as safe as traditional foods. "Internationally, there is a conclusion on the safety of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" GM foods, that is, that all HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" GM foods that have passed safety evaluation and been certified are safe," the ministry said. "The conclusion by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Health Organization is that no health damage has been seen in any people worldwide who have consumed HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" GM foods that have been approved by authorities," it said. A major research program organized by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union, in which more than 500 independent bodies participated over 25 years, concluded that HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" GM technology is no more dangerous than traditional seed nurturing technologies, the ministry said.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" GM food has occasionally been involved in controversy in China in recent years, and most of the dispute was centered on its safety. In 2013, a soybean association in Heilongjiang province said that those who consume oil made of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" GM soybeans are more likely to get diseases such as cancer or infertility - a claim that triggered heated public debate. Chen Junshi of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Chinese Academy of Engineering said at a news conference following the incident that there was no scientific evidence to prove that HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" GM foods harm consumers. "The mainstream opinion among scientists in the world is that HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" GM food is safe," said Huang Dafang, a researcher in biological technology at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences. "I think it is natural that some people oppose new technologies, such as HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" GM food, since they have little knowledge of these technologies," he said. "But they should value the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" GM specialists' opinion, because they are most familiar with the subject." Producers for the Chinese market are obliged to label any product that contains elements of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" GM soybeans, rapeseed, corn, cotton or tomato - five major types of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" GM products in China, according to a regulation issued by the Ministry of Agriculture in 2002. Some other countries ask for labeling of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" GM foods on a voluntary basis. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" United States Food and Drug Administration, for example, doesn't require labeling of genetically modified foods, saying that those on the market are safe. "The Chinese food and drug authorities will improve supervision of labeling of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" GM foods, and those HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" GM food producers who fail to label their products will be punished," the ministry said. Zhu Beibei, who works for a biotechnology company in Beijing, said she believes that HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" GM foods are safe because they already have been consumed by people for years in many countries. "Still, I prefer naturally grown food," she said. "I think all products that contain HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" GM foods should be labeled so people can choose." 
 
China freezes outbound investment quotas as outflows hurt yuan
Business Times Singapore, 07 September 2015 - China refrained from granting new quotas for residents to invest in overseas markets for a fifth month in August, the longest halt in six years, as authorities seek to stem weakness in the yuan.  Business Times Singapore, Sep 7, 2015 - [SHANGHAI] China refrained from granting new quotas for residents to invest in overseas markets for a fifth month in August, the longest halt in six years, as authorities seek to stem weakness in the yuan. The State Administration of Foreign Exchange, which has approved 132 local institutions to put as much as US$89.99 billion in offshore assets via its Qualified Domestic Institutional Investor program, hasn't granted new allocations since March. Quotas for overseas investors to access domestic capital markets rose US$16.4 billion to US$140.3 billion in the period, data from the regulator show. The yuan traded 1.4 per cent weaker outside of China than inside the country on Monday, indicating depreciation pressure.
China is trying to open its capital account enough for the yuan to win reserve status from the International Monetary Fund, while trying to curb an exodus of funds from an economy expanding at the slowest pace since 1990. Chinese investors are seeking to diversify in overseas assets after the Shanghai Composite Index of shares tumbled 39 per cent from this year's peak on June 12. The yuan slumped 3.6 per cent in Shanghai and 4.9 per cent in Hong Kong in the past 12 months. "Interest is there but whether the money can leave in the short term is the problem," said Thomas Kwan, Hong Kong-based chief investment officer at Harvest Global Investments, whose Chinese unit offers QDII funds. "To avoid triggering excessive yuan outflows, I don't think regulators would grant additional QDII quotas in the short term." The State Administration of Foreign Exchange didn't reply to a faxed request for comment. China's QDII quota increased 8 per cent in the first quarter of this year, after falling 1 percent in 2014 as the regulator withdrew some unused ones. That for Qualified Foreign Institutional Investors, allowing overseas companies to buy domestic securities with foreign currency, has expanded 15 per cent this year. 
"Policy makers are not enthusiastic about granting more QDII quotas right now," said Chen Xingdong, chief China economist at BNP Paribas SA in Beijing. "The depreciation pressure has intensified. They don't want to do anything now that could strengthen capital outflows." China's foreign-exchange reserves fell US$315 billion in the year through July to US$3.65 trillion. The stockpile may have dropped by as much as US$200 billion in the last few weeks of August on People's Bank of China moves to support the yuan, Michael Every, head of financial markets research at Rabobank Group in Hong Kong, wrote in a Sept 1 research note. The August data may be released as early as Monday. Expectations that the US will raise rates for the first time since 2006 this year are also luring funds from China, which has been loosening monetary policy since November. The one-year Chinese government bond yield is 1.91 percentage points higher than that of US Treasuries, down from 3.74 a year ago.
"Interest to have US dollar exposure is much higher now because of worries on yuan depreciation," said Harvest's Kwan. Diversification is now a consideration as well as returns, he said, so clients are becoming interested in developed-market equities in addition to Hong Kong dollar-denominated Chinese shares and US currency bonds of Chinese companies.
By keeping borrowing costs low to counter the slowdown, seeking to prevent further currency depreciation with intervention and opening up the capital account, policy makers are challenging Nobel-winning economist Robert Mundell's "impossible trinity" principle. That theory stipulates a country can't maintain independent monetary policy, a fixed exchange rate and free capital borders all at the same time.
Capital Account China's capital and financial account deficit was a record US$78.9 billion in the first quarter of this year. Vice Public Security Minister Meng Qingfeng said regulators will start a campaign to crack down on underground banks and illegal cross- border money transfers, according to an Aug. 24 statement on the ministry's website.
On the home front, China is pressing ahead with easing capital controls. On July 15, it issued new rules requiring only registration instead of pre-approval for foreign central banks, sovereign wealth funds and global financial organizations to trade Chinese bonds. In the other direction, progress has stalled with no details on extending a stock exchange link between Shanghai and Hong Kong to include Shenzhen. It's reasonable to expect the QDII2 scheme, allowing domestic investors to buy overseas property or securities directly, to be delayed, Huang Li, a Shanghai-based analyst at Fitch Ratings, said last month. Outbound investment flows via QDII rose about 30 per cent following the stocks rout, she said, based on third-party data. "By liberalising offshore investment for mainlanders, there's a potential that if people onshore are genuinely lacking in confidence in local markets, then there's really no other place for you to park your money," said Aidan Yao, a Hong Kong- based senior economist at AXA Investment Managers, which oversaw the equivalent of US$773 billion at the end of June. "The issue is with investors looking offshore for investment opportunities at a time when confidence is not restored. You could risk larger outflows than otherwise."
BLOOMBERG
 
Bangladesh firms eye global fish fillet market 
ANN Asia News Network, By Sohel Parvez in Dhaka/The Daily Star/07 September 2015 - Local firms are pouring in millions of dollars to tap the huge global market for fish fillets, a move that will diversify the country's fish export basket now largely dominated by shrimps.
Bangladesh firms are pouring in millions of dollars to tap the huge global market for fish fillets, a move that will diversify the country's fish export basket now largely dominated by shrimps. It is a highly promising sector, said Mahbubul Mosaddek Chowdhury, managing director of Earth Agro Farms that has taken up a 1.4-billion-taka-scheme (US$17.61 million) to construct a factory in Gazipur district near Bangladesh capital, Dhaka, to make fillets from pangasius and sea fish.
¿The world market for fillets is quite big and we have the advantage of producing fish in high quantities."
Chowdhury's factory will have the capacity to process 60 tons of pangasius a day and the by-products will be used to make fishmeal and fish oil. Chowdhury said 95 per cent of the construction of the factory has been done, meaning it is scheduled to go into production by January next year. Virgo Fish & Agro Process, S&K Associates and at least two other companies have also lined up to process pangasius and telapia, which account for more than 20 percent of Bangladesh's fish production.
Bangladesh produced 669,000 tons of the two fresh water fish varieties in fiscal 2013-14, up 29.9 per cent year-on-year, according to data from the Department of Fisheries (DoF). The massive expansion of aquaculture, particularly of pangasius and telapia, over the last three decades has helped the country ensure protein at low-cost for many people. It has also created thousands of jobs. Today, Bangladesh is the world's fifth largest producer of fish from inland aquaculture, according to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Food and Agriculture Organisation.
Despite increasing production and farming, neither telapia nor pangasius is processed to make fillets, for which there is high demand abroad. And in the absence of industrial processing, farmers do not get fair prices of their farmed fish during supply glut, said stakeholders. Fillet processing would increase demand and facilitate farmers to get fair prices, said the Earth Agro MD, adding that the company has started negotiating with fish farms to grow pangasius through contract farming.
The global market for fillets stands at around $200 billion a year and processors from Vietnam dominate the trade, he said. The market for pangasius and telapia is rising due to the declining supply of marine catches and various regulations on sea fishing imposed by the nations, said M Shamsul Kibria, managing director of S&K Associates that plans to invest 1.64 billion taka to build a factory.
The firm plans to start construction of the plant in October to process 60 tonnes of fish a day, said Kibria, former joint secretary of the fisheries ministry. The US and Europe are the main markets for fish fillets, with demand rising in the Middle East and other parts of the world as well, he added. The domestic market prospects are also looking good thanks to the rising number of restaurants and international chain hotels. A senior official of Virgo Fish said the firm is targeting both the domestic and export markets.
However, there are shortcomings. Currently, the pink-fleshed pangasius sutchi variety is widely cultured, the demand for which is low in the global market. As buyers prefer the white-fleshed ones, fries of the pangasius hypophthalmus variety are being imported for cultivation here, Chowdhury said. The pangasius hypophthalmus variety has white coloured flesh. Nittyaranjan Biswas, principal scientific officer of DoF, said fillet-making would open a new avenue for seafood business in Bangladesh. ¿Until now, we have remained shrimp-based. Fillets will diversify our fish export basket." But its entry into the world market will depend largely on quality control from farm to processing, he added. 
 
UAE- Oil ministries undersecretaries to mull unifying oil prices in GCC countries 
Middle East North Africa Financial Network (MENAFN), 7 September 2015,  (MENAFN - Emirates News Agency (WAM))
KUWAIT 6th Sept. 2015 -- The 15th preparatory meeting of GCC oil undersecretaries committee scheduled on next Wednesday in Doha is planned to discuss the possibility of unifying prices of oil products in the GCC countries Kuwait Oil ministry said Sunday.
In a statement to KUNA the ministry said the meeting would review a memo prepared by the GCC general secretariat on the meetings of the GCC energy team in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization and Free Trade Agreements. The meeting will also delve into a report by the president of the Working Group for GCC countries which is assigned to study and follow up developments on the meetings with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change the Kyoto Protocol and also review another report by the General Secretariat on meetings by mineral resources officials in GCC countries. The statement added that undersecretaries will also touch upon a memo by the Secretariat on meetings of joint Media Committee specialists with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OAPEC) including the final decision on proposed media Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) to the Petroleum Cooperation Committee in preparation for approval along with the Secretariat's memorandum on cooperation between GCC countries in the field of renewable and complementary energy and the report of the petroleum strategy committee. The Ministry's statement asserted on the importance of the Doha meeting due to rapid changes in global oil industry and the push for stability in this regard and the development of technical economic and media plans that would benefit development of GCC oil business. 
 
UK manufacturing hit by turmoil in China  
By Katie Allen, The Guardian, 7 September 2015 02:24 - Manufacturers’ organisation halves forecast for sector as economic slowdown in far east compounds export woes. The economic downturn in China has compounded pressures on UK manufacturers and hit their output and exports, a leading business group will warn on Monday as it slashes its outlook for the sector. Sales to the domestic consumer market and booming car production have not been enough to make up for a drop in overseas demand, says HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" the manufacturers’ organisation EEF. Those manufacturers making mechanical equipment have been particularly hard hit as waning orders from China coincide with flagging demand from the oil and gas sector, itself hit by a plunging oil price. The trade group is halving its growth forecast for manufacturing this year to 0.7% from 1.5%, citing a “rollercoaster of risks” that include renewed eurozone tensions and a slowdown in emerging markets, particularly China. EEF chief economist Lee Hopley said that while the overall UK economy looked set for “solid” growth this year, manufacturers were contending with a lower oil price, fragile eurozone growth, and now the blow to global investor confidence from turmoil in China. “While UK data has continued to point to solid growth, UK manufacturing is having to contend with a rollercoaster of risks from the rest of the world and the white-knuckle ride is starting to take its toll,” she said. “We’ve seen the future of the eurozone on the line once again, turbulence and uncertainty over China and Greece and, of course, oil and gas are still a concern. Against this backdrop, it’s no surprise that confidence is faltering and UK manufacturers are feeling less optimistic about their growth prospects for next year.” The gloomier outlook for manufacturing this year reflects signs of falling production and orders in EEF’s latest survey of businesses, as well as a string of other HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" weak indicators in the sector, including HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" official figures showing it contracted in the second quarter. For the first time in more than two years, there were more companies reporting a drop in output than a rise, according to the EEF survey, published with law firm HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" DLA Piper. Output falling The poll of 442 manufacturers showed that export orders fell to a six-year low in the past three months. Domestic orders were also down, hurt largely by weakness at those manufacturers reliant on the oil and gas sector. Looking ahead, more than a third of companies reported signs of improving demand in Europe – the UK’s biggest export market – but the proportion of companies eyeing growth opportunities in Asia had fallen. Orders down The survey suggested there were still more companies planning to raise investment and employment rather than cut them, but only by a slim margin. Hopley said the extent of any further fallout from China’s slowdown would be key for both employment and investment in the months ahead. “If there isn’t something more persistent happening in China at the moment, companies feel they will wash through it. But clearly we are on amber alert for these [employment and investment] balances in the next quarter,” she said. Economists point out China’s slowdown has HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" mixed effects on the UK. The downward pressure on oil prices is keeping inflation low and should boost household budgets. Meanwhile, the market turmoil could prompt the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Bank of England to keep interest rates at their record low for longer. But for exporters, waning demand is another blow, on top of a stronger pound, that makes UK goods more expensive to overseas buyers. Manufacturers say that while direct UK exports to China are relatively small, it has been a growing market in recent years. China is the largest foreign market for British cars. China shock The EEF has analysed what would happen to the UK economy if there was a 12% drop in China’s imports, which is equivalent to the decline during the Asian financial crisis in the late 1990s. Such a fall would weigh on UK GDP, manufacturing output and, most notably, on manufactured exports, the group found, using its economic model. A separate report on the outlook for small businesses also flags deteriorating confidence, but points to domestic pressures. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Federation of Small Businesses says its members are more cautious after HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" George Osborne’s summer budget announced changes including taxes on dividends and a “national living wage”. “The reaction to these changes is reflected in the evidence we present today, which shows confidence levels amongst members cooling markedly,” said FSB national chairman John Allan. The group’s survey of 1,580 small businesses showed they continued to hire new workers over the last three months, but at a slower rate than the previous quarter. Nearly six-in-10 small businesses, or 58.7%, plan to grow in the next 12 months, down from 65.3% in a poll three months ago. The poll also pointed to improving access to finance, a pickup in productivity and modest growth in exports. 
 
Taiwan can benefit from Agreement on Trade Facilitation: ministry
Want China Times, CAN, 2015-09-06  - Taiwan is looking forward to the implementation of the Agreement on Trade Facilitation (TFA), which can help boost its GDP, industrial productivity and foreign trade, by increasing the efficiency of customs procedures, an economics official said Friday. The official from the Ministry of Economic Affairs stated that as of Thursday, 15 of the 160 members of the World Trade Organization have ratified the TFA. Among these countries and territories are the United States, Japan, Australia, Singapore, Hong Kong, South Korea, Malaysia and Taiwan. WTO members reached consensus on the TFA in December 2013 at the Bali ministerial conference. The agreement will enter into force once two-thirds of the WTO members have completed their domestic ratification process. According to the ministry's assessment, the implementation of the TFA could enable Taiwan's GDP to increase by US$3.9 billion, industrial production value to grow by US$5.6 billion, exports will rise to US$3.2 billion and imports to US$2.8 billion.
The TFA will be the first multilateral trade agreement of the WTO since its establishment in 1995. The agreement contains provisions for faster and more efficient customs procedures through effective cooperation between customs and other appropriate authorities on trade facilitation and customs compliance issues. Fast and efficient customs procedures will enable exporters to cut down on costs and improve their competitiveness in the international market, according to the official.
 
China could walk away from FTA if deal blocked 
PNA (Philippines News Agency), 7 September 2015, CANBERRA, Sept. 7 -- Australia's Treasurer Joe Hockey has warned colleagues that if the opposition blocks the China-Australia free trade agreement, China could walk away from the landmark deal. Talking to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Australian Broadcasting Corporation on Monday, Hockey said he had discussed the terms of the free trade agreement with Chinese Finance Minister Lou Jiwei at G20 meeting between the world's finance ministers in Turkey over the weekend. Hockey said it could be up to a decade before China would renegotiate the deal if it was blocked by Labor in Parliament. "It will be a very long time before the Chinese would ever approach Australia with a free trade agreement should the Labor Party undermine and ultimately destroyed the agreement we've negotiated," Hockey told the broadcaster. Labor has had reservations about the landmark free trade agreement, but Prime Minister Tony Abbott guaranteed Australian jobs would not be affected, and the Australian economy would benefit greatly from the deal. Last week, Abbott told opposition leader Bill Shorten to listen to "good Labor people" such as former Labor Prime Minister Bob Hawke and former party leader Simon Crean who both labeled the deal as mutually beneficial for both China and Australia. Crean -- who was on the negotiation team for the free trade agreement with China when Labor was in power -- said last week it was "an agreement that should be supported." At the time, Abbott said it was the "best deal that China has done with any developed economy" and one that was "absolutely vital" for Australia's future. It is reported a parliamentary inquiry into the finer details of the agreement is set to finish in the coming days, with the results expected to be delivered this week. (PNA/Xinhua)  Published by HT Syndication with permission from HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Philippines News Agency. 
 
END


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.