HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO Chief Says Trade Talks Are Stalled, Says It's Decision Time for Members
·         HYPERLINK \l "Azevedo: Doha rescue effort foundering
·         HYPERLINK \l "Canada requests sanctions against US over meat labelling spat
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S. Seeks Arbitration in COOL Dispute,  Objects to ‘Excessive’ Canadian Measures
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO failing to cope with trade disputes burden as staff exits mount
·         HYPERLINK \l "India raises duties on some steel products to counter Chinese imports
·         HYPERLINK \l "US mfg sector appeals for 'serious policy reforms' in India
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S. House moves to revive Obama's Pacific trade pact
·         HYPERLINK \l "FACTBOX-Deciphering alphabet soup in U.S.-Asia trade pact fight
·         HYPERLINK \l "OECD urges global finance reforms to fight inequality
 
WTO Chief Says Trade Talks Are Stalled, Says It's Decision Time for Members
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, June 18, 2015
 
June 17 – This year's Doha round trade negotiations are firmly stuck, as members have failed to reach convergence on any issues of substance, World Trade Organization Director-General Roberto Azevedo said.
 
“As things stand I see very little prospect of delivering the substantive, meaningful work program which we have been aiming towards,” Azevedo said during a June 17 meeting in Geneva. “That is the reality today. The question is whether we can change this situation by the end of July.”
 
Members previously agreed to deliver by July 31 a detailed work program that would provide a path for concluding the 2001 Doha round of negotiations to liberalize trade in the areas of agriculture, industrial goods and services.
 
While the work program deadline is not binding, its lapse would signal that calls to end the Doha round for good may not be answered. Delegates from key WTO member countries—such the U.S., the European Union and Japan—said earlier that they may end their participation in the Doha round discussions if there is no progress by the Dec. 15–18 ministerial conference in Nairobi, Kenya (108 WTO, 6/5/15).
 
‘Decision Time.’
 
Azevedo spent an hour outlining the major challenges of the current WTO negotiations and urged members to contact their capitals to forge a path forward.
 
“Now it is time for the political calls to be made,” Azevedo said. “This is the priority over the coming weeks. It's decision time.”
 
WTO members for six months have held intensive consultations in Geneva and high-level discussions with political leaders at the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development meeting in Paris and at the G-7 summit in Germany, yet they have failed to agree on even the broadest conceptual terms of the Doha Development Agenda.
 
Some in Geneva see the impasse as a warning sign that the 14 years of Doha negotiations may meet an inglorious end before the new year.
 
Agricultural Challenges
 
Members' sharp divisions over the best way to reduce farm subsidies and agricultural tariffs have proven to be the most challenging aspect of the Doha discussions.
 
Punctuated by the recent discord in Washington over trade promotion authority, the U.S. lacks political backing to modify the terms of the 2014 farm law without major concessions from large emerging economies like China and India. Meanwhile, China and India repeatedly have refused U.S. overtures to reduce their domestic farm subsidies, which have skyrocketed since the 2001 Doha round began.
 
WTO members' failure to agree to reduce domestic subsidies tracks their reluctance to reduce tariffs in line with the goals of the Doha Development Agenda. As a result, members acknowledge, they will have to lower their ambitions for the market access pillar.
 
China and India are seeking the inclusion of a special safeguard mechanism to sanction temporary tariffs on farm imports in the face of disruptive trade surges, and a special products provision to provide developing countries extra flexibility in market access for food, livelihood security and rural development.
 
Many members, led by the U.S., oppose the inclusion of such terms without an agreement on ambitious market access terms because they say such terms could sanction protectionist trade measures (103 WTO, 5/29/15).
 
NAMA, Services, Export Competition
 
The disagreements in the agricultural negotiations have atrophied the concurrent discussions to liberalize market access terms for industrial goods and services.
 
Even the “intensified” effort to seek horizontal negotiations among the three pillars has failed to achieve actionable outcomes for non-agricultural market access (NAMA) and services.
 
Members could agree to eliminate export subsidies, Geneva trade officials said, although that would depend on the U.S.’s ability to accept export credit terms from 2008.
 
Not Off Track Yet
 
Azevedo's analysis did not shock any of the delegates in attendance, and some held out hope for an agreement before July 31.
 
Things aren't quite off the rails yet, said one member of the Group of 33 (G-33) developing nations. “I am rather cautiously hopeful that we could come up with something, although I do not know yet what it is.”
 
“I have been recommending since January that due to the wide gaps we have in many areas, we should start by establishing the skeleton based on what can be considered as stable parts of work in the past,” the ambassador told Bloomberg BNA. “But this idea didn't fly and discussions have been geared toward simplified approaches and re-calibration which—to me—leads to more questions than answers.”
 
Others were less optimistic and acknowledged that if members can't find a way to move forward by the ministerial in Nairobi, they will be discussing an uncertain future for the WTO in 2016.
 
 
Azevedo: Doha rescue effort foundering
POLITICO
6/17/15 2:28 PM EDT
 
World trade talks are in trouble again, requiring global leaders to make “tough political calls” to salvage any chance of a deal, World Trade Organization Director General Roberto Azevedo said today.
 
“It is hard to see a way forward,” Azevedo told a gathering of all WTO members in Geneva. “I don’t want to prejudge the outcome, but I think I have the responsibility to be honest and realistic. As things stand, I see very little prospect of delivering the substantive, meaningful work program which we have been aiming towards.”
 
WTO members agreed at their Bali ministers meeting in December 2013 to come up with a work program for finishing the long-running Doha round of world trade talks, which were launched in late 2001. The current deadline for finishing that work is the end of July to set the stage for a successful ministerial meeting in December in Nairobi, Kenya.
 
Even if a deal is reached, it’s expected to be a shadow of the ambitious agreement to reduce trade-distorting farm subsidies and open agricultural, manufacturing and services markets to more foreign trade that many envisioned when the talks launched nearly 14 years ago.
 
“Now it is time for the political calls to be made,” Azevedo said. “Let me be clear, our problem is not about the time available. We have a sense of what we can achieve. So now it’s about making those tough political calls,  just like we did in Bali. So this is the priority over the coming weeks. It’s decision time.”
— Doug Palmer
 
 
Canada requests sanctions against US over meat labelling spat 
17 June 2015
Agence France Presse
 
Canada on Wednesday submitted a request at the World Trade Organization for retaliatory trade measures against the United States for non-compliance after winning a meat labelling dispute.

At a special WTO meeting held to iron out trade disputes, Canada evaluated the suspension of its tariffs and related obligations on US goods at three billion Canadian dollars ($2.5 billion) annually.

This was "in response to the US's continued non-compliance with its WTO obligations" in the COOL (Country of origin labelling requirement) dispute," a source close to the dispute said.

"At the meeting today, Canada said it was deeply disappointed that the US continues to maintain a measure that is inconsistent with its WTO obligations," the source said.

The WTO had upheld a complaint by Canada and Mexico that US laws in place since 2009 requiring retailers to label meat with the country where the animal was born, raised and slaughtered discriminated against imported livestock.

Canada, which said that the measure adversely affects its pig and cattle breeders, successfully challenged the regulation before the WTO.

America's largest trade partner had previously fought the so-called COOL rule at the WTO saying it discriminated against Canadian products, and won.

But Washington tweaked the regulation to circumvent the ruling. However both Canada and Mexico won on appeal.

The United States objected to the amount proposed by Canada, and the matter has been referred to arbitration.

The United States, Canada and Mexico agreed a year ago to enable the arbitrator to circulate its decision within 60 days.

Canada said that the amount of sanctions requested was "the equivalent of the level of nullification and impairment of benefits suffered by Canada, on an annual basis."

It also said that it would provide in due course a list of the US goods that will be affected by its suspension of concessions and the level of tariffs to be applied to them.

The United States said it strongly disagreed with Canada's specific proposal for the suspension of concessions.

"Although these matters will be considered in detail during the arbitration, the US would emphasize that the level of Canada's request is quite excessive," a US delegate said.
 
 
U.S. Seeks Arbitration in COOL Dispute,  Objects to ‘Excessive’ Canadian Measures
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, June 18, 2015
 
June 17 – The U.S. objected to what it called Canada's “excessive” request for nearly $2.5 billion in retaliatory tariffs stemming from the recent World Trade Organization ruling on U.S. country of origin labeling (COOL) for meat.
 
During a June 17 meeting of the WTO Dispute Settlement Body (DSB), the U.S. referred the issue to arbitration , which delays —by at least another 60 days—Canada and Mexico's ability to seek sanctions for retaliatory trade actions against the U.S. for its non-compliance with international trade obligations.
 
The WTO in May ruled that U.S. COOL rules, which require meat producers to indicate on retail packaging where each animal was born, raised and slaughtered, accord less favorable treatment to imported meat than to domestic products (96 WTO, 5/19/15).
 
Canada ‘Deeply Disappointed’
 
The U.S. delegation said in its remarks at the DSB meeting that it “strongly disagrees with Canada's specific proposal for the suspension of concessions.”
 
Earlier in June, Canada asked the WTO to authorize nearly $2.5 billion in annual trade tariffs against U.S. products like beef, pork, apples, rice, corn, maple syrup, pasta, wine, jewelry, office chairs, wooden furniture and mattresses.
 
Canada said it was not appeased by the U.S. House of Representatives' recent approval of a bill to repeal the COOL rules (H.R. 2393)(113 WTO, 6/12/15). “We are deeply disappointed that the United States continues to maintain a measure that is inconsistent with its WTO obligations,” the Canadian delegation said in a statement.
 
In a separate statement, Canadian Minister of Agriculture Gerry Ritz and International Trade Minister Ed Fast said the only way for the U.S. to “avoid billions in retaliation by late summer is to ensure legislation repealing COOL passes the Senate and is signed by the President.”
 
Mexico to Revise Sanctions
 
Mexico recently increased its estimate of COOL costs up to $713 million from $653 million per year and said it would include the details of its request in a new WTO submission.
 
Mexico said it would request a special meeting of the DSB on June 29 to submit its modified request.
 
The U.S.-based National Foreign Trade Council (NFTC) urged the Senate to swiftly approve the COOL repeal measure to prevent harm to U.S. farmers and manufacturers.
 
“It is now more important than ever for the United States to show its commitment to the multilateral trading system and the WTO by bringing COOL requirements into compliance with our treaty obligations,” said NFTC President Bill Reinsch.
 
 
WTO failing to cope with trade disputes burden as staff exits mount
Legal Business
12 June 2015 00:01 by Tom Moore
Tags: Litigation

Litigation
 
In its latest annual report, the World Trade Organization (WTO) has reported that its disputes unit has 'faced difficulties in retaining staff', causing delays to panels being established amid a surging caseload.
 
The annual report revealed the WTO's dispute settlement body had one of its most active years in 2014 since its inception nearly two decades ago, with 34 active panel, compliance and arbitration proceedings and six appeals.

Significant cases before the body included the European Union's renewed trade row with the US in its proxy dispute over aircraft makers Airbus and Boeing, this time over alleged US tax incentives for Boeing, while a plain packaging disputes brought against Australia, with five WTO members challenging the policy and 41 members registering as third parties, is the largest dispute ever brought before the dispute settlement system.

The WTO's director-general Roberto Azevêdo said in September last year that the disputes arm faced difficulties in retaining staff and acknowledged that the private sector can offer lawyers more stable and lucrative working conditions and better career advancement opportunities. The latest annual report from the WTO said that 'inevitably, this has led to the loss of a number of trained and experienced lawyers and consequently their institutional and case law memory'.

The exit of experienced lawyers has led to delays in getting disputes panels up and running and long waits for slots to appeal an outcome.

Both the increasing dispute settlement workload, coupled with the recent loss of a number of trained and experienced dispute settlement lawyers, led Azevêdo to reallocate resources at the end of 2014 so that the three dispute settlement divisions could recruit junior lawyers through temporary contracts for a period of up to two years. The WTO has also had to reassign staff working in other divisions to work on pending disputes.

But, the annual report stated: 'These solutions only provide temporary relief for what is a recurrent problem. The need for specialised skills, at both professional and support staff levels, means that the WTO needs to hire new staff at both the senior and junior levels.'

The disputes body received 14 requests for consultations in 2014, nearly half what it received in 2013 when 27 requests were filed. Nonetheless, this did not reduce the workload, as 40 active disputes were already proceeding through adjudication, whether before the appellate body, panels or in arbitration.

Brussels-based Lode Van Den Hende, a European Union and WTO law specialist at Herbert Smith Freehills, told Legal Business: 'There is an anomalous situation where the support staff, not the panelists who come and go, are writing the reports. That's not very healthy; the WTO needs to ensure the balance does not shift any further onto the support staff.'

He added: 'Panelists are appointed on an ad hoc basis so you can have an ex-trade ambassador who hasn't decided a case for five years in charge. The WTO is a small organization, considering it's meant to be running global trade, so while I haven't seen a reduction in quality it would make sense to make panel members and the appellate body members full-time. However, the problem with this is that fewer judges would be needed if the jobs became full-time and it would be hard for all the different members to agree on which judges would win these spots. At present the WTO attempts to be representative but that would get harder if there were fewer roles.'
 
 
India raises duties on some steel products to counter Chinese imports 
By Aman Shah

MUMBAI, June 17 (Reuters) - India has raised duties on certain steel products by up to 2.5 percentage points, as domestic producers struggle to cope with surging cheap imports from China and Russia, among others.

The government has raised import tax to 10 percent from 7.5 percent on flat steel and to 7.5 percent from 5 percent for long steel products, the government said on Wednesday.

Almost all companies making the alloy in India have urged the government to take action against what they claim is "dumping" of cheaper steel, which has pressured prices and hit profitability over the past few quarters.

The industry welcomed the government's decision on Wednesday, but said the raise was not enough to significantly reduce shipments coming in from Japan and South Korea, countries with which India has free trade agreements.

"I think at least it shows that the government has recognised that there is an issue and taken a step, though a small one, to recognise it," said Sanak Mishra, Secretary General of industry group Indian Steel Association.

Shares in Indian steel companies reacted positively with Tata Steel Ltd closing up 3.6 percent and JSW Steel Ltd ending Wednesday up 3.3 percent.

In its annual budget in February, India raised the cap to which it can increase import duties to 15 percent from 10 percent, but kept the tariff unchanged.

Earlier this month, the government imposed anti-dumping duties ranging from $180 to $316 per tonne on some industrial-grade stainless steel in a bid to stem the flood of imports.

The tariff hike will reduce the gap between domestic steel prices and the landed cost of Chinese steel by around 2.5 percent, India Ratings analysts wrote in a note, adding that even that benefit could be hurt by an appreciating rupee.

"Additional tariff and non tariff measures are required to ensure cheap and unfair imports do not damage the domestic steel industry which has invested significant capital," said H Shivramkrishnan, Chief Commercial Officer, Essar Steel. (Additional reporting by Abhishek Vishnoi in Mumbai and Mayank Bhardwaj in New Delhi; Editing by Sunil Nair and William Hardy) 
 
 
US mfg sector appeals for 'serious policy reforms' in India 
From Lalit K Jha

Washington, Jun 17 (PTI) The US manufacturing industry today said it is ready to invest in India but for this it needs Prime Minister Narendra Modi to enact "serious policy reforms" that level the playing field for all and encourage and protect collaboration and innovation.

"Now is not the time to simply not accept a reality that's short of the ideal we envision," Jay Timmons, president and CEO, of the US National Association of Manufacturers (NAM) told a meeting here.

"Now is the time to ensure that good words are backed up by good deeds, to bring about the changes we seek and to keep moving forward together to advance one of our nation's and the world's greatest opportunities. And when that happens, manufacturers in the US are ready to go," Timmons said.

"Manufacturers in the United States and around the world are eager to invest in India, but first, we need Prime Minister Modi to enact serious policy reforms that level the playing field for all, and encourage and protect collaboration and innovation," he said.

Speaking at NAM / CQ Roll Call and The Economist's 'Breakfast Briefing: Is India Open for Business', Timmons said over a year ago, manufacturers were encouraged when Modi declared India "open for business" and committed to incentivise investment - all great signs - his hopeful rhetoric has not yet turned into concrete policy reform.

"Put simply, we haven't seen the results," he added.

"As an example, the Modi government has at least said it recognises the importance of strengthening its weak intellectual property rights to protect innovators at home and abroad in its draft National IPR Policy," he said.

"The reality, though, is the government has not implemented any significant policy changes to realise this goal," he added.

Similarly, Modi's talk of opening up the country's market to increase foreign investment was undercut when India stalled a previously agreed upon WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement, jeopardising a deal that included 160 countries and that would add about USD 1 trillion to the global economy.

"Ultimately, India and the WTO agreed on a deal late last year but India is still dragging its feet on honouring the agreement," Timmons said.

"India's policies obstruct the ability of the United States and other countries to sell our products outside our borders and hinder India's ability to fully participate in the global market. India is the 10th largest economy in the world. But today, it is not even among the top 15 destinations for US exports," he noted.

The US International Trade Commission has stated that if India removed discriminatory barriers and improved intellectual property protection, US exports to India would rise by two-thirds - the equivalent of USD 14.4 billion and US investment would roughly double, he said.

"Manufacturers in the United States and around the world are eager to invest in India, but first, we need Prime Minister Modi to enact serious policy reforms that level the playing field for all, and encourage-and protect-collaboration and innovation," Timmons said. PTI LKJ KUN AKJ KUN
 
 
U.S. House moves to revive Obama's Pacific trade pact 
By Richard Cowan and Roberta Rampton

WASHINGTON, June 17 (Reuters) - The U.S. House of Representatives plans to bring legislation central to President Barack Obama's Pacific Rim trade agreement back to the floor for debate on Thursday, giving lawmakers a chance to deal with it in a different format.

After a major setback last week, a measure that would give Obama "fast-track" authority over his 12-nation Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) agreement would be considered again by the House, under the plan hatched by Republican leaders.

If the strategy succeeds in the House, the Senate would also have to approve the legislation.

The House Rules Committee on Wednesday approved the rules for the debate. This time, the fast-track bill would be taken up on its own, not paired with another measure to renew an expiring aid program for workers who lose their jobs due to trade deals.

Last Friday, the combination of the two items in a single bill backfired dramatically. In an unusual procedure, the House narrowly approved fast-track, but overwhelmingly defeated the worker aid provision, stalling fast-track.

The vote was an embarrassing setback for Obama, who favors both measures. It revealed divisions with the Democratic Party over the president's signature trade agreement, a keystone of his foreign policy shift to Asia.

Many Democrats and labor unions fear the TPP could cost American jobs as employers chase lower costs in signatory countries. Ahead of Friday's vote, the AFL-CIO labor group urged Democrats to oppose the worker aid portion of the single bill as a way of defeating fast-track.

On Wednesday, House and Senate Republican leaders committed to breaking off the worker aid component and holding separate votes on it.

At the White House, in an effort to rally support within his own party, Obama met pro-trade Democrats, who arrived by bus ahead of a picnic for members of Congress.

Later, in remarks at the picnic, the president made reference to the tension over the issue without specifically mentioning trade.

"Obviously, democracy can be contentious," Obama said. "There are times where people have deep principled disagreements, but I hope that events like today remind us that ultimately we're all on the same team."

White House spokesman Josh Earnest said earlier that Obama is open to a legislative strategy that separates fast-track from worker aid, as long as both issues make it to his desk to be signed into law.

"The only legislative strategy that the president can support is one that will result in both pieces of legislation arriving at his desk," Earnest said.

Obama reiterated that point in his meeting with lawmakers and thanked them for their support, the White House said in a statement after the meeting concluded.

Under fast-track authority, the president could negotiate trade agreements, such as the TPP, knowing Congress can approve or reject the deals, but not amend them.

Some details on the trade package have been released. . (Additional reporting by Julia Edwards and Jeff Mason; Editing by Kevin Drawbaugh and Leslie Adler) 
 
 
FACTBOX-Deciphering alphabet soup in U.S.-Asia trade pact fight 
 
June 17 (Reuters) - The U.S. Congress's fight over President Barack Obama's proposed Pacific Rim trade deal is sometimes a fog of abbreviations. Here is a guide to key proposals and programs involved. 
 
TRANS-PACIFIC PARTNERSHIP (TPP) 
 
The core of the fight is this proposed pact between 12 Pacific Rim trading partners, supported by Obama and Republican leaders and some Democrats. Meant to lower trade barriers and set common standards on issues ranging from workers' rights to intellectual property protections, the deal would cover the United States, Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore and Vietnam. 
 
Many Democrats and labor unions worry the trade deal, which is close to completion, would hurt U.S. jobs as companies take advantage of lower labor costs in partner countries and find themselves under increased pressure from duty-free imports. 
 
TRADE PROMOTION AUTHORITY (TPA) 
 
Also known as "fast-track," this measure, favored by Obama, would streamline passage of trade agreements through Congress. As proposed, TPA would set objectives for U.S. trade negotiators and a timeframe for making the text public. It would also require notification to Congress of proposed changes to laws. 
 
But TPA would limit lawmakers to casting only a "yes" or "no" vote on the TPP and other trade deals. They could not suggest amendments to it. The bill also would also set deadlines for congressional votes, limiting the potential for delays. 
 
Japan has said that TPA, which would give trading partners confidence that trade agreements would not be picked apart in Congress, is needed for TPP to proceed. 
 
TRADE ADJUSTMENT ASSISTANCE (TAA) 
 
This is a federal program that gives aid to U.S. workers who lose their jobs as a result of foreign trade. They can get benefits such as relocation assistance, subsidized healthcare insurance, career counseling and income support while in job training programs. The program is set to expire on September 30. 
 
 
OECD urges global finance reforms to fight inequality 
17 June 2015
Agence France Presse
 
The OECD called Wednesday for financial sector reforms to combat inequality and lift economic growth in developed nations.

The Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, a policy body comprising 34 advanced economies, cited data stretching back 50 years in a key report unveiled in the British capital.

"Reforms to make the financial sector more stable can be expected to boost long-term economic growth and improve income equality," read the OECD study entitled "Finance and Inclusive Growth".

The Paris-based OECD said the sector would make a "healthy contribution" to "strong and equitable growth" if it could "prevent credit overexpansion" and ensure "supervision of banks to maintain sufficient capital buffers".

Credit has a more negative impact on economic growth when it is given to households rather than businesses, according to the analysis.

The OECD also criticised excessive financial deregulation, the use of bank lending rather than bond financing, and the deterioration of credit quality.

And it pointed to a growing income inequality, saying that high earners can and do borrow more than those on lower wages -- with household credit more unevenly distributed than income.

The OECD criticised state support to systemic financial institutions deemed too big to fail without threatening the global financial system -- and suggested that such groups could be broken up to prevent credit overexpansion and also boost stability.

"Substantial progress has been made... but much remains to be done in particular to reduce governments' support for too-big-to-fail banks," it continued.

"The links between too much bank credit and slower growth, which are stronger where too-big-to-fail banks get more public support, underline the growth benefits of completing reform in this area."

The OECD added: "One way of ending too-big-to-fail would be to break up financial institutions into sufficiently smaller entities.

"Alternatively, reforms can focus on separating the utility functions of too-big-to-fail banks from their more risky activities and on requiring large institutions to set up credible resolution plans, so that they can be closed orderly if they fail the test of the market place."

The group meanwhile estimated that another 10 percent increase in bank credit across OECD nations would curb long-term economic growth by 0.3 percentage points.

"Finance is a vital ingredient of economic growth, but there can be too much of it," the OECD added.

"Over the past 50 years, credit by banks and other institutions to households and businesses has grown three times as fast as economic activity.

"At these levels, further expansion is likely to slow long-term growth and raise inequality."
END 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.