HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "Departure of WTO Agricultural Chair Could Complicate Doha Negotiations
·         HYPERLINK \l "Discussions to Continue on Agriculture, Market Access at World Trade Organization
·         HYPERLINK \l "Maersk warns of slowdown in global trade
·         HYPERLINK \l "Call for WTO ban on Indian sugar subsidy
·         HYPERLINK \l "Food subsidy bill rises by 20pc to Rs 1.07 lakh cr in FY15
·         HYPERLINK \l "India food subsidies need overhaul to curb losses -report
·         HYPERLINK \l "China draft counterterror law strikes fear in foreign tech firms
·         HYPERLINK \l "Russia May Allow Agro Imports if West Invests in Processing Facilities
·         HYPERLINK \l "ASEAN to remove more nontariff barriers to boost economic integration
 
 
Departure of WTO Agricultural Chair Could Complicate Doha Negotiations
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, March 2, 2015
 
Feb. 27— The top mediator of the World Trade Organization's agriculture negotiations is expected to leave Geneva this summer, and his departure may complicate the organization's effort to conclude the 2001 Doha Round, according to sources in Geneva.
 
Ambassador John Adank will soon notify the WTO General Council of his intent to vacate the chairmanship of the Agriculture Committee in Special Session so that he may return to New Zealand. Adank's four-year term has already been extended once and is unlikely to be further extended, Geneva trade sources told Bloomberg BNA.
 
His departure may disrupt the continuity of the WTO's delicate negotiations to liberalize agriculture rules and could exacerbate the challenge of resolving the Doha Development Agenda, the sources said.
 
Though many expect Adank to leave Geneva in August, it is unclear when, exactly, he will relinquish his position and who might replace him as chairman of the Agriculture Committee in Special Session. Adank's transition plans have not yet been made public, and he declined to comment for this story.
 
Post-Bali Work Program
 
News of Adank's forthcoming departure comes as WTO members continue their efforts to advance a detailed work program to address the remaining issues of the 2013 Bali Ministerial Conference by July 31.
 
If a work program is successfully developed by mid-year, it could lead to broader outcomes at the WTO's 10th Ministerial Conference scheduled for Dec. 15–18 in Nairobi, Kenya.
 
However, stark disagreements about the elements of the work program have led some members to believe that the July 31 milestone is an unattainable goal and may have to be extended to December. The introduction of a new agricultural negotiating committee chairman could further disrupt the timeline of the work program, Geneva trade officials told Bloomberg BNA.
 
Some observers in Geneva perceive the work of the agricultural negotiating committee as perhaps the most pivotal element in achieving actionable results this year. Several members have said that any ambition in the non-agricultural market access and services negotiations will be linked to the achievements, or lack thereof, in the agricultural negotiations committee.
 
Quietly Effective
 
Adank, a nearly 30-year veteran of New Zealand's Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, has led the WTO's agriculture negotiations since 2011. He succeeded David Walker, who subsequently became a deputy secretary at New Zealand's Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade.
 
Adank maintained an excellent reputation in what is considered a difficult role at the WTO, according to Geneva trade officials. He is known for his attention to detail and ability to balance the political sensitivities of agriculture negotiations while helping members find a way forward on some of the WTO's thorniest issues.
 
“John has done a great job,” WTO spokesman Keith Rockwell told Bloomberg BNA. “He is knowledgeable and has the respect of everybody in the organization. This is what happens, guys come and then they get called home.”
 
He is recognized as key figure in ushering the outcomes of the 2013 Bali Ministerial Conference, and quietly helped address some of India's concerns about WTO rules regarding public stockholding for food security purposes.
 
In 2014, he provided a supportive role in coordinating the bilateral negotiations between India and the U.S. that ultimately led members to approve the Trade Facilitation Agreement, the WTO's first trade accord in 20 years.
 
This year, Adank held multiple consultations with committee members aimed at addressing domestic support and market access issues. The early-stage negotiations have been slow, and members such as the U.S., India and China have been unable to find consensus on the viability of the December 2008 draft modalities (Rev. 4).
 
Selection Process
 
Once Adank notifies the General Council of his intent to leave, members will initiate a selection process for the next chairman that will be coordinated by WTO Director-General Roberto Azevedo, who is also the chairman of the Trade Negotiation Committee.
 
In the past, representatives from the WTO secretariat's office have coordinated committee work in the absence of a full-time chair.
 
Though the transition from one negotiating committee chair to another won't necessarily jeopardize the WTO's work, the selection of a replacement chair could slow the negotiations further and potentially disrupt the WTO's goals for 2015.
 
There have been instances when previous WTO chairmen became unpopular with members and the committee's work suffered. As a result, members thoroughly vet chair replacements to ensure that they receive the broadest possible acceptance.
 
Objectivity, Confidentiality Essential
 
Typically, candidates to lead the various negotiating groups are evaluated for their ability to mediate discussions among members without influencing the process in favor of their national interests.
 
The last four chairmen of the agriculture negotiations committee have come from New Zealand, whose public officials have a reputation for neutrality in agriculture negotiations.
 
The primary role of the agriculture negotiations chair is to facilitate discussions among members. The role often vacillates between being a sounding board for members and acting as a matchmaker between delegations that disagree over a particular issue.
 
A high degree of trust and respect for the confidentiality of delegates' negotiating positions is generally considered necessary for negotiating chairs to be successful.
 
Negotiating committee chair must also help to keep delegations informed about the status of certain bilateral discussions and clarify any misinformation circulating among members.
 
 
Discussions to Continue on Agriculture, Market Access at World Trade Organization
WTO Reporter, March 2, 2015
By Bryce Baschuk
 
Feb. 27 — The World Trade Organization's Negotiating Group on Market Access is scheduled to meet March 2 to discuss member proposals to reduce trade tariffs.
 
The chairman of the negotiating group, Remigi Winzap of Switzerland, said the success of the negotiations will be determined by members' level of ambition, their willingness to offer concessions, their ability to accept differentiated tariff profiles and the impact of ongoing plurilateral negotiations, according to a report recently circulated among members.
 
Winzap noted that the level of trust among members is insufficient “for a discussion around concrete alternative concepts” and urged members to increase their bilateral negotiations. “Members are hesitant to come up with concrete proposals as such proposal could be killed on arrival,” Winzap's report said.
 
WTO Director-General Roberto Azevedo subsequently urged members to offer more concrete proposals if they are to achieve progress in their goal of advancing a detailed post-Bali work program by July 31, according to his speech at the Feb. 20 General Council meeting.
 
Regular Agriculture Meeting
 
Members are expected to discuss India's public stockholding programs and U.S. agriculture policies at a pair of WTO Agriculture Committee meetings scheduled for March 4–5.
 
The U.S. recently asked India for more details about its domestic food security programs as part of a Feb. 20 inquiry document. Last year, the issue of public stockholding for food security purposes nearly sank the Trade Facilitation Agreement when India asked for a definite extension of a peace clause to preserve its programs from international scrutiny.
 
The Agriculture Committee is tasked with evaluating how countries comply with their commitments on subsidies and market access.
 
The committee will also review the negotiations being discussed in the Special Session of the Committee on Agriculture.
 
Azevedo in Brazil
 
Azevedo plans to meet with government representatives in Brasilia this week.
 
He also plans to meet with Robson Andrade, the president of Brazil's National Confederation of Industry.
 
On March 6, there will be a meeting of the working party on the accession of Azerbaijan to the WTO. Azerbaijan's working party was established in 1997 and has met 11 times since 2002.
 
At the last meeting of the working party, members sought further clarifications on Azerbaijan's tax exemptions, investment incentives, operation of foreign-owned enterprises, privatizations, technical barriers to trade, subsidies, transit system and intellectual property rights regime.
 
 
Maersk warns of slowdown in global trade
Richard Milne, Nordic Correspondent 
Financial Times
March 1, 2015 12:36 pm
 
The chief executive of the world's largest container-shipping group has warned that global trade growth could slow this year in spite of low oil prices as Chinese, Brazilian and Russian economies disappoint.

Container demand rose by about 4 per cent in both 2013 and 2014 and Maersk Line, the Danish group that ships about 15 per cent of the world’s seaborne freight, expects it to increase 3 to 5 per cent this year.

“I’m personally more towards the low end of that,” Søren Skou, Maersk Line’s chief executive, told the Financial Times. “Growth from a historical perspective is quite sluggish. It has a huge impact for us as an industry.”

Mr Skou called the halving of oil prices in the past year “a net positive for container growth” but nonetheless said the opposing forces were potentially greater.

“The economies in Europe are still very sluggish. Brazil, Russia and China: those three economies used to drive a lot of growth, and right now we are not really seeing that to the same extent. The only real bright spot is the US, and even the US is good but not great,” he added.

His comments have weight as Maersk’s predictions are seen as a good indicator of global trade as it carries goods and products between Asia, Europe, the US, Africa and Latin America.

Container demand used to expand at up to 10 per cent a year before the financial crisis, but Mr Skou said those days were behind the industry. He said that rise in demand would more closely mirror global GDP growth now. 
 
He said that it was always hard to interpret the first quarter because of the Chinese new year but added: “To my mind volumes were sluggish. There is nothing in container volume numbers that suggest that the global economy is just on the verge of starting a new growth trend.”

In a 4 per cent environment capacity decisions take on a different perspective if you get it wrong. The good old days aren’t coming back
- Søren Skou, Maersk Line’s chief executive

The lower growth poses problems for an industry where Maersk Line is the only solidly profitable company with dozens of lossmaking ones, and where new capacity outstrips increases in volume.

“Before if you acquired too much capacity you could kind of work your way out of it. In a 4 per cent environment capacity decisions take on a different perspective if you get it wrong. The good old days aren’t coming back,” he added.

Despite the warning, Maersk is about to order new ships for the first time since 2011 when it bought 20 Triple Es, then the world’s largest vessels capable of transporting the equivalent of 18,000 20-foot containers.

Mr Skou said a decision would be made between April and June with the likelihood that more Triple Es would be ordered, possibly slightly modified to take up to 20,000 containers. Maersk has said it needs the new ships to help it maintain its market leadership up until the end of the decade
 
 
Call for WTO ban on Indian sugar subsidy 
2 March 2015
Bangkok Post
 
The Thai Sugar Millers Corporation Limited (TSMC) has urged the Thai government to seek a World Trade Organization (WTO) action to stop an Indian sugar export subsidy because it hurts major regional sugar exporters, including Thailand and Australia.

TSMC chairman Sirivuth Siamphakdee sent a letter to the Commerce Ministry's Trade Negotiation Department outlining the request. The subsidy makes Indian sugar prices unrealistically lower than market prices, he said.

"The Indian export subsidy is completely distorting the market and is against WTO rules. It adversely affects world sugar prices, hurting other major sugar exporters including Thailand, which is the world's second-biggest sugar exporter. So we urged our government to do something to stop India from subsidising exports," said Mr Sirivuth.

In 2014, the Indian government started subsidising raw sugar exports by paying a "marketing and promotion services" fee to exporters of 3,300 rupees per tonne, or around US$54 (1,750 baht), making Indian sugar cheaper than its competitors.

India exported 4 million tonnes last year, or around 2% of total sugar consumption across Asia. He said this eroded the market share of Thailand and Australia, which exported 7 million and 4 million tonnes, respectively.

India has subsidised 1.4 million tonnes of sugar exports this year, increasing its subsidy rate to 4,000 rupees a tonne.

Traders said the sugar subsidy had put pressure on global sugar prices, which have fallen by more than half from a record high of 36 cents per lb. The New York raw sugar futures, which sets global price trends, recently moved in a range of 14-15 cents per lb.

"The Indian subsidy encouraged investment funds to liquidate contracts on the New York raw sugar market, influencing physical market prices to stay at a low level," said an industry official.
 
 
Food subsidy bill rises by 20pc to Rs 1.07 lakh cr in FY15 
 
New Delhi, Feb 27 (PTI) The food subsidy bill for the current fiscal has increased by 20 per cent to Rs 1.07 lakh crore till January 9, compared to subsidy paid in the entire 2013-14 fiscal, the Economic Survey said.

In the 2013-14, government's subsidy bill stood at Rs 89,740.02 crore.

The pre-budget economic document also pointed that the "food subsidy bill has increased substantially in the past few years putting severe strain on the public exchequer".

The Survey stated that food subsidy has gone up as the economic cost of wheat and rice has continuously increasing, but the issue price of the food grains under PDS has been kept unchanged since July 1, 2002.

"Rationalisation of subsidies and better targeting of beneficiaries would release resources for public investment in agriculture," it added.

The pre-budget economic document emphasised that agriculture and food sector needs huge investment in research, education, extension, irrigation, fertilisers, and laboratories to test soil, water and commodities, warehousing, cold-storage.

The survey opines that the focus of public expenditure for agriculture so far has been on provision of subsidies, public expenditure in agriculture is only one-fourth of expenditure towards food and fertiliser subsidies. It is time it shifted towards investments to boost productivity.
 
 
India food subsidies need overhaul to curb losses -report 
By Ratnajyoti Dutta 
 
NEW DELHI, Feb 27 (Reuters) - India's food subsidy regime needs to be overhauled with direct cash transfers to rein in losses in the public distribution of dietary staples to the poor, a key report said on Friday.

The Economic Survey, the basis for Finance Minister Arun Jaitley's 2015/16 budget on Saturday, said reform of the food subsidies required more work.

India, the world's biggest rice and wheat producer after China, runs a mammoth food welfare programme for the poor.

The cost of the South Asian nation's food subsidies for the fiscal year ending March 31 are estimated to surge a quarter to 1.15 trillion rupees ($18.6 billion) from the previous year.

The programme covers over 65 million poor families through the distribution of subsidised food via a network of 450,000 ration shops. The state run network aims at ensuring minimum nutritional support to the poor and stability in grain prices.

The annual loss of 184 billion rupees ($2.98 billion) in subsidies for rice and wheat, the report said, "seriously" undermines the effectiveness of distribution network.

"Leakages can be stopped by cash transfer of the subsidy amount directly to the bank account, but the biggest challenge is most of the poor in India do not have any accounts at all," said Veeresh Hiremath, research head of brokerage Karvy Comtrade.

The report favoured a review of state-run grain procurement policies, especially in states that pay prices higher than minimum support levels for subsidised foods and impose high levies on the purchases.

The review should be extended to policies on stocking and distribution as well, the report suggested.

For more details and other highlights from India's annual economic survey, click here:

($1 = 61.8400 Indian rupees) (Editing by Tom Hogue) 
 
 
China draft counterterror law strikes fear in foreign tech firms 
By Michael Martina and Krista Hughes 
 
BEIJING/WASHINGTON (Reuters) - China is weighing a far-reaching counterterrorism law that would require technology firms to hand over encryption keys and install security "backdoors", a potential escalation of what some firms view as the increasingly onerous terms of doing business in the world's second largest economy.

A parliamentary body read a second draft of the country's first anti-terrorism law this week and is expected to adopt the legislation in the coming weeks or months.

The initial draft, published by the National People's Congress late last year, requires companies to also keep servers and user data within China, supply law enforcement authorities with communications records and censor terrorism-related internet content.

Its scope reaches far beyond a recently adopted set of financial industry regulations that pushed Chinese banks to purchase from domestic technology vendors.

The implications for Silicon Valley companies, ranging from Microsoft to Apple Inc, have set the stage for yet another confrontation over cybersecurity and technology policy, a major irritant in U.S.-China relations.

"It's a disaster for anyone doing business in China," said one industry source. "You are no longer allowed a VPN that's secure, you are no longer able to transmit financials securely, or to have any corporate secrets. By law, nothing is secure."

The Obama administration has conveyed its concerns about the anti-terrorism draft law to China, according to a U.S. official.

Although the counterterrorism provisions would apply to both domestic and foreign technologies, officials in Washington and Western business lobbies argue the law, combined with the new banking rules and a slew of anti-trust investigations, amount to unfair regulatory pressure targeting foreign companies.

"The true test will come with implementation," said Scott Kennedy, the Director of the Project on Chinese Business and Political Economy at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington.

"Given the recent spate of AML-related (anti-monopoly law) cases against foreign firms, the regulations about the banking sector, and the reduction of foreign firms' products on government procurement lists, there is good reason for foreign firms to be highly concerned," Kennedy said.

PROTECTIONISM, NOT SECURITY?

To be sure, Western governments, including in the United States and Britain, have for years requested tech firms to disclose encryption methods, with varying degrees of success.

Officials including FBI director James Comey and National Security Agency (NSA) director Mike Rogers publicly warned internet companies including Apple and Google late last year against using encryption that law enforcement cannot break.

Beijing has argued the need to quickly ratchet up its cybersecurity measures in the wake of former NSA contractor Edward Snowden's revelations of sophisticated U.S. spying techniques.

In December, China's banking regulator adopted new rules that outlined security criteria that tech products in 68 categories must meet in order to be considered "secure and controllable" for use in the financial sector, according to a version of the regulations seen by Reuters.

To attain the designation, source code powering operating systems, database software and middleware must be registered with the government if they are not domestically developed.

U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman issued a statement on Thursday criticizing the banking rules, saying they "are not about security – they are about protectionism and favoring Chinese companies".

"The Administration is aggressively working to have China walk back from these troubling regulations," Froman said.

A U.S. official confirmed a letter was sent by Froman, America's top trade negotiator, and other senior officials to Chinese counterparts expressing their concerns.

James Zimmerman, Chairman of the American Chamber of Commerce in China, said the latest rules, if implemented, would likely limit opportunities for U.S. companies, but could also backfire on China.

"One unfortunate consequence of over-broad anti-terrorism policies is to potentially isolate China technologically from the rest of the world, and the end result of that may be to limit the country's access to cutting-edge technology and innovation," Zimmerman said.

But several U.S. technology executives and industry sources who spoke on condition of anonymity said they feared the security law would be more stringent than the bank regulations – and more sensitive to discuss - because it was rooted in public security considerations.

The vague, open-ended requirements for cooperating with law enforcement appeared the most worrying, as well as the possibility of steep penalties or jail time for non-compliance, according to one executive.

"It's the equivalent of the Patriot Act on really, really strong steroids," said one U.S. industry source, referring to the anti-terrorism legislation enacted under the George W. Bush administration following the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.

The National People's Congress did not respond immediately to a request for comment.

Apple and Google declined to comment on the proposed law, while Microsoft was not immediately available for comment.

China is drafting the anti-terrorism law at a time when Chinese leaders say the country faces a serious threat from religious extremists and separatists. Hundreds of people have been killed over the past two years in the far western region of Xinjiang in unrest the government has blamed on Islamists who want to establish a separate state called East Turkestan.

(Writing by Gerry Shih in Beijing; Additional reporting by Paul Carsten and Matthew Miller in Beijing and Joseph Menn in San Francisco; Editing by Alex Richardson) 
 
 
Russia May Allow Agro Imports if West Invests in Processing Facilities 
 
MOSCOW (Sputnik) - Russia could potentially allow imports of agricultural raw materials if western countries agree to invest in processing facilities on the Russian territory, Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov said when responding to Greece's request to continue fruits import to Russia.

There are quite straightforward rues of the World Trade Organization. And Russia, as a WTO member, cannot choose: we cannot impose sanctions against EU member states and selectively lift sanctions on one of the countries. In this case it would be possible to develop a scheme of non-direct supplies, such as imports of raw materials with an investment into Russia-based food processing facilities, Peskov told Russian daily Izvestiya.

In August, Russia was forced to respond to sanctions introduced by the West over Moscow's alleged role in the Ukrainian crisis with a ban on certain food imports from the European Union, the United States, Canada, Australia and Norway. The list of banned products includes meat, poultry, fish, seafood, milk, dairy products and fruit and vegetables.

Peskov said, however, that Russian President Vladimir Putin during his February visit to Hungary stated that the two countries could cooperate in the agroindustrial sector, despite the restrictive measures.

Athens earlier asked Russia to lift an embargo on Greek fruit imports.

 
ASEAN to remove more nontariff barriers to boost economic integration 
Kyodo News
 
KOTA BHARU, Malaysia, March 1 -- Trade ministers from 10 Southeast Asian countries pledged Sunday to break down further nontariff barriers to boost intra-regional trade as they seek closer economic integration.

The trade ministers of member countries of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations gathered for their annual retreat in Kota Bharu, the capital of Malaysia's northeastern Kelantan state, to chart the way forward for the grouping as it is poised to mark the formal establishment of the ASEAN Economic Community by end of this year.

Under the AEC blueprint, the grouping -- with a combined population of over 625 million people -- envisions an integrated market and production base with free flow of goods, services and investments, skilled labor and capital.

It aims to boost intra-ASEAN trade further. In 2013, trade between ASEAN members amounted to $608.6 billion, accounting for 24.2 percent of total trade in the region. It was a 32.9 percent increase from the $458.1 billion recorded in 2008 when the AEC blueprint was first launched.

"The implementation of the AEC measures does not mean that ASEAN will become a single economic entity by Jan. 1, 2016, rather it sends a strong signal that positive measures have been put in place towards a more liberalized and integrated economic region," the ministers said in a statement at the end of the one-day retreat.

At present, ASEAN members have substantially eliminated custom import duties and beginning 2015, 97.3 percent of the products traded in the region are duty-free.

The focus for the year, they added, will be on removing further nontariff barriers that impede trade, such as simplification of custom procedures, harmonization of standards, further liberalization of services and trade facilitation.

At a joint press conference, ASEAN Deputy Secretary-General for ASEAN Economic Community Lim Hong Hin illustrated some of the common problems like multiple testing required for a product by different countries in the region and labeling requirements such as the use of local language. Some of these have been resolved but there were still cases cropping up.

Malaysian International Trade and Industry Minister Mustapa Mohamed who chaired the retreat said they have identified 69 nontariff barriers and have resolved 45.

"We are committed to see more progress in the (removal) of nontariff barriers," he said.

Meanwhile, Mustapa said the negotiation for a trade pact between ASEAN and its six regional partners -- Australia, China, India, Japan, New Zealand and South Korea -- is on track for conclusion by the end of this year.

The eighth round of talks for the initiative known as the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership will be held in June in Kyoto, western Japan. Before that, some of the negotiating committees will hold a smaller "intersessional" meeting in April in Jakarta, Indonesia, he added.

RCEP is touted as the largest free trade deal as it will cover half the world's population and almost 30 percent of the global economy.

"We will make sure that the deadline of end (of) 2015 is achieved," Mustapa said. "The closer economic integration will make ASEAN an attractive region to do business."

The ministers also discussed concerns over the impact of falling oil prices for net-oil exporting economies in ASEAN like Indonesia and currency volatility including possible capital flow reversal.

"This is where the implementation of ASEAN's regional economic integration can help member states overcome the challenges posed by global economic volatility," the ministers said in the statement.

"We expect ASEAN's economic performance to improve in 2015 to 5.1 percent, above the 3.5 percent global growth projection. We based this on the stronger demand in advanced economies, energized by the robust U.S. recovery and several policy stimulus measures in the Eurozone and Japan," the ministers added.

ASEAN groups Brunei, Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Vietnam. END
 


  ________________________________  
Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.