China to 'accelerate' 3-way trade talks with S. Korea, Japan: minister
Lack of awareness holds back seeking protection under WTO
Interview: Gov't work report a window to comprehend China's "new normal"
China targets 6-per-cent trade growth in 2015
China Calls U.S. Complaint on Subsidies ‘roundless’ Commerce Minister Gao Hucheng says China respects the World Trade Organization ’ rules
Ecuador to Set Import Tariffs to Mitigate Oil-Price Drop, Stronger U.S. Dollar; Tariffs to affect more than 30% of imports, will be charged for 15 months
Obama needs the aid of the GOP; The president’ party is resisting him on the Trans-Pacific Partnership.
India-Australia likely to ink free trade agreement before end of 2015
India wants early scrapping of US penal duties on steel
US airlines let fly at Gulf rivals’53bn in subsidies
Here comes China 2.0
World Trade; Studies from Georgetown University  Have Provided New Information about World Trade ('Public Body' or Not: Chinese State-Owned Enterprise)




China to 'accelerate' 3-way trade talks with S. Korea, Japan: minister
7 mars 2015
Yonhap English News


BEIJING, March 7 (Yonhap) -- Chinese Commerce Minister Gao Hucheng said Saturday that Beijing will "accelerate" negotiations this year with South Korea and Japan aimed at forging a three-way free trade agreement.


Speaking at an annual press conference, Gao also reiterated that South Korea and China will spare no effort to formally sign a bilateral free trade agreement with South Korea.


"Based on the conclusion and signing of the China-Korea FTA this year, we will also move forward and accelerate China-Japan-Korea FTA negotiations," Gao said.


After effectively concluding free trade negotiations last November, South Korea and China completed the "initialing" of the deal last month, marking one step closer to the official signing. Both sides voiced their hope to sign the deal within the first half of this year.


Gao described the free trade deal with South Korea as a "high-standard," saying it will significantly boost bilateral trade between the two nations.


In late 2012, South Korea, China and Japan launched three-way free trade talks aimed at slashing tariffs and other barriers among the three leading economies in Asia, but the negotiations have reported little progress. If successful, a deal would create one of the world's biggest economic blocs with a combined gross domestic product of US$15 trillion.


Diplomatic tension between China and Japan run deep because of competing claims over islands in the East China Sea. Relations between Seoul and Tokyo also remain frayed over Japan's unrepentant attitude over its wartime atrocities, including the sexual enslavement of women by the Japanese military during World War II.


Besides the three-way free trade talks with South Korea and Japan, China is promoting a broader regional trade bloc in Asia, called the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP).


The so-called RCEP talks involve the 10 member ASEAN countries plus six others -- South Korea, China, Japan, India, Australia and New Zealand.


Gao said China hopes to wrap up negotiations for an "updated version of the free trade area between China and ASEAN countries, as well as talks for the RCEP by the end of 2015."


Beset by weak global demand, China has lowered its growth target in trade to "around 6 percent" this year.


Gao said China is "confident of meeting the target of 6.1 percent" growth in trade this year.


The annual press conference was held on the sidelines of China's National People's Congress, the country's rubber-stamp parliament controlled by the Communist Party.





Lack of awareness holds back seeking protection under WTO
7 mars 2015
The Financial Express (Bangladesh)


Bangladesh, March 7 -- Lack of knowledge and awareness, along with technical complexity, holds back the local producers and businessmen to seek protection through trade remedial measures under the WTO (World Trade Organisation) rules.


Mr Monjur Ahmed, an adviser to the Federation of Bangladesh Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FBCCI), said that the local producers and manufacturers had almost no knowledge about the trade remedial measures.


"Businesspeople have no clear idea about safeguard or anti-dumping duties," he told the FE.


"The procedures are also very technical and complex. Moreover, all these involve a time-consuming process."


Take the case of a leading toiletry company of Bangladesh. Once, the company urged the BTC to impose anti-dumping duty on a certain product on the plea that the product was being imported at a lower price than the domestic price.


The tariff commission, however, found that the problem was related to a raw material used for a certain finished toiletry product and nothing like dumping.


In fact, the anti-dumping duty can be imposed only on proper investigation and on finding a causal linkage of dumping with the damage to local manufacturers. To be precise, dumping means selling a product to one country at a price less than that prevailing in the country of origin.


Mr Ahmed also pointed out that there was no legal protection to keep the information, furnished by the producers for investigation, secret. "If tax authority or any other government agency has got the information from the tariff commission, they may harass the firm or industry concerned," he added.


"A legal provision must be there to keep any information, acquired for investigation, secret and non-transferable to any other authority."


In this regard, BTC chairman Dr Rahman told the FE that they were working on revising the tariff commission act and such a legal provision would be included there.


As it takes six to nine months for investigating damage caused by abnormal import hike, dumping or subsidised import, local firms and companies find it easier to lobby with the NBR for imposing or increasing regulatory and supplementary duties on the products.


"But, neither supplementary nor regulatory duty can be a long-term protection for local industries," said Mr Ahmed. "On the other hand, no trade remedial measure will be effective as long as mis-pricing and fraudulence in imports are there."


According to WTO statistics, some 2,966 anti-dumping measures have taken by 98 member countries as of June 30, 2014 China, Japan, South Korea, USA, Indonesia and India are the major countries take these measures.


Interview: Gov't work report a window to comprehend China's "new normal"
7 mars 2015
HYPERLINK "calendar:T1:07:51" 07:51
Xinhua News Agency


by Xinhua Writer Xu Haijing 


 CANBERRA, March 7 (Xinhua) -- The government work report Chinese Premier Li Keqiang delivered Thursday serves as a window to better understand China's "new normal," says an Australian observer. 


 "Li Keqiang sees China operating in an increasingly unpredictable global environment, but with an improving domestic economy that is stable enough to face external challenges," Hans Hendrischke told Xinhua in a recent written interview. 


 The focus of international newspaper headlines on the 7 percent GDP growth target as the "new normal" is misplaced, the economics professor at University of Sydney stressed, pointing out that actually the 7-percent growth was the original target set in China'sHYPERLINK "tel:2011-2015" 2011-2015 development plan. 


 The "new normal," a phrase to describe China's current economic situation, "includes the successful rebalancing of the Chinese economy towards a consumer and service economy," noted Hendrischke, a fluent Mandarin speaker who once worked in China as a diplomat for many years. 


 With consumption now contributing 51 percent to economic growth and the value-added of the service sector accounting for 48 percent of GDP, "these measures are several percentage points above the original targets for 2015," he continued. 


 These achievements, together with those in poverty reduction and social inclusion, "show that the government has been able to over-fulfill on its commitments," said the professor. 


 The "new normal," he added, also includes an acute sense of the risks of the middle income trap facing China's industrial structure, as "Li Keqiang acknowledged that the traditional low-cost manufacturing basis of the Chinese economy is no longer sustainable. 


 "The new normal is a stronger service orientation and high-end manufacturing in areas where China will have to create its own markets by extending its domestic economies of scale, for example in infrastructure and transport, into global markets." 


 Operating in these markets requires institutional reforms, which Hendrischke referred to as another element of the new normal. 


 Reforms on public finances and the state-owned sector "have now moved onto the government agenda as successful experiments, preparing the ground for their wider adoption during the 13th Five-Year Plan," which will be rolled out in early 2016, noted the observer. 


 Internationally, the "new normal" is more complex than the "old normal" of business, Hendrischke said, adding that "the world economy is undergoing profound adjustment, its recovery lacks drive, (and) the influence of geopolitics is increasing." 


 The Chinese premier is anticipating growing economic difficulties, and his response is a more proactive foreign economic policy that integrates foreign trade and investment into China's regional and global strategies, he said. 


 "The overall strategy is to make China an international trade and manufacturing hub with its own value chains extending globally, parallel to the North American and European hubs." 


 Hendrischke noticed that Australia was mentioned twice in Li's report, once in relation to the development of free trade zones and once in regard to the free trade agreement between the two countries. 


 "This shows that Australia is an important player in China's regional strategy," he said. 


 "Australia stands to benefit from the new normal as a contributor to Chinese value chains, in particular those in services, including education, agribusiness, high-end manufacturing and other focal areas in current policies and the next five-year plan."



China targets 6-per-cent trade growth in 2015
7 mars 2015
HYPERLINK "calendar:T1:06:54" 06:54
dpa International Service in English
dpa Deutsche Presse-Agentur   



Beijing (dpa) - The Chinese government said Saturday that it was confident it could meet its target for trade growth this year, state media reported, despite a significant shortfall in 2014.


China is aiming for a 6-per-cent increase in trade volume this year, Commerce Minister Gao Hucheng said on the sidelines of the annual Chinese parliamentary gathering in Beijing.


China's imports and exports increased by 3.4 per cent last year, less than half the official target of 7.5 per cent.


"Domestic and foreign trade environments for China this year are not improved markedly," Gao told reporters at the National People's Congress.


"To fulfill the foreign trade growth target, efforts should be made to implement the existing policies to stabilize foreign trade increase," he said.


He said producing higher-value goods and encouraging new export models like e-commerce would help sustain trade growth.


Gao said China would speed up a free trade deal with South Korea and Japan, and predicted that talks on a deal with ASEAN nations would be wrapped up by the end of the year.


Discussions on a Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) would also finished by the end of 2015, he predicted.


China has the "confidence and ability" to start FTA talks with "any country or region in the world," Gao said.


China Calls U.S. Complaint on Subsidies ‘roundless’ Commerce Minister Gao Hucheng says China respects the World Trade Organization’ rules


By Dinny McMahon   
7 mars 2015
HYPERLINK "calendar:T1:06:26" 06:26
The Wall Street Journal Online


BEIJING— complaint by the U.S. to the World Trade Organization accusing China of unfairly subsidizing a number of industries is “roundless," China's minister of commerce said Saturday, suggesting the move was part of a rising tide of protectionism.


Speaking at a news conference on the sidelines of the National People's Congress, the nation's parliament, Commerce Minister Gao Hucheng said that “rade and investment protectionism is again rearing its head," and this reflected a weak global economy.


“hina always respects WTO rules…nd we will appropriately handle the case through the [WTO] dispute settlement mechanism," he said, repeating a previous pledge by Beijing.


The U.S. opened a new front in a long string of trade disputes with China last month, challenging a broad program Beijing uses to subsidize export businesses ranging from textiles to seafood.


U.S. officials requested consultations with China over the subsidy program, which it said allows local officials to subsidize smaller exporters through “ommon service platforms," giving Chinese companies a small but crucial advantage in exports, contrary to the rules of the World Trade Organization.


The new WTO case emerged as the Obama administration is seeking to negotiate a 12-nation trade bloc among Pacific nations, not including China. President Barack Obama last month said the Pacific agreement would help ensure China doesn't write the rules of trade in the rapidly growing Asia-Pacific economic zone.


Analysts have said that a successful enforcement of existing trade rules, especially broad subsidies that affect diverse industries and congressional districts, may help the administration make the case for the Pacific deal, known as the Trans-Pacific Partnership, and legislation needed to ease its passage.


Ecuador to Set Import Tariffs to Mitigate Oil-Price Drop, Stronger U.S. Dollar; Tariffs to affect more than 30% of imports, will be charged for 15 months


By Mercedes Alvaro   
7 mars 2015
HYPERLINK "calendar:T1:03:59" 03:59
The Wall Street Journal Online


QUITO—Ecuador announced on Friday that it will impose import tariffs of between 5% and 45% for 2,800 products, in a bid to mitigate effects of falling oil prices as well as a strengthening U.S. dollar.


Minister of Foreign Trade Diego Aulestia said at a news conference that the new tariffs, which will affect 32% of Ecuadorean imports, will be charged for 15 months will take effect starting Wednesday.


Mr. Aulestia added that the measure complies with World Trade Organization rules and the local private sector has been consulted on the issue.


Ecuador, which uses the U.S. dollar as its official currency, is trying to protect its balance-of-payments position, which is heavily dependent on the trade account.


Last year Ecuador registered a trade deficit of $727 million.


In early January the country imposed safeguard tariffs of 21% and 7% for Colombia and Peru, respectively, amid the depreciation of the Colombian peso and the Peruvian sol against the U.S. dollar, but on February 27 the tariffs were lifted amid negotiations with both countries.


Since 2012, President Rafael Correa's administration has been restricting imports, setting quotas on foreign goods, including cellphones and cars, and raising duties on several products with the aim to cut the nonoil-trade deficit.


The central bank expects Ecuador's gross domestic product to have expanded about 4% last year.


Obama needs the aid of the GOP; The president’ party is resisting him on the Trans-Pacific Partnership.
By George F. Will   
7 mars 2015
Washington HYPERLINK "http://Post.com/" Post.com


Michael Froman received from a Harvard Law School classmate, Barack Obama, a job that validates the axiom that the unlikelihood of any negotiation reaching agreement grows by the square of the number of parties involved. In trade negotiations, even one's own country is troublesome, as the catfish conundrum illustrates. And the degree of difficulty in achieving a free-trade pact is proportional to the number of Democrats in Congress.


As U.S. trade representative, Froman's goal is completion and ratification of the Trans-Pacific Partnership involving the United States and 11 Asia-Pacific nations, from Chile to South Korea, that generate 37 percent of the world's economic product. The TPP aims not just to liberalize trade but also to reform some of these nations' domestic policies, particularly concerning labor and environmental issues, partly to entice certain Democratic constituencies to soften their opposition to free trade.


Some developing nations, such as Vietnam, welcome some compulsory rationality —eing required by trading rules to limit subsidies to sclerotic state-owned enterprises. But beware of ostensibly altruistic protectionism —rotectionism with moral pretensions. Sometimes poorer nations want higher standards forced on them. Other times rich nations use higher standards to raise production costs in, and thereby lower the competitiveness of, poorer countries.


Negotiation and ratification of the TPP will be easier if Congress gives Obama what prior presidents have received —fast-track" authority guaranteeing an up-or-down vote on the agreement without amendments. But Obama's aggressive aggrandizement of executive power through unilateral actions (regarding the Affordable Care Act, immigration, etc.) has been unprecedented in its sweep and undisguised in its disdain for Congress. This has produced the much-praised but elusive joy of bipartisanship: Conservative Republicans, eager to express separation-of-powers rectitude, are joining liberal Democrats, eager to derail any agreement, in opposing fast track.


Immersed in this political equivalent of three-dimensional chess, the administration is serenely confident that enough Democratic votes will join with large majorities of Republicans to ratify what is negotiated, even without fast track. Even if Republicans representing Southern catfish farmers must be mollified by restricting imports of Asian catfish that are processed in American plants in blue states.


The two largest achievements during Bill Clinton's presidency occurred in spite of Democrats. Welfare reform was forced upon him by a Republican-controlled Congress (he vetoed it twice before relenting), and the North American Free Trade Agreement was ratified in spite of congressional Democrats (a majority of whom voted against it). Now, the TPP —otentially the best result of the Obama years —epends on Republicans.


Democrats are plucking up the protectionist banner unfurled by 19th-century Republicans, who were tireless defenders of the strong (manufacturers) against consumers.HYPERLINK "calendar:T5:Today" Today, many Democrats agree with Rep. Rosa DeLauro (D-Conn.), who says that the United States "has lost 5 million manufacturing jobs since NAFTA." Notice the slippery language ("since NAFTA"), and remember the post hoc ergo propter hoc fallacy: The rooster crows and then the sun rises, therefore the crowing caused the sunrise. Manufacturing jobs have been declining as a share of total employment since 1950 and in actual number since 1979. But because of productivity improvements, manufacturing production and exports are near all-time highs.


Granted, Froman says, some imports substitute for domestic products. But many imports are "intermediate goods" that go into the production of domestic goods, some of which are exported. And, he says, 50 percent of imports from Canada and Mexico, our first- and third-largest trading partners, are used as inputs in the manufacturing of American products. Furthermore, Froman says, free trade is progressive in the sense that lower-income Americans spend a larger portion of their disposable income than more affluent Americans spend on such imports such as food and clothing.


You who are reading this column probably have a chronic, indeed incurable trade deficit with your barber or hair dresser. You regularly buy what he or she sells, yet he or she never buys anything from you. But things somehow work out. As they do between nations, because as the late Robert Bartley, editor of the Wall Street Journal's editorial page, once wrote, "International transactions are always in balance, by definition."


"Protectionism," said Clinton during the NAFTA debate, "is just a fancy word for giving up; we want to compete and win." But now, even more than then, Democrats are the party of a United States in a defensive crouch, flinching from globalization's challenges. Besides, progressivism's constant agenda is to expand the role of government and contract the role of markets in allocating wealth and opportunity. Republicans rescuing Obama's best idea would be an interesting coda to his presidency.




India-Australia likely to ink free trade agreement before end of 2015
7 mars 2015
The Hindu


COIMBATORE,TAMIL NADU India will be the fourth country to have free-trade agreement with Australia India and Australia are expected to sign a free-trade agreement by the end of this year and it will mutually benefit both the countries, Australian Consul General to South India Sean Kelly said here on Thursday.


He was here to participate at an event organised by the Rotary Club of Coimbatore, Indo-Australian Chamber of Commerce and the National Association of Software and Service Companies (Nasscom).


The Consul General said that India would be the fourth country —nly next to Japan, Korea and China —o have a free-trade agreement with Australia.


Mr. Kelly said that Indian investments in Australia across various sectors increased from 600 million Australian Dollars in 2006 to 10 billion in 2013. He added that Australia was interested in doing business with India in the areas of agriculture, dairy, premium food and beverages and pulses. He also said Australia would explore possibilities to bring to India experts and best farm management practices in the dairy sector.


Earlier, Executive Director of the Indo-Australian Chamber of Commerce C. Sarath Chandran gave an overview on business prospects in Australia. President of the Rotary Club G. Karthikeyan also spoke.


India wants early scrapping of US penal duties on steel
Amiti Sen   
7 mars 2015
Business Line (The Hindu)


Essar, Tata Steel, Jindal likely to benefit from WTO verdict India has indicated to the US that it should remove restrictions on imports of its hot-rolled steel products at the earliest in line with a recent ruling of the World Trade Organisation, so that domestic companies can start exporting again.


New Delhi has informed Washington that while it is willing to give it the maximum period of 15 months allowed by the WTO to change its legislation in line with the WTO ruling, it should not ask for more time to implement the new rules.


Companies such as Essar, Tata Steel and Jindal, which had stopped exporting to the US because of the steep penal duties, as high as 577 per cent in some cases, could regain their foothold in the market once these duties are removed, a Commerce Ministry official told BusinessLine .


“e want the US to simultaneously work on implementation of the changed rules and removal of penal duties wherever required. This will ensure that at the end of 15 months, the US will not take more time to decide how the new rules should be applied on the ground,” Commerce Ministry official told BusinessLine .


The WTO, late last year, had ruled against the US’mposition of countervailing duties (anti-subsidy duties) on hot-rolled steel products from India. It said that the US’ractice of ‘umulation’r addition of subsidised and dumped (exports at prices lower than those prevailing in the domestic market of the seller) imports while calculating the injury suffered due to subsidised imports alone was faulty.


It also ruled that state-owned enterprises such as NMDC cannot be categorised as a public body on the grounds that it did not have governmental authority or discharged governmental function.


This means that inputs sold by such enterprises to companies for manufacturing items cannot be viewed as subsidised inputs.


The WTO, late last year, had ruled against the US’mposition of countervailing duties (anti-subsidy duties) on hot-rolled steel products from India.


US airlines let fly at Gulf rivals’53bn in subsidies
SUSAN CAREY   
7 mars 2015
The Australian


THE three largest US airlines have released key details of a report they compiled to highlight $US42 billion ($53.8bn) in government subsidies and unfair benefits their three state-owned Persian Gulf ­ivals have allegedly received since 2004 that they claim allow the fast-growing foreign carriers to distort international trade.


Representatives of American Airlines, United Continental and Delta made public parts of a 55-page report on their Gulf subsidy claims that the US carriers began circulating among Washington policymakers in late January. American, United and Delta are asking their government to call for consultations to modify the “pen skies”ir treaties with the United Arab Emirates and Qatar.


If those negotiations are held, the US three would like further expansion to the US by Emirates Airline, Etihad Airways and Qatar Airways to be curtailed during the talks. And in the absence of a new deal, the US carriers wanted the treaties to be revoked, US airline representatives said. The World Trade Organisation, the normal dispute-resolution body when it comes to subsidies and dumping disagreements, has no oversight over aviation.


Emirates Airline president Tim Clark said the carrier had received a copy of the US carriers’eport. “e will provide a response when we’e had the opportunity to fully review the allegations,”e said. “e are confident that any allegation that Emirates has been subsidised is totally without grounds.”Qatar Airways, based in Doha, and Etihad Airways of Abu Dhabi have said they don’ receive government support.


“e will provide a comment after we have had time to properly review and respond to the claims,”tihad said.


Qatar Airways had no immediate comment.


David Ross, a Wilmer Cutler Pickering Hale and Dorr trade lawyer working for the three US carriers, went page-by-page through a condensed version of the longer report, showing the subsidies alleged to have gone to Emirates, Etihad and Qatar.He said the magnitude of the subsidies was unprecedented and was causing US airlines and their partners to lose market share.


Here comes China 2.0
7 mars 2015
The Australian Financial Review


Economy Beijing is putting its industrial-driven past behind it, creating victims and victors along the way, write Angus Grigg and Lisa Murray.


A Maserati Quattroporte drove into Jianxi Province last summer just as China's credit crunch started to bite. Its destination was the central city of Xiyu, where a loan shark waited. The driver, like many of his contemporaries running trading companies, was in a tight spot. He needed cash, and quickly.


Such haste meant the deep-blue, four-door sedan with its black grill and silver trident was exchanged for 800,000 yuan ($166,000), or half its purchase price just three months earlier.


The terms were simple. The driver had four months to repay the loan at a monthly interest rate of 3 per cent or forfeit the Italian sports car.


For the driver, it was a bet on the Chinese economy - a high-stakes wager the country would return to its super-charged growth of the past two decades as it had so many times before.


The optimistic assumption was based on a belief the government would provide more credit to banks and those trading steel, cement and other finished goods would be flush once again.


The economy would be reinflated and the game would begin anew.


But that bounce-back never did come and the driver lost his prized Maserati, allowing the loan shark, who asked not to be named, to turn an easy profit of 400,000 yuan, he told AFR Weekend.


"Business is pretty good," he says.


That anyone, even the most leveraged trader could fall over in an economy that grew at 7.4 per cent last year would seem perverse. But it's not the actual number that is important.


It's about where it has come from.


In China's case, that number was 10.4 per cent just four years ago and on Thursday, China's Premier Li Keqiang, said it would be about 7 per cent this year - the slowest growth rate in 24 years and the country's so called "new normal".


The question, therefore, must be: what does 7 per cent growth look like for the world's second biggest economy and its major trading partners?


In coal towns and steel cities across central and northern China the outlook is grim.


"My main clients are in the steel, mining and the property sector these days," says the loan shark, who notes there has been a spike in the number of clients forfeiting their property recently after failing to repay loans.


They are victims of what is being labelled "peak China" or perhaps a better description is "old China".


That was a China reliant on the construction of apartments, roads and rail lines for its growth - a growth that required ever greater amounts of the coking coal and iron ore.


But surging corporate and government debt, chronic overcapacity in the manufacturing sector and an estimated 40 million empty apartments forced policymakers to change gears.


They are reducing China's reliance on investment-led growth, while attempting to shut down inefficient steel mills and high-polluting factories.


As a result of this new found discipline and a push towards a greener China, iron ore and coking coal prices have halved over the past year.


No one is brave enough to forecast a rebound and after the Chinese Premier delivered his annual speech to Parliament, iron ore futures dropped 3 per cent to below $US60 a tonne on the weak outlook for growth.


But this is the "old China" - a China the government is looking to put behind it. In the wealthier coastal provinces and some parts of the country's fast-growing west, China 2.0 is emerging.


Here the people are richer than ever.


Like Australia three years ago, China is now experiencing a two-speed economy.


While steel demand barely grew last year, consumer-led real consumption grew at 10.9 per cent.


"China is still the world's best consumption story," says Andy Rothman, a long-time China bull and economist with fund manager Matthews Asia.


A look at the raw numbers shows the wealth effect from two decades of rapid growth. Over the past decade, real urban and rural incomes have more than doubled.


That in turn has created big opportunities for countries like Australia to sell beef, milk and holidays to China's growing number of middle-class consumers.


While China's growth rate is most certainly slowing, it is still becoming a much bigger economy with a bigger footprint in the global market.


According to Danny Quah, a professor at the London School of Economics, a growth rate of 7 per cent this year will result in additional economic output 2.6 times greater than that produced by 12 per cent growth 10 years ago. In dollar terms, Quah says, 7 per cent growth should see China add $US790 billion in output over the next 12 months, in nominal terms at market exchange rates.


That compares with $US274 billion of extra output produced by 12 per cent growth in 2005.


To put these figures into context, China's additional output this year is bigger than the entire Turkish economy.


"If China's growth slows from having switched to greater reliance on domestic consumption, then export opportunities for the rest of the world will be correspondingly larger," Quah wrote in a paper published by the Brookings Institute.


That said, challenges do exist to China's consumer story.


As Premier Li noted in his speech, "the number of new areas of strong consumer activity is limited".


This appears to be a reference to the bottom 40 per cent of Chinese households accounting for just 17.5 per cent of spending, a figure that has barely changed over the past 14 years.


The rosy outlook for Chinese consumption is also contingent on the country continuing to muddle through, without a systemic crisis brought on by the twin evils of a credit bubble and oversupply in the housing market.


Muddling through is no sure thing, especially after a senior government official likened the current economic conditions in China to the months before the 1998 Asian financial crisis.


The counterpoint to this argument is the government's $US3.8 trillion ($4.8 trillion) in foreign currency reserves, which are more than adequate to ward off a sharp devaluation of the yuan as capital leaves the country.


Barring a major external shock, this should ensure the government's rhetoric around the economy being "stable" remains the case.


That means the likes of Shanghai tennis coach Henry Chen will continue to consume, take overseas holidays and enjoy a life that only one generation ago was beyond comprehension.


Driving through the city's old French Concession, in his new Hyundai Sonata, the 34-year-old is hardly troubled by China's slowing economy. His gold iPhone 6 is on the charger and there's an IKEA catalogue on the dashboard. He's talking about his trip to Australia during last month's Chinese New Year holiday.


Chen, his wife and five-year-old daughter spent $15,000 travelling to Cairns, the Gold Coast and Sydney. They ate out every night, took a helicopter ride over Fitzroy Island, stayed in five-star hotels and couldn't believe how cheap a steak was - an observation few Australians would make.


"We've now been to Japan, Korea, Singapore and Thailand," he says.


Chen's parents, however, have never been outside greater China.


"My wife love bags," he says between tennis lessons. "She buys too many bags. Coach, Gucci, Louis Vuitton and Prada."


Not that she added to her collection in Australia, as all their excess baggage was taken up with 20 kilograms of milk powder for their daughter.


By Chinese standards, the Chens, with an annual family income of about $100,000, are beyond middle class.


While Chen sharpens the ground strokes of wealthy Chinese entrepreneurs and expatriates on the tennis court, his wife manages a clothing factory for a Spanish fashion label. As a result, they earn more than a group McKinsey and Company defines as upper middle class.


In 2012, this group - earning between $22,000 and $48,000 a year, numbered just 14 per cent of urban households.


But the consulting firm estimates the segment will grow to 54 per cent of urban households by 2020. That's around 350 million people, more than the entire population of the United States.


These are the people that buy imported food, might join a gym and can afford the occasional overseas holiday.


It is this group Australians are increasingly seeing at major sights around the country. According to federal government figures, 124,000 tourist visas for Chinese nationals were processed in the six weeks leading up to the Lunar New Year holiday, a 23 per cent increase from the previous year.


For Australia, this meant full hotels and crowded restaurants, but this group coming to Australia made up just 2.4 per cent of an estimated 5 million Chinese people who travelled overseas during the holiday.


The problem for Australia is the lift this gives to tourism and other sectors such as education and food will never make up for the economic dent of falling coal and iron ore prices.


The trade statistics make this point. In the year to HYPERLINK "calendar:T2:June 30, 2014" June 30, 2014 iron ore was Australia's top export, valued at $57 billion followed by coal at $9.3 billion. Education-related travel ranked fourth at $4.1 billion, followed by personal travel at $1.9 billion. Agriculture was worth $8.7 billion.


The issue is that Australia can't feed, educate and provide holidays to China in the same way as the country delivered raw materials to build its infrastructure, due to capacity constraints.


There's simply not enough hotel rooms, agricultural land or university places. It means as China moves beyond its infrastructure building phase to an economy more reliant on consumption, Australia is not well equipped make the same shift.


The government's own fact sheet on last year's China free-trade agreement unintentionally made this point.


It killed off the idea of Australian being the "food bowl of Asia" saying the "delicatessen of Asia" was a better label. Australia's place was to provide "niche sales in premium markets", the government said.


While this is a more realistic approach, niche markets will not balance the federal budget or raise overall living standards. Australia, for all its prosperity over the past decade, was tapped into the old Chinese economy.


And few Australians may realise just how much this old China is hurting, as the days of growth at any cost to the environment and the long-term health of the banking system quickly fade. It's far broader than simply a trader who lost his Maserati.


For the province of Inner Mongolia, coal production declined by 41 per cent in January compared with a year earlier, according to the local government.


Overall, China's coal production and consumption fell for the first time in 14 years in 2014, due to the slowing economy and a switch to cleaner fuel sources. "The question is not whether peak coal is going to happen," says Li Shuo, a senior climate analyst with Greenpeace East Asia. "It's whether peak coal has already happened.


The Premier hinted at this in his speech, saying China would "strive for zero-growth in the consumption of coal in key areas of the country" this year.


In iron ore, the chief information officer at MySteel, Xu Xiangchun, said the lower growth target would see China's iron ore consumption decline between 2 per cent and 3 per cent this year. This compares with a rise of 1 per cent last year.


Australia's low-cost producers will be largely immune from this fall in overall demand, as they grab market share from high-cost Chinese miners.


But they will still feel the pain of lower prices, with the World Bank saying during the week the current supply glut was likely to last for the next two years.


It leads to an acute, if painful observation, from one Australian who has been a long-time observer of China.


"Australia is more leveraged to the old China than most Chinese people," he says.


Henry Chen, hitting tennis balls and joking about his wife's obsession with handbags, certainly gives this impression.



World Trade; Studies from Georgetown University Have Provided New Information about World Trade ('Public Body' or Not: Chinese State-Owned Enterprise)
7 mars 2015

Investment Weekly News


2015 MAR 7 (VerticalNews) -- By a News Reporter-Staff News Editor at Investment Weekly News -- Data detailed on World Trade have been presented. According to news originating from Washington, District of Columbia, by VerticalNews editors, the research stated, "Chinese state-owned enterprises (SOEs) pose an increasing number of challenges to the international trade regime. One of the issues is how to regulate state-owned enterprises under the World Trade Organization's rules on subsidies."


Our news journalists obtained a quote from the research from Georgetown University, "This paper tackles the issue of what criteria decide whether an SOE can be a 'public body' that provides subsidies to other enterprises under the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures. Appellate Body's jurisprudence on this issue is not clear, and the debate regarding the proper line between 'public body' and 'private body' continues. This paper is the first attempt to provide a systematic and objective analysis of three different approaches in interpreting the term 'public body', providing a framework for further discussions on the proper legal status of Chinese SOEs under the World Trade Organization (WTO) legal regime."


According to the news editors, the research concluded: "By examining the negotiation history and varying approaches to the issue, this paper identifies the problems of current Appellate Body's approach and provides proposals for future clarification. 'Tithing Chinese SOEs as examples, this paper also analyzes potential impact of different approaches on SOEs."


For more information on this research see: 'Public Body' or Not: Chinese State-Owned Enterprise. Journal of World Trade, 2014;48(1):167-189. Journal of World Trade can be contacted at: Kluwer Law Int, Carnegieplein 5D, HYPERLINK "geo:0,0?q=PO%20Box%2085889%202508%20Cn%20The%20Hague" PO Box 85889, 2508 Cn The Hague, Netherlands.


The news correspondents report that additional information may be obtained from R. Ding, Georgetown University, Center Law, Washington, DC 20057, United States.


Keywords for this news article include: Economics, Washington, World Trade, United States, District of Columbia, North and Central America, Government Agencies Offices and Entities


Our reports deliver fact-based news of research and discoveries from around the world. Copyright 2015, NewsRx LLC




Envoyé depuis un mobile Samsung.


  ________________________________  
Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.