China tries again to join WTO procurement pact
U.S. Sees Gains In New China GPA Offer, But Says Big Gaps Still Remain
Foreign Affairs Cabinet Secretary Amina Mohamed hails WTO’s move to hold meeting in Kenya
Canada, Mexico Seek To Overturn Sole U.S. Win In COOL Compliance Decision
Ukraine and EU hold consultations on additional import duties
RoO being used as non-tariff barrier to exports from LDCs
Sausage row reveals German disquiet over trade talks
Food Min floats proposal to cut food subsidy
Tamil Nadu leads in ensuring GI protection in India
WEF expects record presence at Davos meet; India Inc gears up
 
China tries again to join WTO procurement pact
By Victoria Guida 
POLITICO
1/6/15 2:57 PM EST
 
China has offered to extend preferential access to more types of government contracts in yet another bid to join the World Trade Organization’s Government Procurement Agreement, but sources say the proposal has several major flaws.
Beijing has proposed lowering the threshold for the size of a contract that may receive non-discriminatory treatment under the 45-member plurilateral pact, bringing those limits down to about $200,000 for foreign bids on supplies and services.
Jean Heilman Grier, former senior procurement negotiator at the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative and now a principal at the consulting firm Djaghe, said China’s offer would bring the contract-size thresholds down to about the same level as other participants in the pact. However, China wants to have two years to transition to those levels after joining the agreement, a revised version of which went into effect in April of last year.
The agreement allows for such transitional measures for developing countries, but whether China fits that definition is something the parties to the agreement will have to determine, Grier said.
“I think that’s really going to be a big issue: whether or not China should be able to be eligible for transitional measures. It was intended for … countries that truly are developing,” she said.
All the same, she said, the lowered thresholds show that Beijing is “now getting serious about bringing this to closure,” adding that it was a significant improvement over China’s last offer. “That seems to me like a major development,” Grier added. The proposal is China’s sixth bid to join the GPA.
All GPA members in negotiating their thresholds must strike a balance between covering as many procurement contracts as possible and avoiding the administrative burden of making every little purchase eligible, she said.
China also added five provinces — Shanxi, Heilongjiang, Anhui, Jiangxi and Hainan — to its offer, meaning it has now suggested covering 15 of its 22 provinces. For comparison, 37 of the 50 U.S. states have agreed to be covered under the procurement agreement. Grier said she thought Beijing would probably have to add a few more provinces before being allowed to joint the pact.
In addition to the size of contracts, China also has added new services that foreign companies would be allowed to provide, including legal, urban planning, software implementation, building-cleaning and garbage-disposal services. Grier said Beijing’s services offer is still far from equivalent to other parties, adding that it was difficult to say how long the list would need to be because the commercial relevance of the sectors tends to matter more than the number of sectors covered.
The U.S. allows all but a handful of services sectors to be covered by the agreement.
China also expanded the number of construction services that it would allow under the agreement, though most parties to the GPA cover all construction services, according to Grier.
In addition, Beijing more than doubled the list of “other entities” that it would include in the deal; that category would generally include state-owned enterprises, but China added only one — China Post Group. Many of the additions are universities and hospitals. It also removed additional restrictions surrounding the other entities listed there.
Beijing’s refusal to list state-owned enterprises, particularly in significant areas like electric utility services, has been a huge point of criticism of all of China’s offers thus far, Grier said.
Also potentially problematic is a note in China’s offer in which it reserves the right to apply domestic-content requirements or the transfer of technology from foreign companies participating in procurement bids, she added. “That’s going to be an issue,” she said.
China’s offer also still does not cover its military.
USTR praised China’s new offer, which Beijing released before the end of 2014 in compliance with the commitment it made to the U.S. at the Strategic and Economic Dialogue last year, but added that the proposal did not go far enough in several areas.
“We welcome the new offer and note some significant improvements, such as the lowering of certain thresholds and increased entity coverage,” a USTR spokesman said. “However, our initial review suggests that significant gaps remain. We plan to consult soon with China and other GPA members to discuss the offer and determine next steps in the accession negotiations.”
 
 
U.S. Sees Gains In New China GPA Offer, But Says Big Gaps Still Remain 
World Trade Online
Posted: January 6, 2015 
The United States is highlighting expanded entity coverage and a lowering of the thresholds above which public contracts would be open to foreign suppliers as two significant improvements in China's latest offer to accede to the Government Procurement Agreement (GPA), while making clear that it still falls far short of U.S. demands.
 
"We welcome the new offer and note some significant improvements, such as the lowering of certain thresholds and increased entity coverage," a spokesman for the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative said in an e-mailed statement. "However, our initial review suggests that significant gaps remain."
 
The spokesman did not specify what the remaining gaps are. But a copy of China's confidential offer obtained by Inside U.S. Trade reveals that it falls short of demands by the United States, European Union and other GPA parties for Beijing to cover major state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and to remove two broad exclusions that were present in previous offers, among other shortcomings.
 
The new offer, circulated to GPA parties on Dec. 23, is China's sixth since launching its accession negotiations in 2008, although it is formally known as the fifth revised offer. The spokesman said the U.S. plans to "consult soon with China and other GPA Members to discuss the offer and determine next steps in the accession negotiations."
 
On entity coverage, the primary improvement in China's offer is on sub-central government entities. Specifically, the new offer adds five provinces of Shanxi, Heilongjiang, Anhui, Jiangxi and Hainan to the list of sub-central jurisdictions that would open up their procurement to foreign bidders from GPA signatories.
 
This is on top of the 10 provinces and four municipalities listed in China's previous offer, tabled in December 2013. But it falls short of the U.S. request for China to cover all of its 22 provinces, four municipalities and five autonomous regions.
 
Beijing has proposed a staged approach under which some of its provinces and municipalities would be covered immediately when the GPA enters into force for China, while others would be covered three years after that date. All of the five new provinces in China's latest offer would be placed in the latter category.
 
China's new offer lowers thresholds across the board -- for central, sub-central, and other government entities -- while maintaining an approach of phasing them in over three years. In some cases, China's new thresholds are in line with those applied by other GPA parties.
 
This is the case for the thresholds for central government entities, which would be phased in after three years to 130,000 Special Drawing Rights (SDRs) for goods and services and 5 million SDRs for construction services.
 
These are the same thresholds which the U.S. and the European Union apply to central government entities and which the U.S. had demanded China adopt. China's previous offer had proposed phasing its thresholds on central government entities to 200,000 SDRs for goods and services and 15 million for construction services.
 
One SDR, a standard of value used by the International Monetary Fund and based on a basket of major currencies, was valued at approximately $1.43 on Jan. 6.
 
On sub-central entities, China's new offer lowers the thresholds that will be applied from the third year to 355,000 SDRs for goods and services and 15 million SDRs for construction services. This is partly in line with the U.S., which currently applies a threshold of 355,000 SDRs for procurement of goods and services and 5 million SDRs for construction services.
 
But the U.S. in a 2012 request for improvements had demanded that China lower the thresholds for sub-central entities to 200,000 SDRs for goods and services and 5 million SDRs for construction services. Those are the thresholds currently applied by the EU for sub-central entities.
 
China's new offer also reduces the thresholds that would apply to other government entities listed in Annex 3, which is where GPA parties typically list SOEs. Under the new offer, the thresholds beginning in the third year for such entities would be set at 400,000 SDRs for goods and services, and 15 million SDRs for construction services.
 
This is partly in line with the thresholds applied by the U.S. and EU, which both apply thresholds of 400,000 SDRs or lower for goods and services and 5 million SDRs for construction services. The U.S. in 2012 had demanded that China lower these thresholds to 160,000 SDRs and 5 million SDRs respectively.
 
With respect to SOEs, China's new offer still falls far short of U.S. demands that Beijing cover any state-owned or state-invested firms that conduct procurement for government purposes or are "created, established, or otherwise authorized to undertake infrastructure or other construction projects for government purposes."
 
That said, the new offer does add some new entities such as China Post Group, the Agricultural Development Bank of China and several hospitals and universities to its Annex 3.
 
China's new offer retains two out of three broad exclusions to GPA rules that other parties had found objectionable. The first exclusion maintained in China's new offer allows China to deviate from the GPA's non-discrimination rules in certain procurements when not doing so would impair "important national policy objectives." The second one allows China to require the incorporation of domestic content, transfer of technology or other offset measures for covered procurements. Both are included in Annex 7, which lists "general notes" to coverage.
 
However, China's new offer does remove a third broad exclusion to coverage of central government entities that many GPA parties had urged China to drop. That restriction, present in China's previous offers, had limited coverage of central government entities to their offices in Beijing.
 
While the improvements on coverage and thresholds were highlighted as significant by USTR, China's new offer also includes other changes. For instance, it expands coverage of services by including five new sectors and seven new subsectors of construction services.
 
The five new service sectors that China proposes to cover are legal services; urban planning services; software implementation services; building-cleaning services; and refuse disposal services, not including disposal of radioactive waste.
 
But these service sectors continue to be defined more narrowly than the U.S. has requested. This is because they are all listed using three or more digits of the Central Products Classifcation (CPC) code, while the U.S. has called for China to make services commitments using the broader two-digit CPC code.
 
Among the seven new subsectors of construction services are construction work for warehouses and industrial buildings; educational buildings; health buildings and "other buildings." The other three new subsectors are construction work for civil engineering, and special trade construction work for foundations and water well drilling.
 
 
Foreign Affairs Cabinet Secretary Amina Mohamed hails WTO’s move to hold meeting in Kenya
BY Luke Anami
The Standard
January 7th 2015 at 00:00 GMT +3
 
Foreign Affairs and International Trade Cabinet Secretary Amina Mohamed has welcomed the World Trade Organisation’s (WTO) decision to hold the 10th ministerial conference (MC10) in Nairobi this year. She says the move is a boost to the financial sectors in the country.
 
The conference that will take place from December 15 to 18, in Nairobi, is the topmost decision-making body that meets every two years. It brings together all WTO members - countries or customs unions. “Hosting the WTO ministerial conference would be a huge boost to our economy as it is likely to influence future investments,” Ms Mohamed said.
 
“We expect to receive visitors from all parts of the world - a move that will have a direct bearing on the service sectors including banking and hospitality industry.” Kenya made its request to host MC10 on behalf of all African countries, both the 42 that are WTO members and those that are still in the process of accession. The move makes it the first African country to host the WTO ministerial conference since 1996.
 
Food security
 
The last conference was held in Bali, Indonesia, in 2013, where ministers adopted the “Bali Package” - a series of decisions aimed at streamlining trade. The move allowed developing countries more options for providing food security, boosting least-developed countries’ trade and generally accelerating development.
 
“When WTO members arrive in Kenya this year for our tenth ministerial conference, let members know they will be hosted by the entire continent of Africa,” the CS said. Ms Amina expects more than two thirds, if not all of the WTO members, to ratify the Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA).
 
This will see the agreement come into force before the tenth ministerial conference. “We would also like to see consensus on a broad-based, balanced Post-Bali Work Programme that responds to the imperatives of the global economy for recovery, growth, jobs and development that is sustainable and safeguards our planet,” Ms Mohamed said at the WTO General Council meeting in Geneva, late last year.
 
The TFA negotiations were concluded in December 2013 at the Bali Ministerial Conference. TFA is expected to improve movement of goods on transit and ease release and clearance among WTO member countries. It is expected to reduce costs that accrue during the movement of goods across borders by reducing paperwork, declaration forms, penalties, and time taken to clear goods at points of entry such as ports and or border crossings.
 
The TFA will come into force once two-thirds of members have completed their domestic ratification process. The last time Kenya hosted a key international trade conference, the African Growth Opportunity Act (Agoa) forum, was in 2010, where President Barrack Obama’s administration was represented by the then Foreign Secretary Hillary Clinton.
 
 
Canada, Mexico Seek To Overturn Sole U.S. Win In COOL Compliance Decision 
World Trade Online
Posted: January 6, 2015 
Canada and Mexico have both filed separate appeals at the World Trade Organization that aim to overturn the sole victory that a WTO compliance panel granted to the United States in a dispute over the U.S. country-of-origin labeling (COOL) regime for beef and pork.
 
The target of the Canadian and Mexican appeals -- which are roughly the same -- is the compliance panel's ruling that an amended U.S. labeling regulation did not violate Article 2.2 of the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT), which requires technical measures to be no more trade restrictive than necessary to fulfill a legitimate objective.
 
That ruling was consistent with the earlier decision of the WTO's Appellate Body, which was evaluating the original COOL regulation at the center of the dispute. Both the compliance panel and Appellate Body found that providing consumers with information through labeling was a legitimate objective, and that neither Canada nor Mexico had sufficiently shown how alternative options would be less trade-restrictive than the U.S. COOL measure.
 
Despite that ruling by the compliance panel, the U.S. still took a major blow when the panel found the amended regulation had not made the measure any less discriminatory -- a violation of Article 2.1 of the TBT Agreement -- and had in fact made things worse for Canadian and Mexican livestock producers.
 
Canada and Mexico make a handful of arguments in trying to tackle the compliance panel's decision with regard to Article 2.2. Among them is the compliance panel's alleged failure to fully analyze how each of the COOL regime's components contribute to its objective.
 
The compliance panel largely focused on three country-of-origin labels -- known as Labels A, B, and C -- because Canada and Mexico had complained that these labels were in violation of Article 2.1 of the TBT Agreement. Canada and Mexico did not raise these complaints with respect to the two other labels, Labels D and E, nor did they propose alternative measures for them. Because of this, the panel excluded two labels from its analysis of Article 2.2.
 
Label A is for meat products that are from the U.S., while Labels B and C are for meat products that are born, raised and slaughtered in multiple countries. Meanwhile, Label D is solely for meat products from one country, while Label E is for ground meat products that could contain multiple countries of origin.
 
Mexico, in its appeal filing, said the compliance panel had failed to "properly consider and take into account the design and operation of Label E (the ground beef label) in its assessment of the amended COOL measure's degree of contribution to the fulfillment of the legitimate objective."
 
Both Canada and Mexico also took issue with the way the compliance panel had conducted its analysis, but did not fully flesh out those arguments in their Dec. 12 filings. They also objected to what they said was a failure by the panel to sufficiently assess the alternative measures they had proposed.
 
The Appellate Body, in its 2012 ruling, said it was not able to fully evaluate the other options because the panel had not analyzed them in its decision. Under WTO rules, the Appellate Body can only examine legal questions, but cannot reopen the factual record.
 
In their new appeals, Canada and Mexico are also asking the Appellate Body review of all five of the labels in terms of whether COOL rule violates Article 2.1 of the TBT Agreement, Canada specifically went out of the way to say it was not taking issue with the compliance panel's overall determination that the COOL measure violated Article 2.1
 
 
Ukraine and EU hold consultations on additional import duties 
6 January 2015
Ukrainian Government News
 
On January 5, the EU and Ukraine held technical consultations on the introduction by Ukraine of additional import duties. The meeting was held in the format of a video conference.

"The parties had held a preliminary technical meeting regarding the introduction by our state of additional import duties under the Law of Ukraine "On measures to stabilize the balance of payments of Ukraine", adopted by the Parliament in late December," director of the department for cooperation with WTO on trade protection Svitlana Zaitseva. She added that consultations would be continued.

The consultations were attended by representatives of the Ministry of Economic Development and Trade, Ministry of Finance from the Ukrainian side, from the EU side- Head of the EU Group of Support for Ukraine Peter Balazs and representatives of the trade block of the European Commission.
 
 
RoO being used as non-tariff barrier to exports from LDCs 
7 January 2015
The Financial Express (Bangladesh)
 
Bangladesh, Jan. 7 -- Trade experts made a fervent call for building the country's trade-related capacity, getting the rules of origin further relaxed and strengthening the infrastructural backbone of the economy to help an optimum expansion of the export market.

The suggestions came from a roundtable discussion on 'Bali Decision on Preferential Rules of Origin for LDCs: Issues for Bangladesh', as strict RoO tags restrict access of the country's products to different overseas markets.

Speakers at the meet highlighted the urgency of taking measures for relaxing the trade rules as Bangladesh is entitled to have preferential treatment to its exports by virtue of being a least-developed country.

Rules of Origin (RoO) are a set of principles applied to determine the originating status of a product imported into a country-essentially fixing a certain amount of local value addition to the item.

But the RoO, according to the speakers, are frequently being used as non-tariff barriers to offer protection to domestic markets from competition. And this tool deprives the LDCs of the benefits associated with the Generalised System of Preferences (GSP).

To protect the nation's interests, the meeting also underscored effectively negotiating the issue, along with other LDCs, with the developed countries.

The Committee of Rules of Origin reviews the developments time to time in line with the global trading regime.

Metropolitan Chamber of Commerce and Industry (MCCI) and Bangladesh Foreign Trade Institute (BFTI) jointly organized the conference at the MCCI conference hall to assess the impacts of rules of origin on export and find ways of making it more productive.

"The Least Developed Countries (LDCs) have been seeking flexible rules-of-origin criteria since the launch of the DDA (Doha Development Agenda) negotiations, to better utilise the preferences accorded to them," said Dr. Mustafa Abid Khan.

Mr Khan, acting Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of the Bangladesh Foreign Trade Institute (BFTI), presented the keynote on the topic of talk on the tricky trade issues.

MCCI President Syed Nasim Manzur, who presided over the meeting, also underscored the need for a flexible and simplified set of rules of origin and strengthening bilateral trade negotiations with individual countries.

"There is confusion about export of pharmaceutical products from LDCs after 2016 as it will need extension of international intellectual property protection rules," said the MCCI president, suggesting more focus on this matter.

The conference was also addressed, among others, by Hedayetullah Al Mamoon, Senior Secretary of the Ministry of Commerce, additional secretary Monoj Kumar Roy, Director-General of the WTO cell of the commerce ministry Amitava Chakraborty and FBCCI adviser Manzur Ahmed.

To get to the goal of building up a middle-income country by the year 2021, commerce secretary Hedayetullah Al Mamoon stressed taking some future strategic plans. "We should negotiate, along with other LDCs, with developed countries for relaxing the rules of origin right now," he said.

Speakers, mainly officials from related government and private organisations and trade bodies, also underscored the need for increasing the country's negotiating capacity especially in value addition and tariff classification, active involvement in various bilateral and multilateral negotiations for other preferential trade arrangements.

According to the keynote paper, the LDCs have been benefiting from the LDC-specific generous rules of origin of the GSP schemes of the EU and Canada.

For Bangladesh, growth of export is higher in the EU, Canada, China and Japan.

For the LDCs, the WTO Bali conference was of high importance. In line with the work programme agreed upon in Bali, subsequent negotiations will require a proactive engagement on the part of LDCs.

The Bali decision, thus, obligates the LDCs to do the necessary homework and pursue and advance their interests through future trade negotiations.

Bangladesh needs to be very careful at multilateral discussions and is required to develop its expertise to achieve goals, said one participant.

He also stressed the need for increase in efficiency and developing infrastructure besides work for relaxing the strict rules of origin.
 
 
Sausage row reveals German disquiet over trade talks
Jeevan Vasagar in Berlin
Financial Times 
January 6, 2015 5:51 pm
 
A small grilled sausage from Bavaria has become the unlikely symbol of German resistance to the transatlantic trade deal being negotiated between the EU and the US, after the country’s agriculture minister warned that “not every sausage can be protected” in the trade talks.

Christian Schmidt, Germany’s agriculture minister, said in an interview with Der Spiegel: “If we want to seize the opportunities of free trade with the enormous American market then we can’t carry on protecting every sausage and cheese speciality.”

Food producers, politicians and campaigners against the trade deal seized on his remarks as evidence that the protection of regional brands would be sacrificed to globalisation.

While GM food and investor protection rules remain the most contentious aspects of the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP), the agriculture minister’s remarks provoked an outcry in support of the Nürnberger Rostbratwurst, a finger-sized pork sausage from Nuremberg which is protected as a regional speciality by the EU.

Progress in the trade talks between the US and the EU to create what would be the world’s biggest free trade bloc has been slow, and there is growing public scepticism towards the deal, particularly in Germany. 
 
Anne Vollmer, spokeswoman for the BVE, a lobby group for the German food and drink industry, said: “Regional specialities must remain regional specialities. We don’t want Nürnberger Rostbratwurst from Kentucky, and Tennessee whiskey from Baden Baden. The seal stands for a designated quality and a designated expertise.”

The sausage in question has been subject to strict local regulation since the 14th century; in the Middle Ages, Nürnberger Rostbratwurst failing to meet the city authorities’ quality standards were dumped into the Pegnitz river, which runs through the Bavarian city of Nuremberg.

The minister’s spokesman later issued a clarification, offering support for protected geographical indications — the EU appellation that covers foodstuffs such as Parma ham and Roquefort. But the spokesman said he believed the rules should be implemented consistently, so that it was clear to Americans that Europeans were keeping to their own standards.

“There are, time and again, problems with Feta cheese, which may only come from Greece and Cyprus,” the minister said in a subsequent interview in which he attempted to damp down the row. “One hears of companies that produce Feta cheese in Denmark.”

Less than 70 German foodstuffs were offered protection under EU rules in 2010, the last year for which comparable figures are available, including also Westphalian ham and Allgauer Weisslacker, a kind of Bavarian cheese. Whereas in France 170 products fall under the protection of the EU and 170 in Italy.

But the products generate significant economic value; sales of Germany’s protected products generated revenues of just over €3.3bn in 2010, according to EU figures, compared with €3bn for French food and drink products.

The minister’s comments have fuelled German suspicions that the TTIP negotiations favour larger corporate interests over consumer protection and Mittelstand or smaller food producers.

Maritta Strasser, a campaigner at Campact, a German advocacy group which campaigns against TTIP, said: “In general, this debate is an example of the danger that TTIP poses.

“Transparent information for consumers and high standards fall by the wayside, that’s what we fear, because big multinational concerns have exclusive access to the negotiating parties.”

Daniel Rosario, spokesman for the EU, insisted that TTIP would not undermine European food brands or weaken intellectual property safeguards.

“On the EU side, we have made clear to our American counterparts that geographical indications are one of our main priorities and we have not agreed and will not agree to reduce the protection of our geographical indications in Europe,” he said. 
Additional reporting by Christian Oliver in Brussels
 
 
Food Min floats proposal to cut food subsidy 
Sanjeeb Mukherjee 
7 January 2015
Business Standard
 
The food ministry has floated a proposal that the subsidy for running grain-based welfare schemes other than the Public Distribution System (PDS) should be borne by the departments concerned and not transferred to the account of the ministry, a plan which would reduce the amount of food subsidy.

This has become all the more imperative as the National Food Security Act (NFSA), once fully implemented across the country, would cover more than half of India’s population, negating the need for allocating grains separately for other departments.

At present, the department of food and public distribution not only supplies wheat and rice for the Public Distribution System (PDS) but also for schemes like mid-day meal, which is run by ministry of human resource development, nutrition programmes run by the ministry of women and child development and also welfare homes like jails, ‘nari-niketans’ etc.

However, the entire subsidy of these programmes run by other ministries and departments is billed to the department of food, which inflates its already high subsidy.

According to the proposal, the subsidy accruing to all these departments and schemes should be borne by them and not passed on the food department.

“This in one go should lower the food subsidy by some amount as the subsidy on one scheme alone was somewhere around Rs 2,750 crore in 2013-14,” a senior official said.

The total food subsidy stood at Rs 92,000 crore in 2013-14 against Rs 85,000 a year earlier. For the current year, the subsidy is pegged at Rs 1,15,000.

However, in the broader context, the plan would transfer subsidy from one account to another and not bring down the subsidy burden on the exchequer, the official said.

He, however, said the change in accounting will help in reflecting a true picture of the expenditure being made on a scheme and would also lead to better control and ownership of the scheme by the department concerned.

Re-distribution of the food subsidy would also make it more compliant with the WTO. Recently, a high-level panel held discussions on the issue.

The nine-member panel, chaired by Food Minister Ram Vilas Paswan, also comprises Commerce Minister Nirmala Sitharaman, Power Minister Piyush Goyal, Chief Economic Advisor Arvind Subramanian and Food Secretary Sudhir Kumar. The panel has been set up by Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

The food law has been rolled out in only 11 states and Union Territories. The Centre has given time till April 4 for other states for its full implementation.

The law aims to provide legal entitlement to 5 kg of subsidised foodgrains per person per month at Rs 1-3/kg to two-third of the country's population.

 
Tamil Nadu leads in ensuring GI protection in India 
C.H. Unnikrishnan 
7 January 2015
Mint
 
Mumbai, Jan. 7 -- Tamil Nadu has emerged as the top Indian state to protect its natural products and industrial skills by filing the highest number of geographical indications (GI) since India established the system of protecting such intellectual property (IP) rights in 2003.

GI is an IP tag on natural and industrial products and traditional skills that is exclusively associated with a particular place of origin.

This not only protects the commercial rights to these assets but also helps the local community to reap their benefits.

Typically, a GI tag conveys an assurance of quality and distinctiveness, essentially attributable to the fact of its origin.

Tamil Nadu has so far registered 24 geographical indications, which include the rights for the popular Kanchipuram silk and Thanjavur paintings. It has filed 26 more applications for geographical indications that are still pending, taking the total to 50.

Uttar Pradesh and Maharashtra were joint second with 39 GIs (both registered and pending) till December 2014. Goa and Punjab claimed the least with two each.

India, as a member of the World Trade Organization (WTO), enacted the Geographical Indications of Goods (Registration and Protection) Act in 1999, and the law came into force with effect from September 2003.

A higher number of GI registrations from a state indicates the diverse resource pool and skills set that it can claim for exclusive commercial exploitation.

It also reflects the level of IP awareness in order to protect the traditional assets in the new IP-driven economy.

India's GI registry, which is part of the office of the Controller General of Patents, Designs and Trademarks, has for the first time updated the data on total GI registrations and filings in the country from September 2003 to December 2014 (the entire period for which the GI regime has been in effect).

Geographical indications have also been registered in India by foreign countries for tapping the local market. One of the most popular among such foreign assets registered in India is Scotch whisky, registered by the UK since 2009.

Although the Indian GI registry has a list of some 490 geographical indications, there are only nine from overseas. These include Champagne and Cognac from France, Parma ham from Italy, Tequila from Mexico, Porto and Douro from Portugal and the range of wines from Napa Valley in the US.

Some well-known products protected by Indian states include Darjeeling tea, Tirupati laddu from Andhra Pradesh, Muga silk from Assam, Goa's Feni, Kashmir's Pashmina wool, Mysore Agarbathi, Bangalore Blue Grapes, Alleppey Coir and Malabar Pepper.

A GI is registered for an initial period of 10 years, which may be renewed from time to time.
 
 
WEF expects record presence at Davos meet; India Inc gears up 
 
Geneva/New Delhi, Jan 6 (PTI) WEF's high-profile annual congregation of the world's rich and powerful at the Swiss ski resort town of Davos will this year host over 300 heads of state and government along with 1,500 business leaders, including more than 100 members of India Inc.

The theme of this year's annual meeting is 'The new global context' and will have Indian industrialist and Jubilant Group head Hari S Bhartia as one of the six co-chairs, Geneva-based World Economic Forum (WEF) said today.

The other co-chairs for the meeting will be World Bank chief Jim Yong Kim, Google Chairman Eric Schmidt, Oxfam International's Executive Director Winnie Byanyima, Alliance Trust's CEO Katherine Garrett-Cox and Brazilian banking giant Itau Unibanco's CEO Roberto Egydio Setubal.

Announcing details, WEF said that a record number of over 2,500 participants from more than 140 countries representing business, government, international bodies, academia, civil society and the media will participate in the 45th Annual Meeting from January 20-24, 2015.

From India, the event is likely to be attended by more than 100 business leaders, besides some senior union ministers and other top government officials.

"In particular, most European countries will be represented by the prime minister, president or chancellor and will be accompanied by strong government delegations. A number of heads of state from Africa will be in Davos as well as most of the leaders from the ASEAN countries," WEF said.

"The key Latin American countries will also be represented at the highest level. China, the US, Japan and Russia will send top-level delegations. The heads of all the world's major international organisations will also be in Davos," it added.

In addition, the annual Davos meet will also convene the heads of the world's leading civil society organisations, world-class academics, including 14 Nobel laureates.

"Today's leaders are facing challenges that are unprecedented in complexity, velocity and interconnectedness. Finding a way to navigate these successfully in 2015 is, therefore, a critical priority for every leader, not just to ensure sustainable growth but to rebuild trust," WEF Founder and Executive Chairman Klaus Schwab said.

With significant participation from all crisis-hit areas in the world, the Davos meet will convene a number of official and unofficial dialogues to stimulate peace-making efforts.

The WEF will also launch 10 major multi-year initiatives such as infrastructure finance and the future of the global financial system.

At the request of the UN Secretary General, it will place special emphasis during the meet on the Post-2015 Development Agenda and next United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change Conference in Paris, and it will provide an ongoing platform for expanding public-private cooperation in support of both, the Forum said.

In addition, there will be a special gathering of trade ministers taking place during the meeting, it added. 
