China ratifies WTO's Trade Facilitation Agreement
IRAN PLANS TO JOIN WTO  POST SANCTIONS
IMF  asks G20 nations to take urgent action for growth
Vietnam, Philippines to set up strategic partnership in November
G20 seeks to lift market mood, douse China fears
New strategic balances to emerge in Indian Ocean, AsPac regions 


China ratifies WTO's Trade Facilitation Agreement
6 septembre 2015
Xinhua's China Economic Information Service


BEIJING, Sept. 4 (Xinhua) -- China has ratified the protocol of World Trade Organization's (WTO's) Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA), the Ministry of Commerce said in a statement on Friday.


China became the 13th member formally accepting the protocol on Sept.4 when Yu Jianhua, China's ambassador to the WTO, submitted an instrument of acceptance to Director-General Roberto Azevedo, according to the statement.


The Trade Facilitation Agreement will enter into force once two-thirds of the WTO members have completed their domestic ratification process.


China called on the other members to pick up speed in adopting the protocol in order to facilitate international trade and lower the trade cost.


Concluded at the WTO's 2013 Bali Ministerial Conference, the TFA contains provisions for expediting the movement, release and clearance of goods, including goods in transit.


It also sets out measures for effective cooperation between customs and other appropriate authorities on trade facilitation and customs compliance issues. It further contains provisions for technical assistance and capacity building in this area. 


IRAN PLANS TO JOIN WTO POST SANCTIONS
6 septembre 2015
Pakistan and Gulf Economist


Iran plans to join the World Trade Organization (WTO) after the lifting of sanctions and a relevant workgroup has already been appointed, the IRNA news agency quoted Iranian Industry, Mining, and Trade Minister Mohammad-Reza Ne'matzadeh as saying last week.


"We are seriously planning to make a balance between our exports and imports given its importance," Neimatzadeh noted, adding, "Urgent planning is required so as to know what measures to take in post-sanctions era to expand our foreign markets." WTO is the only global international organization dealing with the rules of trade between nations. At its heart are the WTO agreements, negotiated and signed by the bulk of the world's trading nations and ratified in their parliaments. The goal is to help producers of goods and services, exporters, and importers conduct their business.


WTO received Iran' membership application on July 19, 1996. The General Council established a Working Party to examine the application of Iran on May 26, 2005. The country submitted its Memorandum on the Foreign Trade Regime in November 2009. Iran's bid for accession into the WTO has long faced the U.S. veto. Washington agreed to drop its opposition as part of a preliminary nuclear agreement in November 2013.


For the WTO membership, Iran has to radically restructure its economy, slash tariffs and reduce state ownerships.


IMF asks G20 nations to take urgent action for growth
5 septembre 2015
Press Trust of India
From Barun Jha


Ankara, Sep 5 (PTI) Asking the world's 20 biggest economies to take urgent action to support growth and jobs, IMF chief Christine Lagarde today flagged the concerns of weakening growth prospects in emerging market economies.


Lagarde said the G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors meeting has taken place at a time of renewed uncertainty for the global economy amidst rising financial market volatility, declining commodity prices, depreciating currencies in some countries, and China's growth transition.


"Downside risks to the outlook have increased, particularly for emerging market economies. Against this backdrop, policy priorities have taken on even more urgency since we last met in April," she said after the meeting.


The major challenge facing the global economy is that growth remains moderate and uneven, she said, adding that for the advanced economies, activity is projected to pick up only modestly this year.


"For the emerging market economies, prospects have weakened in 2015 relative to last year, though some rebound is projected next year. For both the advanced and emerging economies, productivity growth continues to be low," Lagarde said but did not name any country.


Interestingly, Lagarde said here yesterday that India remains among the few emerging economies that continue to grow at a decent pace.


The IMF Managing Director today called for a concerted policy effort to address the challenges, including continued accommodative monetary policy in advanced economies, growth-friendly fiscal policies, and structural reforms to boost potential output and productivity.


"If you ask me about the takeaway from this meeting, I will say it is uncertainty... the only thing that seems to be growing at the moment is unemployment," Lagarde said.


About the US, she said the Federal Reserve has not raised rates for a long time and it would be good if they do it now while ensuring that there is no uncertainty.


"It is also critical that the G20 (nations) increase their efforts to ensure a timely and effective implementation of their growth strategies.


"To keep the commitments made in Brisbane, more emphasis on implementation will be required between now and the G20 Summit in November when, along with the OECD, we will provide our assessment of progress towards the goal of achieving an additional two per cent of GDP growth by 2018," she noted.


Lagarde welcomed G20 nations' additional commitment to take steps to promote greater inclusiveness, and to provide an enabling economic environment for developing countries as they pursue their sustainable development goals.


"I urge the G20 (nations) to actively support the positive outcomes of the Addis Ababa Conference on Financing for Development (FFD) as well as the climate change agenda to be further discussed by global leaders in Paris later this year," she added. 


Vietnam, Philippines to set up strategic partnership in November
5 septembre 2015
Xinhua News Agency


 HO CHI MINH CITY, Sept. 5 (Xinhua) -- Vietnam and the Philippines are expected to close a strategic partnership agreement in November, local online newspaper Tuoi Tre (Youth) News on Saturday quoted a Vietnamese diplomat as saying. 


 The two countries will foster their bilateral cooperation to deal with regional and international issues of mutual concerns, including the South China Sea issue, Vietnamese Ambassador to the Philippines Truong Trieu Duong told Tuoi Tre, citing the draft text of the agreement. 


 The strategic partnership would likely be signed during the APEC Economic Leaders' Meeting, scheduled to be held on Nov. 18-19 in Manila, Philippines, according to the report.


G20 seeks to lift market mood, douse China fears
Stuart WILLIAMS, Aurélia 
5 septembre 2015
Agence France Presse
Ministers and central bank chiefs from the world's top 20 economies sought Saturday to bolster market confidence in the global economy and calm mounting jitters over the fallout from China's slowdown.


Also preoccupying the economic supremos from the G20 is the monetary policy of the US Federal Reserve, with economists warning a rate rise at its next meeting later this month could deal a heavy blow to emerging markets already mired in trouble and, in some cases, recession.


China rattled markets in mid-August with a sudden devaluation of its currency, amplifying concerns about its slowing growth and leading to panic selling on markets.


Sources close to the talks told AFP it is highly improbable that China will be specifically mentioned in the final communique to be published later Saturday after two days of talks in Ankara.


But US Treasury Secretary Jacob Lew pressed his Chinese counterpart on the sidelines of the meeting to improve communication of economic policy and refrain from "competitive devaluation" of its currency to gain advantages for Chinese exporters.


In an unusually strongly-worded statement, a US treasury spokesperson said Lew also noted that it was important for China to signal that it will allow market pressures to drive the yuan "up as well as down".


The Chinese central bank on August 11 devalued the yuan by nearly two percent, surprising markets and raising concerns about the effects of China's economic slowdown and bitter criticism of its opaque communications.


"It would be a very bad thing for the global economy if we get into a pattern of competitive devaluation," a senior US treasury official told reporters, adding the issue would be addressed in the final communique.


The official said there had been "detailed discussions" but the group was agreed "competitive devaluation is a threat that has to be guarded against."


Meanwhile, a long shadow has been cast by uncertainty over the monetary policy of the Fed, which has held its benchmark federal funds rate at the zero level since 2008 to support the economy's recovery from a recession.


While economists say the current robustness of the US economy could justify a rate hike, the so-called lift-off from zero would suck up liquidity badly need by troubled emerging markets.


Key emerging markets are already in severe trouble, in particular Brazil and Russia.


The Institute of International Finance, a global association of financial institutions, said the recent decline in equity and currency values in several emerging markets "has reached crisis proportions".


Even if the Fed were to postpone the mooted rate hike until later this year "it would provide only short-term relief", it added.


London-based consultancy Capital Economics said that on some measures the slowdown in emerging markets in the second quarter of this year means their growth is now not much faster than developed markets.


Host Turkey, whose ambitious President Recep Tayyip Erdogan wants to make his country a top 10 global economy by 2023, is another key emerging market hitting choppy waters as the impressive growth figures of past years slip away.


The Turkish lira on Friday hit a new historic low against the dollar, smashing through the 3.0 to the dollar ceiling, amid continued political uncertainty after inconclusive June 7 elections.


But the Financial Times reported Saturday that the final G20 communique would strike a "reassuring" note and even forecast an increase in global growth.


An official taking part in the discussions said that the communique would be "realistic".


A source close to the negotiations indicated there had been a degree of discord over the tone of the communique at the meeting.


Washington was keen on a statement with an optimistic tone but the International Monetary Fund (IMF) was more prudent and some emerging markets did not even want there to be mention of a global economic "recovery", the source said.


The US treasury official hailed signs of stronger growth in Europe but said "it would be a good if it was growing in a stronger way than it is."


While there was "steady and strong growth" in the US economy, the United States "cannot be the only engine of growth," said the official.


The G20 has also taken up the issue of migration amid the alarm in Europe triggered by the horrifying image of a three-year-old Syrian refugee who drowned off Turkey.


Angel Gurria, the head of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), emphasised at the meeting that "well-managed" migration could bring benefits to developed economies.



New strategic balances to emerge in Indian Ocean, AsPac regions 


5 septembre 2015
Indo-Asian News Service


Two very important statements from Kevin Andrews, Australia's foreign minister, and Kevin Rudd, the country's former prime minister, have opened up the scenario of a newly developing strategic balance in the Indian Ocean and the Asia Pacific regions.


While Andrews has rued Australia's previous decision of walking out from Malabar, a multilateral naval military exercise, because of Chinese demarche, Rudd has earnestly called for India's inclusion in the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) grouping.


Both the statements indicate two very important things.


The first is India's growing importance in the region, of course with active US support. The second is, no doubt, a considerable decrease of Chinese influence in the region. This was not so even a year ago and very few observers could anticipate it. But the defeat of Mahinda Rajapaksa, in first the Sri Lankan presidential election and then in the parliamentary election, has suddenly altered the scenario. In the power game of the region, Rajapaksa was undoubtedly China's most strategically important ally as Sri Lanka is situated just on the threshold of the sea lanes of the Indian Ocean which ensures China's energy supplies by connecting it with the Persian Gulf and the Strait of Hormuz. As the US has shifted the focus of its foreign policy to the Asia Pacific, the Indian Ocean has become doubly important for China.


The timing of the two Australian leaders' statement is important. It has taken place within a very short time of Rajapaksa's defeat. Moreover, by the middle of this month, Australia and India will undertake a joint naval exercise called AUSINDEX off the coast of Visakhapatnam in the Bay of Bengal with a pronounced emphasis on anti-submarine warfare. The two sides will put into use submarines, anti-submarine reconnaissance aircraft, frigates and tankers. The exercise will be so elaborate as to include off-shore as well as on-shore operations.


This is the first bilateral military exercise between India and Australia, which sits on the confluence of the Indian and Pacific Oceans. The message is unmistakable. The countries of the region are now prepared to militarily collaborate with each other in thwarting China's String of Pearls theory - the building up of military bases like Gwadar in Pakistan, Kyaukpyu deep sea port and the Coco islands in Myanmar, Chittagong in Bangladesh and Hambantota and Colombo in Sri Lanka for maintaining a hegemonistic presence in the Bay of Bengal and the Indian Ocean. This was the reason behind China's issuing a demarche to the US, Japan, Australia, India and Singapore after the Exercise Malabar in the Bay of Bengal in 2007.


So far as Exercise Malabar is concerned, China's reactions bear marks of self- contradiction. It has taken exception whenever the exercise was multilateral and held in the Bay of Bengal. In response to China's sensitivities, India and the US kept the exercise within a bilateral parameter and involved other nations like Japan only when the matter moved out of the Bay of Bengal. However, both the US and India have now decided to upgrade the exercise and this is likely to raise further uneasiness in Beijing. But the scale of military hardware - like guided-missile destroyers, guided-missile frigates, nuclear powered attack submarines and the like - that both the US and India have been parading since 2011 can only be described as a response to the gigantic march and modernization that the Chinese navy has undergone in recent years.


Kevin Rudd's description of the Indian economy being worth $2 trillion and his open advocacy for increased Indian presence in the Asia-Pacific market has wider connotations. The import is not merely economic in nature but should be better viewed as an attempt to chalk out an US-India-Australia-Japan axis for overhauling the strategic map in this part of the world. Perhaps the US will never forget the discomfiture it had suffered when China had nearly elbowed Washington out of the East Asia Summit in Kuala Lumpur in 2005. The development had hurt the US so much that the then deputy secretary of state, Richard Armitage, had somberly admitted that his country was not at all doing well in its race with China for influence over the Asia Pacific region.


In the days to come Japan's role may assume critical importance as its relation with China has almost touched the nadir. So long Beijing enjoyed so much influence that it could even line up the regional press against Tokyo. A broad section of observers even suspect Chinese hands behind the sudden spurt of Japanese war crime stories in a section of east and southeast Asian media.


It is to be seen how Japan plays its role in this changing security scenario. Whether Beijing likes it or not, India's ascent seems inevitable as a regional player.


(Amitava Mukherjee is a senior journalist and commentator. The views expressed are personal. He can be contacted at HYPERLINK "mailto:amukherjee57@yahoo.com" amukherjee57@yahoo.com)


