HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO Members to Hold ‘Recalibration’ Meeting on Rules Negotiations
·         HYPERLINK \l "TISA Round This Week Focuses On U.S. Priorities, Sensitivities
·         HYPERLINK \l "(AE) COMMERCE: 12ème round des négociations TiSA
·         HYPERLINK \l "BRICS countries might push for e-commerce agreement within WTO
·         HYPERLINK \l "Mexico hails WTO ruling in "dolphin safe" tuna dispute with U.S.
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO Finds U.S. Tuna Labeling Rules Still Discriminate Against Mexico
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO appellate body rejects Vietnam’s appeal of US antidumping duties on shrimp
·         HYPERLINK \l "India may take WTO action against EU over drug clinical trials - GVK
·         HYPERLINK \l "Abu Dhabi's Etihad Airways CEO warns Europeans against protectionism
·         HYPERLINK \l "Changes to Gulf Open Skies pacts could involve price, capacity dumping rules -Delta CEO
·         HYPERLINK \l "Sops to least developed nations in services won’t threaten local industry: Ministry
·         HYPERLINK \l "Brazil removes suspension of tra fish imports from Vietnam
·         HYPERLINK \l "Being a member of the WTO may not be that easy for Russia – article in Russia Direct online magazine
·         HYPERLINK \l "IMF calls for cut in fossil energy subsidies amid low oil prices
 
WTO Members to Hold ‘Recalibration’ Meeting on Rules Negotiations
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, April 16, 2015
 
April 15 – World Trade Organization members agreed to review the status of their Doha round negotiations on trade rules in a stocktaking meeting scheduled for May 4.
 
The forthcoming meeting will take a factual and objective evaluation of issues that have lingered within the rules negotiations since 2011.
 
The chairman of the WTO's Rules Negotiating Committee, Wayne McCook of Jamaica, proposed the informational briefing at an April 14 committee session.
 
McCook said that members “recognized the need for recalibration and are prepared to engage concretely in the search for doables, although the degree of ambition varies among them.”
 
Rules Negotiations Flounder
 
Members are seeking to address the remaining Bali ministerial goals of liberalizing multilateral rules regarding agriculture, non-agricultural market access (NAMA) and services. They hope to advance a detailed work program by July 31 that may ultimately conclude the 2001 Doha round.
 
Part of the members' work includes negotiations to modernize the Anti-dumping Agreement and the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures. The negotiations also include discussions on improving disciplines on fisheries subsidies and WTO provisions applying to regional trade agreements.
 
These discussions, known generally as the rules negotiations, have fallen to the back burner as members failed to make significant headway in agricultural negations in recent months. Members have divided opinions as to whether rules should be included in the post-Bali work program at all.
 
WTO Director-General Roberto Azevedo recently told members that they should address all Doha round issues together to ensure that progress in one area is not dragged down by a lack of consideration in other negotiations, such as rules.
 
Divisions Remain
 
Developed nations like Australia, Canada and the U.S. questioned whether it would be a productive use of time to rehash old issues that have long burdened the rules negotiations.
 
The stocktaking briefing was encouraged by Japan, which represents the Friends of Anti-dumping Negotiations group.
 
Brazil and India said that they would attend such a briefing but stressed the importance of addressing core Doha round issues—like agriculture, NAMA and services—before engaging on rules issues.
 
 
TISA Round This Week Focuses On U.S. Priorities, Sensitivities
World Trade Online
Posted: April 15, 2015 
 
The twelfth round of negotiations for a Trade In Services Agreement (TISA) being held in Geneva this week focuses on five priority areas, some of which represent U.S. priorities and others that are sensitive for Washington.
 
The April 13-17 round focuses on financial services, telecommunications, and domestic regulation, which are priorities for the U.S. and other participants, including the European Union.
 
The agenda also includes maritime transport and movement of natural persons as service suppliers, according to an April 13 announcement by the European Commission. The EU is chairing this week’s round.
 
The latter two areas are sensitive for the U.S. because maritime trade is governed by the Jones Act, which generally prohibits any foreign built or foreign flagged vessel from engaging in coastwise trade within the United States. The temporary movement of natural persons is controversial to the U.S. because it is perceived as linked to immigration policy by the congressional committees of jurisdiction.
 
The aim of focusing on these five issues is to reach agreement on all but the most controversial elements by a July stocktaking session. Members agreed to narrow their focus at the last round in February after they found an overcrowded agenda yielded little progress.
 
The commission announcement highlights the focus on preparing the July meeting, saying negotiators are aiming to identify the “deal breakers” in each of the issues on the April agenda and define the perimeters of the agreement.
 
The April meeting will also review progress made in the negotiations so far, including on market access. The commission announcement notes that all participants but Pakistan, Paraguay and Uruguay have made their initial offer, but does not mention that the offers by Canada and Mexico omit key sectors.
 
Canada in February said it would present its missing financial services offer in April.
 
 
(AE) COMMERCE: 12ème round des négociations TiSA 
15 April 2015
Bulletin Quotidien Europe
 
Bruxelles, 14/04/2015 (Agence Europe) - L'UE préside cette semaine (13-17 avril) à Genève la 12ème session des négociations pour un accord international sur les services (TiSA).

Cette semaine, les discussions se concentrent sur les services financiers, les télécommunications, le transport maritime, la réglementation intérieure et le mouvement des personnes physiques pour la prestation de services (« mode 4 »). Les négociateurs doivent aussi examiner les progrès réalisés jusqu'ici, ce qui inclut une discussion sur les offres en matière d'accès au marché: à ce stade, tous les pays parties prenantes ont formulé leur offre d'ouverture, à l'exception du Pakistan, du Paraguay et de l'Uruguay.

Assurant la présidence de ce round de négociations, l'UE veut commencer les préparatifs pour un exercice de bilan prévu pour juillet, l'objectif étant de définir le périmètre de l'accord et d'identifier les pierres d'achoppement dans chaque secteur en cours de discussion.

Cinquante pays de l'OMC - Australie, Canada, Chili, Colombie, Costa Rica, Corée du Sud, États-Unis, Hong Kong, Islande, Israël, Japon, Liechtenstein, Mexique, Nouvelle-Zélande, Norvège, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Pérou, Suisse, Taïwan, Turquie, Uruguay et les 28 États membres de l'UE - sont engagés depuis mars 2013 dans cette négociation qui vise à contourner l'impasse du round de Doha sur la libéralisation des échanges de services. Ensemble, ces pays représentent 70% du commerce mondial des services. La Chine et l'île Maurice ont formulé la demande de rejoindre les négociations dans un proche avenir.

Les négociations TiSA portent sur tous les secteurs des services, incluant les TIC, les services de logistique et de transport, les services financiers et les services aux entreprises. Mais l'objectif du futur accord va au-delà de la seule ouverture des marchés des services: il s'agit aussi de développer de nouvelles règles sur le commerce des services, comme celles qui s'appliquent aux marchés publics de services, les procédures d'octroi de licences ou l'accès aux réseaux de communication.

Dans un communiqué, la Commission rappelle toutefois que l'UE exclut que le TiSA englobe les services publics de santé et l'assurance-maladie. « L'UE ne compromettra pas la qualité de ses services de santé publique dans un accord commercial », insiste l'exécutif européen. (Emmanuel Hagry)
 
 
BRICS countries might push for e-commerce agreement within WTO 
 
MOSCOW. April 15 (Interfax) - The BRICS countries (Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa) are discussing the possibility of entering into an electronic commerce agreement, as well as initiating the adoption of such an agreement within the context of the World Trade Organization, Russian First Deputy Economic Development Minister Alexei Likhachev said on Tuesday following a BRICS expert dialog in Moscow on e-commerce issues.

He said the main idea of the dialog is to set the stage for "barrier-free e-commerce among BRICS countries, and in future a common space for barrier-free e-commerce, including harmonized technological standards and a harmonized regulatory base."

"Whether we'll reach a general BRICS agreement on the principles and rules of e-commerce - this is still an open question, it will be discussed, but it's clear that we will develop it within the context of trade among our countries," Likhachev said.

He said BRICS could push for the adoption of an agreement within the WTO concerning the development of e-commerce. "We've already sent our Russian representatives to the relevant WTO committee that handles e-commerce in order to propose a kind of unified approach," Likhachev said.
 
 
Mexico hails WTO ruling in "dolphin safe" tuna dispute with U.S. 
 
Mexico City, Apr 15 (EFE).- The World Trade Organization has found that modifications to U.S. regulations on "dolphin safe" canned-tuna labeling still discriminate against Mexico, authorities here said.

A special WTO group found that changes to U.S. tuna labeling regulations continue to "restrict trade and do not meet that country's objective to inform consumers about harm done to dolphins during the tuna-catching process," Mexico's Economy Secretariat said Tuesday.

"The WTO once again has sided with Mexico, finding that Mexico's fishing method is able to certify and ensure protection for dolphins, whereas other methods cannot provide the same degree of certainty, and yet they carry the 'dolphin safe' label."

The United States has said it will appeal. If the WTO special group's findings are upheld later this year, Mexico would have the right to take retaliatory measures until the discriminatory aspects of U.S. tuna labeling are eliminated.

Stricter U.S. rules adopted in 2013 barred tuna caught by setting on dolphins - the method used in Mexico's Eastern Tropical Pacific, or ETP, large purse seine fishery - from accessing the "dolphin-safe" label.

They also imposed more onerous certification and tracking and verification requirements on tuna caught in the ETP to ensure no harm was done to dolphins.

In its latest findings, the WTO ruled against Mexico on one aspect, saying "the different harms caused by setting on dolphins on the one hand and other tuna fishing methods on the other hand justified the United States' decision to treat those fishing methods differently."

However, it agreed with Mexico that the United States' different certification and tracking and verification requirements discriminated against the Latin American country. EFE
 
 
WTO Finds U.S. Tuna Labeling Rules Still Discriminate Against Mexico
World Trade Online
Posted: April 15, 2015 
A World Trade Organization compliance panel has ruled in favor of Mexico that amended U.S. requirements for "dolphin safe" labeling on tuna continue to violate international trade rules because they still make it harder for Mexican-caught tuna to obtain the label compared to tuna caught in other oceans.
 
The April 14 ruling also expanded the scope of U.S. violations when compared to previous WTO rulings, finding the U.S. violated not only the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT) but also the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). The U.S. plans to appeal the ruling “in the coming months,” Andrew Bates, a spokesman for the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, said in an April 14 statement.
 
The compliance panel's core finding was that the U.S. tuna labeling rule as amended in 2013 continued to violate Article 2.1 of the WTO Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade, which requires countries to ensure that their technical regulations accord products from other WTO members treatment that is no less favorable than that provided to like products originating domestically or in third countries.
 
The U.S. measure did so because it required more onerous certification that no dolphins were harmed for tuna caught in the Eastern Tropical Pacific (ETP), where the bulk of the Mexican fleet operates, than in other oceans, the panel found.
 
Specifically, the amended U.S. measure requires tuna caught in the ETP to be accompanied by a statement from an independent expert observer saying that no dolphins were harmed or intentionally encircled by a fishing net in order to qualify for the “dolphin safe” label. By contrast, ships operating outside the ETP need only to provide a certification by the captain that no dolphins were seriously injured or killed in a tuna catch.
 
The certification requirement for ships operating outside the ETP was strengthened in the 2013 rule in order to try to bring the U.S. into compliance with a 2012 Appellate Body ruling that found the labeling rules were not even-handed in addressing the risks to dolphins. Prior to the change, ship captains outside the ETP only had to certify that they had not intentionally encircled dolphins with a net in order to target schools of tuna congregating under them.
 
But the compliance panel ruled that this new certification requirement still fails to sufficiently match the rigor of the labeling requirement for tuna caught in the ETP.
 
In doing so, it rejected the U.S. defense that the different treatment resulted from a “legitimate regulatory distinction.” The WTO Appellate Body has established in previous rulings that members' technical regulations can discriminate between like products without violating TBT Article 2.1, if a party demonstrates that it has a legitimate regulatory reason for doing so.
 
The U.S. had argued that the amended measure was sufficiently "calibrated" to address the different levels of risks to dolphins in the ETP and in other oceans. Within the ETP, tuna naturally associate with dolphins, making dolphins a bigger target for fishing vessels seeking schools of tuna and putting them at bigger risk of becoming bycatch.
 
But the panel rejected the U.S. argument because it found ship captains outside the ETP were not equipped with the skills to make a reliable certification that no dolphins were harmed, and therefore that the amended U.S. measure does not address the risks to dolphins in fisheries other than the ETP. It therefore found that the different treatment does not stem from a "legitimate regulatory distinction.”
 
In contrast to the initial panel ruling in 2011, the compliance panel found the U.S. had violated Articles I:1 and III:4 of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), which deal with most-favored nation treatment and national treatment, respectively. The initial panel did not rule on these GATT claims due to judicial economy, but the Appellate Body said it was incorrect not to do so, according to one lawyer following the case.
 
The compliance panel based its ruling on GATT Article I and III on similar grounds to its finding under TBT Article 2.1. It found that the differing certification requirements in the amended rule discriminated between Mexican tuna and tuna caught outside the ETP.
 
The compliance panel also found that the U.S. could not shield the measure under Article XX of the GATT by claiming the measure was necessary to protect an exhaustible natural resource, as it failed to meet the "chapeau" language of that article -- which requires that measures not constitute arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination.
 
In order to reach that conclusion, it essentially applied the same logic that it used under Article 2.1 that the differing certification requirements were not the result of a legitimate regulatory distinction.
 
"In the Panel's view, the findings we made in the context of Article 2.1 apply with equal force in the context of the chapeau of Article XX," it wrote. "Insofar as the different certification requirements are not justified by the objective of conserving dolphins by providing consumers with accurate information about the dolphin-safe status of tuna products, we find that this aspect of the amended tuna measure is unjustifiably and arbitrarily discriminatory."
 
The U.S. did win on one point in the ruling, which was the panel's finding that the U.S. was justified in prohibiting tuna caught by intentionally setting nets on dolphins from obtaining the dolphin-safe label. In more clear terms than the Appellate Body, it ruled that this requirement was consistent with Article 2.1.
 
Mexico challenged that this prohibition is unwarranted because tuna can be caught without harm to dolphins using this method, whereas other fishing methods can lead to greater bycatch of other marine life. But the panel accepted that there is evidence that encircling dolphins is particularly harmful to the animals.
 
Bates, the USTR spokesman, said the U.S. was pleased with that aspect of the decision and characterized it as a “mixed ruling.”
 
The Mexican Secretariat of Economy issued a statement welcoming the ruling but did not say whether it would appeal the aspect of the ruling where it failed to succeed.
 
Under the Dispute Settlement Understanding, a party has a maximum of 60 days to appeal a panel report, although a party can seek to have the report adopted by the Dispute Settlement Body sooner, shortening the timeline. But once one party appeals a report, the other party has only five days to notify its own appeal.
 
The Mexican statement noted that if the U.S. does not appeal -- or fails in any eventual appeal -- Mexico will have the right to impose trade retaliation.
 
"The decision of the WTO is another important victory not only for Mexico, but for the environment and all marine species, as well as for consumers who trust in the accuracy of environmental labeling," the statement said.
 
 
WTO appellate body rejects Vietnam’s appeal of US antidumping duties on shrimp 
Mayer Brown LLP
Duane W. Layton, Paulette Vander Schueren and Adrian Verdegay Mena
USA, Vietnam 
Lexology
April 14 2015 
 
The Appellate Body of the World Trade Organization (WTO) has circulated its report in the dispute (reference DS429) brought by Vietnam challenging the imposition of antidumping duties by the United States on imports of frozen warm-water shrimp. The Appellate Body’s report also addressed claims by Vietnam with respect to certain US laws, methodologies and practices of the US Department of Commerce (USDOC).
 
WTO Panel Ruling Under Review
 
The original dispute concerned claims made by Vietnam with respect to the USDOC’s final determinations in various administrative “reviews” of the antidumping duty order. Additionally, Vietnam made claims with respect to the USDOC’s likelihood-of-dumping determination within the expiry review affecting the same product. Other claims brought by Vietnam before the WTO panel included the USDOC’s “zeroing” methodology; the USDOC’s practice with respect to the so-called non-market economy (NME) wide entity rate; and Section 129(c)(1) of the Uruguay Round Agreements Act (URAA).
 
Section 129 of the URAA creates a mechanism governing the implementation of WTO rulings in relation to trade defense investigations. In particular, Section 129(c)(1) provides that Section 129 determinations apply to entries made on or after the date when the US Trade Representative directs the USDOC to revoke or implement a Section 129 determination.
 
The WTO panel found, inter alia, that (i) Vietnam had failed to establish that the USDOC’s simple zeroing methodology in administrative reviews is “a measure of general and prospective application that can be challenged ‘as such’”; (ii) the USDOC’s application of its simple zeroing methodology to calculate dumping “margins” for Vietnam’s shrimp exporters was inconsistent with Article 9.3 of the WTO Anti-dumping Agreement (AD Agreement); (iii) the USDOC’s practice of assuming that all producers in an NME country belong to a single country-wide entity and assigning a single rate to these producers/exporters is inconsistent with Articles 6.10 and 9.2 of the AD Agreement; (iv) Vietnam had failed to establish that Section 129(c)(1) of the URAA is inconsistent “as such” with Articles 1, 9.2, 9.3, 11.1, and 18.1 of the AD Agreement; and (v) the US acted inconsistently with Articles 11.2 and 11.3 of the AD Agreement as a result of the USDOC’s reliance on WTO-inconsistent margins of dumping in its likelihood-of-dumping determination as well as its treatment of requests for revocation made by certain Vietnamese exporters not being individually examined.
 
Appellate Body Ruling
 
On January 6, 2015, Vietnam notified the WTO Dispute Settlement Body (DSB) of its intention to appeal the WTO panel ruling. In its appeal Vietnam claimed that the panel had acted inconsistently with Article 11 of the WTO Dispute Settlement Understanding (DSU) by finding that Vietnam had failed to establish that Section 129(c)(1) of URAA precluded implementation of recommendations and rulings of the DSB with respect to prior unliquidated entries. Vietnam also appealed the WTO panel’s finding that Vietnam had not established that Section 129(c)(1) is inconsistent “as such” with Articles 1, 9.2, 9.3, 11.1, and 18.1 of the AD Agreement.
 
The Appellate Body upheld the panel’s analytical framework when examining that Vietnam had failed to establish that Section 129(c)(1) did not, in and of itself, preclude the implementation of WTO recommendations and rulings with respect to prior unliquidated entries.
 
The Appellate Body also rejected Vietnam’s claim that the panel had not properly relied on the various elements that it examined to inform its understanding of the meaning and effect of Section 129(c)(1). As a result, the Appellate Body found that Vietnam had not established that the panel acted inconsistently with Article 11 of the DSU. Consequently, the Appellate Body did not need to address Vietnam’s request that Section 129(c)(1) was inconsistent “as such” with Articles 1, 9.2, 9.3, 11.1, and 18.1 of the WTO AD Agreement.
 
 
India may take WTO action against EU over drug clinical trials - GVK 
By Zeba Siddiqui

MUMBAI, April 15 (Reuters) - India may go to the World Trade Organisation (WTO) if the European Union does not reconsider a decision to suspend the sale of about 700 generic drugs that were approved based on clinical trials by GVK Biosciences Pvt Ltd, the firm's CEO said.

The European Medicines Agency (EMA) suspension became effective in January, a month after France, Germany, Belgium and Luxembourg suspended the sale of 25 generic drugs that were approved based on trials conducted by GVK Biosciences.

The privately-held company, part of India's infrastructure builder GVK Group, conducts clinical research for domestic and foreign drugmakers.

The regulatory actions were taken after the French watchdog inspected a GVK Biosciences manufacturing plant in southern India last year and found manipulation of data from electrocardiograms for at least five years.

The French regulator said at the time that suspensions were taken out of precaution and there was no reason to suggest the drugs were ineffective or harmful.

The drugs suspended by the EMA include those made by U.S. firms Mylan Inc and Abbott Laboratories, as well as large Indian companies such as Lupin Ltd and Dr Reddy's Laboratories.

After an appeal by the company, the Indian government set up a panel of experts last year to investigate the matter and found no manipulation, GVK Biosciences CEO Manni Kantipudi told Reuters.

An Indian government delegation visited the European authorities between February and March to ask for the suspension to be reconsidered, Kantipudi said.

If that does not happen, New Delhi is ready to take commercial and legal action, which could include action at the WTO, India's Commerce Secretary Rajeev Kher told local daily Hindu BusinessLine last week.

The commerce department did not respond to a request for comment by Reuters.

"There are some legal options, but we will see what comes out of these diplomatic talks and then we and the commerce ministry will decide on what to do," Kantipudi said.

In an email, EMA spokeswoman Rebecca Harding confirmed the meeting with the delegation of the Indian government regarding GVK Biosciences' clinical trials, and said a "re-examination procedure" is ongoing and is expected to be finalised in May 2015.

GVK Biosciences is the latest Indian firm to come under international scrutiny over quality issues. Several large Indian drugmakers have over the past two years faced U.S. and UK sanctions over issues ranging from data fabrication and manipulation, to sanitation. (Editing by Muralikumar Anantharaman) 
 
 
Abu Dhabi's Etihad Airways CEO warns Europeans against protectionism 
By Stanley Carvalho 
 
ABU DHABI, April 15 (Reuters) - The boss of Abu Dhabi's Etihad Airways has warned Europe that it will suffer if it restricts the access of foreign carriers to its market, in a fresh effort by fast-growing Gulf airlines to head off what they see as Western protectionism.

Chief executive James Hogan met with the European Union's Transport Commissioner Violeta Bulc this week to stress the benefits of Etihad's operations to European consumers and economies, an Etihad statement said on Wednesday.

"Etihad Airways is committed to Europe. But growing resistance to us from a handful of protectionist competitors could have unintended consequences well beyond limiting our development," the statement quoted Hogan as saying.

"If our growth is curtailed or our investments in airlines are compromised, the real damage will be to Europe in lost jobs, lost flight connectivity, lost investment in local and national economies and lost consumer choice."

State-owned Etihad is making increasing inroads into Europe, partly through equity investments in Air Berlin, Air Serbia, Aer Lingus and Alitalia.

This has aroused opposition from European carriers such as Air France-KLM and Lufthansa, which along with some U.S. competitors have long complained that the Gulf airlines are benefiting unfairly from interest-free government loans and cheap fuel. The Gulf carriers deny those accusations.

The Etihad statement did not say which particular business issues Hogan was concerned about in Europe, and a spokesman for the airline declined to comment on Wednesday.

Under a bilateral traffic agreement between the United Arab Emirates and Germany, UAE carriers may fly to only four German airports: Frankfurt, Munich, Hamburg and Duesseldorf.

Last month Germany approved a summer flight schedule allowing Air Berlin and Etihad to share some flights not covered by the agreement, such as Berlin-Abu Dhabi and Stuttgart-Abu Dhabi, but the German transport ministry said last week this "should remain an exception".

Emirates airline, based in neighbouring Dubai, has also responded strongly to Western criticism. The airline rejects all allegations of unfair subsidies made by U.S. airlines and will expect an apology from them, Emirates president Tim Clark said last month. [ID:nL6N0WJ4IY}

Etihad's core operations in the EU contributed $1 billion to the combined gross domestic product of the 28 EU nations last year and supported more than 11,000 jobs there, Hogan said. Its purchases of European aircraft and equipment contributed more. (Editing by Andrew Torchia) 
 
 
Changes to Gulf Open Skies pacts could involve price, capacity dumping rules -Delta CEO
By Jeffrey Dastin

April 15 (Reuters) - Potential changes to U.S. Open Skies pacts with Qatar and the United Arab Emirates could involve new rules on price-lowering and capacity-dumping, Delta Air Lines Inc Chief Executive Officer Richard Anderson said on Wednesday.

The remarks during a conference call on the company's earnings represented one of the clearest statements yet by U.S. airlines on what they hope talks between the U.S. and the Gulf states would achieve if they take place.

Delta and other U.S. airlines have charged their Gulf competitors with receiving more than $40 billion in subsidies from their home governments. This, they say, has allowed them to lower prices and begin pushing U.S. airlines out of key markets.

Emirates, Etihad Airways and Qatar Airways have denied the allegations, saying U.S. carriers have lost market share because of inferior service.

"We're in the process of answering questions (from the U.S. government)," Anderson said, "and the end result needs to be like the Chinese steel case or agricultural cases that the U.S. frequently brings (to the World Trade Organization), where you come up with remedies that will address a subsidy."

The Obama administration on Friday solicited comments on the debate and said it expected to begin reviewing submissions by the end of May.

The government has not indicated whether it would discuss the subsidy claims with Qatar and the UAE. (Reporting by Jeffrey Dastin; Editing by Lisa Von Ahn) 
 
 
Sops to least developed nations in services won’t threaten local industry: Ministry
Amiti Sen 
16 April 2015
Business Line (The Hindu)
 
Share of LDCs in India’s services imports is a mere 0.60%, says Commerce Ministry note India’s offer to give preferential treatment to service exporters from least developed countries (LDCs) at the World Trade Organisation (WTO) does not pose a threat to domestic industry, the Commerce Ministry has clarified in an internal note.

“India does not face any threat from LDCs in services, as they do not have capacity to match our service suppliers in most areas,” the note submitted to the Cabinet Secretariat said.

In February, India agreed to give preferential treatment to LDCs in the area of services in line with a commitment taken by WTO members to give easier access to both goods and services from poorer countries. New Delhi offered to waive the visa fee for LDC applicants seeking Indian business and employment visas. It also agreed to give technical assistance and capacity building in financial services, insurance, MSME (micro, small and medium enterprises) sector, agriculture and rural development, railways and specially-designed courses in consultancy services. Technical assistance for development of chartered accountancy and company/corporate secretary professions in LDCs was also offered.

Improved commitments

India took on market access commitments in 15 sub-sectors and improved commitments in four sub-sectors and for a number of categories of professionals from LDCs. “The market access offer made by India is entirely made up of what is autonomously available to all countries on a most favoured nation basis. Most of the offers are pegged at the level of India’s revised offers at WTO,” the note said.

So, India has basically taken on commitments in certain areas of services where it has been offering market access on its own. This means that while no extra market access has been given to LDCs, in future India cannot close down these sectors to LDC exporters even if it chooses to do so for other countries.

However, the Ministry clarified that LDC country exports are so small that they do not hold any challenge for the domestic industry. “In fact, in 2013-14, the share of LDCs in India’s services imports has been a mere 0.60 per cent,” the note said.

The clarification holds significance as preferential access given to certain countries with which India has Free Trade Agreements elicited criticism recently from both industry and some sections of the Government for allegedly hurting domestic players.

In the area of goods, India provides duty free market access on about 96 per cent of items and offers preferential duties for another 2.2 per cent.

 
Brazil removes suspension of tra fish imports from Vietnam 
15 April 2015
Vietnam News Summary
 
Brazil’s latest report to the Vietnamese Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD), states that it has removed the temporary suspension of tra fish imports from Vietnam.

Earlier, Brazil suspended licenses of the tra fish imports from Vietnam from September 22nd, 2014 due to concerns over food hygiene and safety.

After the suspension, MARD’s Department of Animal Health discussed with relevant agencies of the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) to send a letter to the Brazilian Department of Animal Health and Brazilian Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Supply.

According to the letter, the Vietnamese side provided documents to explain that Brazil’s requirement on Vietnam’s emergency plan for the prevention of tra fish diseases was contrary to Vietnam’s technique and in reality also contrary to the regulations of OIE and WTO.

Consequently, on March 27th, Minister of Fisheries and Agriculture of Brazil asked the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Supply of Brazil to re-allow imports of Vietnamese tra fish and reverse the decision on suspension of imports of seafood products from Vietnam.

Brazil is one of the potential export markets for Vietnamese seafood products. In 2013, the country was among Vietnam’s 10 biggest seafood export markets, valued at USD123 million, reported the Vietnam Association of Seafood Exporters and Processors. Of this, tra fish accounted for 99%, worth USD122 million. In 2014, Vietnam passed China to top frozen fillet export in Brazil with about 44,000 tonnes of tra fish in the first eight months this year. (CPV Online – April 14)

 
Being a member of the WTO may not be that easy for Russia – article in Russia Direct online magazine
16 April 2015
RIA Oreanda-News
 
Economy. Moscow. OREANDA-NEWS. April 16, 2015. Even though it is still too early to talk about the results of Russia’s accession to the WTO, it is quite clear that in order to enjoy the potential benefits over the long term, Russia should address a range of important domestic factors today. Trade disputes within the World Trade Organization (WTO) are nothing new, something that Russia is quickly finding out after finally joining the WTO in 2012. China is taking steps to counter EU tariff policies on its poultry and meat products, while the European Union is taking more active action in its dispute with Russia and its tariff reatment of paper products, palm oil and refrigerators.

Following an unfruitful round of consultations and an initial request to establish a panel that was blocked by Russia (a step allowed by WTO rules), the EU decided to take the case into the Dispute Settlement Body of the organization once again, stating that measures are still in place and continue to severely hamper trade. It was only on March 25 when the WTO finally established a panel to investigate this – currently the fifth case overall against Russia.

To those unfamiliar with WTO practices, the establishment of the Dispute Settlement Body does not necessarily mean that one country has started an economic trade war with the other. This is just the usual way the organization operates: The member states challenge each other’s trade policies and negotiate a better way that could benefit all sides the most.

These developments show that Russia is taking steps to start using available instruments more actively and support its stand on major trade policy issues. For instance, one of the questions actively posed by Russia in the WTO concerns EU financial sanctions. Keith Rockwell, director of the information and external relations division of the WTO, explained this to Russian journalists at a WTO workshop in Geneva:

This issue has come up in the General Council, in the Council of Trading Goods, in the Services Council, because the Russians are concerned that their rights under the services agreement are being violated as part of these sanctions. We’d have to wait and see how this process will work itself out, said Rockwell.

Russia’s lack of experience and trade policy specialists

Raising concerns and being able to defend one’s interests in current and future disputes is key to ensure that Russia reaps maximum benefits from being a member of the organization. According to Alexey Portanskiy, professor in the faculty of World Economy and International Affairs at the Higher School of Economics, this is only possible when Russians have enough experience with the WTO.

Unfortunately, Russia lacks such experience. In this regard Russia’s participation in dispute settlement processes, both as a complainant and a respondent, is key because it allows the country, on the one hand, to protect its interests, and on the other, to accumulate experience in the WTO, explains Tatiana Isachenko, an expert on the WTO with a Ph.D. from Moscow State Institute of International Relations (MGIMO-University).

Another problem is that Russia does not have enough highly qualified lawyers and specialists in the field of trade policy. Let’s admit that the time for training such professionals has been lost and now we have to make up for that, Portanskiy points out.

Indeed, notwithstanding significant changes and the emergence of specialized structures (such as the Center of Expertise on WTO issues, the Information and Analytical Center for Foreign Trade, the Center for the Study of the Tariff and Non-Tariff Regulation, and the Russian Mission to the WTO), the situation is still difficult and demand for qualified specialists continues to persist, notes Isachenko.

The lack of qualified experts and personnel often leads to an erroneous interpretation of the rules and regulations and, as a result, the wrong policy decisions, warns Isachenko. Professionals with knowledge of the WTO rules and possibilities of their application to protect the interests of domestic producers should be represented in all major companies involved in foreign trade activities, as well as domestic producers associations.

Russia’s domestic companies are not interested in foreign markets?

Apart from the lack of Russian specialists in international trade disputes, the country’s economic interests also suffer from state officials’ unfamiliarity with potential export opportunities, and domestic producers’ disinterest in entering foreign markets, thinks Ivan Rubanov, head of the analytical group of the expert council of the Agricultural Committee of the Russian State Duma.

Russia hardly uses the WTO mechanisms when it comes to promoting domestic agricultural products. Our agricultural exports are still rather low and represented, to a large extent, by liquid and inexpensive primary products, namely grains and oilseeds. The main problems are provoked by administrative and infrastructure barriers at home, not abroad, he told Russia Direct .

In addition, the expert says, the majority of Russian companies are not competitive enough for developed markets, plus they seem more enthusiastic about new import-substitution opportunities.

Vladimir Salamatov, director general of the World Trade Center Moscow, also acknowledges the positive incentive that the devaluation of Russian national currency gave to Russian enterprises.

At the moment, the devaluation of the ruble creates an additional protection from imports; however, it does not give domestic producers a reason to relax, but, on the contrary, to increase their competitiveness and produce goods that will be in demand not only on the territory of the Customs Union, but on other global markets as well, he says.

Salamatov shares the opinion of the Minister for Trade of the Eurasian Economic Commission Andrei Slepnev in saying that the current economic goal should be not import-substitution in itself, but rather the creation of products that are competitive not only at home, but also abroad. Substitution with outdated and unprofitable products does not make any sense.

Nothing can promote growth better than competition, he points out.

Encouraging domestic producers to enter foreign markets, eradicating administrative barriers and helping local producers get cheaper loans and create sufficient infrastructure will allow small and medium enterprises to increase their share of the GDP from the current 20 percent to the worldwide average share of 50-60 percent, Salamatov believes.

Improving the dialogue between government and business

Another urgent question in the context of Russia’s membership in the WTO concerns the effectiveness of government-business dialogue, which should consist of an open discussion of state economic policy and business participation in the future policymaking processes. What is important here is that the government should be able to quickly address the concerns and feedback coming from the business community, points out Portanskiy.

Unfortunately, we have not achieved this ideal yet: Government officials do not always react to what business representatives are saying, and those speaking for the business are often big business alliances, such as The Russian Union of Industrialists and Entrepreneurs [RSPP], and do not always represent the interests of the whole business community, the expert believes. The business community should be able to debate with the authorities the major political and economic issues that might potentially have a long-term impact on the business environment.

According to Isachenko, in order to address this issue it is necessary to organize the work in a systematic way interacting with industry associations of domestic producers. The main goal should be to convince Russian firms that the WTO agenda is directly related to their business activities.

During the negotiations on Russia's accession to the WTO and during the last two years, RSPP and the Russian Business Council held a significant number of roundtables and seminars on these issues, but in practice, it was not enough, she says.

What are Russia’s achievements so far?

According to the data provided by the World Trade Center Moscow, as a result of two years in the WTO, Russian exports grew by 1.8 percent. This seems to be a relatively small gain, but if looking at specific industries, this number will grow significantly. Although exports of metals and chemical products fell, by 3 and 10 percent respectively, other areas enjoyed an increase in their exports: Machinery and equipment exports grew by 16 percent, mineral resources – by 2 percent, food products – 5 percent, clothing and shoes – by 26 percent.

These signs make us hopeful that membership in the WTO, as planned, will become one of the main drivers of Russian economic growth, says Salamatov.

 
IMF calls for cut in fossil energy subsidies amid low oil prices 
 
WASHINGTON, April 15 (Xinhua) -- Falling oil prices provide a golden opportunity to reduce inefficient fossil energy subsidies in favor of more productive and equitable spending, said the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in a newly-released report Wednesday.

"Energy tax reform could help reduce negative externalities caused by energy consumption, such as pollution and global warming and provide breathing room for growth-enhancing tax reforms -- for example, by lowering taxes on labor to boost employment," said the IMF in its Fiscal Monitor report.

"In developing economies, further reform of energy subsidies could provide space for productive spending on education, health, and infrastructure, as well as for programs to benefit the poor," said the report.

Fossil-fuel subsidies totaled 550 billion U.S. dollars in 2013, more than four times those to renewable energy, said the International Energy Agency at the end of last year.

The report said the lower international oil prices will benefit the world economy as a whole, but it will hurt the public finance of those oil exporters, mainly emerging and middle-income economies.

The fiscal loss associated with lower oil prices is estimated to average 4 percent of gross domestic product (GDP) this year. Country estimates range from close to zero to more than 25 percent of GDP, depending on the contribution of oil revenues to fiscal revenues, said the report.
END
 