WTO deal to cut tariffs on IT products
WTO slashes tariffs on IT goods but implementation held up
WTO lifts duties on tech products
WTO Countries Clinch Deal to End Tariffs on Many High-Tech Goods
ITA-II unlikely to generate commercially meaningful results
Major Economies Agree to Eliminate Tariffs on 201 IT Products
Need to protect Indian interests in new ITA pact: NASSCOM
WTO to cut tariffs on IT products worth over a trillion dollars
Tariff agreement on IT products 'to benefit NZ exporters'
Landmark trade pact on slashing tech tariffs
WTO strikes landmark IT tariffs deal
Trillion-Euro Global High-Tech Trade Deal Agreed
Trade negotiators finalize ITA product expansion pact
CEA Applauds WTO Members' Approval of ITA Product List, Urges Others to Join
WTO seals landmark tariff-cutting IT deal
WTO members try to seal trillion-DOLLAR IT trade deal
WTO strikes 'landmark' deal to cut tariffs on IT products
The Trans-Pacific Partnership: Into the home stretch
(AE) INDIA: Contact to resume at end of August on free trade negotiations

WTO deal to cut tariffs on IT products
Shawn Donnan, World Trade Editor
Financial Times (FT.Com)
 
The US, China, the EU and more than 50 other members of the World Trade Organisation have sealed an agreement to reduce tariffs on IT products including game consoles, semiconductors and printer cartridges in a move that should lead to increased trade and lower prices for consumers.
The deal announced on Friday to add more than 200 categories of products to those covered by the 1997 Information Technology Agreement was hailed as the most significant tariff-reduction move by the WTO in almost two decades.
It will reduce tariffs to zero on products that now account for $1.3tn of the $4tn-plus global trade in IT goods. Items that have become part of everyday living such as satellite navigation devices, video game consoles and solid-state hard drives faced tariffs of up to 30 per cent in some parts of the world.
Roberto Azevêdo, WTO director-general, said IT products now made up some 7 per cent of global trade [https://www.wto.org/english/news_e/news15_e/ita_23jul15_e.htm] and had overtaken that in automotive goods as well as in textiles, clothing, iron and steel combined.
“Eliminating tariffs on trade of this magnitude will have a huge impact. It will support lower prices — including in many other sectors that use IT products as inputs — it will create jobs and it will help to boost GDP growth around the world,” said Mr Azevêdo.
The deal came after the US and China last November overcame deadlock over what products could be included, though it had been delayed in recent months by disagreements between South Korea and China as well as the EU and China.
Although some important classes of products will still not be included, among them LED displays and lithium ion batteries, the technology industry welcomed Friday’s deal as a landmark achievement.
“The ITA expansion is game changing for the technology sector and people who use and love technology around the world,” said Dean Garfield, president and chief executive of the Information Technology Industry Council, which represents the global tech sector.
“This agreement not only makes history by representing the biggest tariff-elimination undertaking achieved by the WTO in nearly two decades, it will open markets, create jobs and spur economic growth around the world, as well as bring down costs for consumers.”
Mr Azevêdo and others hailed the ITA update as “the first major tariff-cutting deal at the WTO in 18 years” and said “it shows that the multilateral trading system can deliver”. However, negotiations in Geneva to try to come up with a plan to revive the much bigger and long-stalled Doha round have ground to a halt amid a deadlock over important issues such as agricultural subsidies.
That deadlock comes as the US and other major economies are opting to focus on large regional deals as a more easily deliverable model to push trade liberalisation. The US, Japan and 10 other Pacific Rim economies are meeting in Hawaii over the next 10 days to try to seal the Trans-Pacific Partnership covering some 40 per cent of the global economy.
If agreed it would become the most significant trade deal since the mid-1990s Uruguay Round, which led to the creation of the WTO.
 
WTO slashes tariffs on IT goods but implementation held up
By Tom Miles
Reuters News
 
GENEVA (Reuters) - The World Trade Organization finalised a list of 201 information technology products to be freed from import tariffs in a $1.3 trillion deal on Friday, but said it was still short of the critical mass of countries needed to put it into force.
The first global tariff-cutting deal in 18 years will mean consumers should pay less for products such as computers, touch-screen devices, games consoles and hi-fi systems, while companies will see cuts in the cost of machine tools and components, giving a boost to economies globally.
“Today's agreement is a landmark,” WTO Director-General Roberto Azevedo said in a statement, adding that the value of trade involved was worth 7 percent of the global total, more than world trade in cars.
The product list includes new-generation semi-conductors, GPS navigation systems, medical products which include magnetic resonance imaging machines, printed circuits and satellites, the WTO said.
Once in force, the agreement will update the WTO's 18-year-old Information Technology Agreement and add the 201 products to the list of goods covered by zero-tariff and duty-free trade.
Removing tariffs on trade worth $1.3 trillion is expected to give a $190 billion boost to the world economy.
However, five of the 54 WTO members that negotiated the deal - Taiwan, Turkey, Thailand, Colombia and Mauritius - failed to sign up, leaving the deal short of a quorum, measured as 90 percent of world trade in those products, needed to bring it into force for all 161 WTO members.
"The majority have already confirmed their participation. We expect those participants who didn't, that they will soon," Azevedo told reporters. "And others who haven't even participated before have expressed their interest in joining."
The five who had not yet signed up had different reasons for doing so, such as needing more time to consult with their ministries or because key officials were traveling, he said.
U.S. Ambassador Michael Punke said he was confident that those who had not signed up would join soon.
"This was the best possible outcome," he said.
U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman said more than $100 billion of U.S. exports alone would be covered by the updated agreement and industry estimates showed the removal of tariffs could support up to 60,000 additional jobs. 
"ITA’s expansion is great news for the American workers and businesses that design, manufacture and export state-of-the-art technology and information products, ranging from MRI machines to semiconductors to video game consoles," he said in a statement.
EU Trade Commissioner Cecilia Malmstrom said: "This deal will cut costs for consumers and business – in particular for smaller firms, which have been hit especially hard by excessive tariffs in the past."
Technology manufacturers such as General Electric Co <GE.N>, Intel Corporation <INTC.O>, Texas Instruments Inc <TXN.O>, Microsoft Corp <MSFT.O> and Nintendo Co <7974.T> are among companies expected to benefit from the deal.
Intel welcomed the range of products covered.
"That definitely impacts Intel and that’s important, but also as important are the other technologies that it covers that were not even dreamt of when the original ITA was negotiated," said Intel communications director Lisa Malloy.
 
WTO slashes tariffs on IT goods but implementation held up
Channel NewsAsia

See article Tom Miles, identical 
 
WTO lifts duties on tech products
Shanghai Daily
 
DOZENS of countries have agreed to abolish duties on more than 200 technology products — from advanced computer chips to GPS devices, printer cartridges and video-game consoles.
The agreement, which was announced yesterday, marks the World Trade Organization’s first tariff-killing deal in 18 years.
The deal is an expansion of the 1997 Information Technology Agreement, which includes 80 WTO members. The updated accord covers products that generate US$1 trillion in annual global revenue, including US$100 billion a year for American companies.
The worldwide figure is equivalent to the total global trade in iron, steel, textiles and clothing combined, the WTO said.
Not all 161 WTO member economies signed up to the expanded deal, but all will benefit because it eliminates the tariffs on dozens of tech products regardless of which WTO economy they come from.
Tariffs are taxes imposed by governments around the world on imported goods.
Dean Garfield, president of the Information Technology Industry Council trade group in Washington, said the deal “will open markets, create jobs and spur economic growth around the world, as well as bring down costs for consumers.”
Talks on revising the technology agreement began in 2012. The breakthrough occurred when the United States and China worked out most of their differences during Chinese President Xi Jinping’s visit to Washington in November.
Negotiators still must complete technical details and a timetable for eliminating the tariffs. The work is expected to be completed by the time WTO members meet in Nairobi, Kenya, in December.
US Trade Representative Michael Froman called the deal “great news for American businesses that design manufacture and export technology and information products.”
His office said the deal will support 60,000 American jobs.
 
WTO Countries Clinch Deal to End Tariffs on Many High-Tech Goods
Dow Jones Top Global Market Stories
 
More than 50 countries have completed a deal through the World Trade Organization to eliminate tariffs on a range of high-tech goods, the European Commission said Friday.
The deal, which follows a breakthrough during President Barack Obama's trip to China last year, marks the first major agreement to cut tariffs through the World Trade Organization this century. It builds on a previous WTO information-technology agreement, or ITA, that many officials saw as woefully out of date because it didn't cover products that were invented or became popular after 1997.
The WTO estimates the items covered by the tariff cuts to be worth $1 trillion a year in total trade.
"We've worked hard to broker this compromise between different countries and to find the best solutions for Europe," said Cecilia Malmströ m, the European Union's trade chief. "This deal will cut costs for consumers and business—in particular for smaller firms, which have been hit especially hard by excessive tariffs in the past."
U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman said: "ITA's expansion is great news for the American workers and businesses that design, manufacture, and export state-of-the-art technology and information products, ranging from MRI machines to semiconductors to video game consoles."
Talks for the technology deal [http://www.wsj.com/articles/global-tech-firms-stand-to-gain-from-tariff-drop-1415731151] had long been stalled, with other countries accusing Beijing of trying to exclude too many items from the list for tariff elimination to protect rapidly evolving Chinese industries from competition from more advanced economies and retain import tariff revenue on components.
In the end, officials from the major economies agreed to eliminate tariffs on more than 200 items over time, including advanced microchips, GPS devices, printer ink cartridges, videogame consoles and magnetic resonance imaging machines, which face tariffs of up to 8% in the countries involved.
"This is a significant win for public health," said a spokesman for General Electric Co., which makes MRI machines in South Carolina and Wisconsin. "We urge all partners to implement a quick phase out of tariffs so that patients can benefit from enhanced access as soon as possible."
The U.S. exports $100 billion a year in products affected by the talks, officials said. Besides manufacturers, consumers may benefit from lower prices on imported goods.
The U.S. and other countries launched efforts to expand the technology agreement in 2012, and the WTO said Saturday that 54 member countries were edging close to an ITA agreement. "By taking this step, WTO members will help to provide a jump-start to the global economy and underline the WTO's role as the central global forum for trade negotiations," the WTO's director-general, Roberto Azevê do, said Saturday.
 
ITA-II unlikely to generate commercially meaningful results
D. Ravi Kanth
Mint
 
A second-generation Information Technology Agreement (ITA), showcased as a major tariff elimination agreement, involving 201 products among a core group of countries at the World Trade Organization (WTO), is unlikely to generate commercially meaningful results.
"The presence of close to 50 ex-outs in the final agreement, as well as the exclusion of major IT products of the 21st century such as LCD (liquid crystal display) terminals and hardware items in mobile telephony, is not likely to generate commercially meaningful results," said a trade official from an East Asian country, which is a major supplier of IT products.
However, the agreement is "systemically" important, the official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, added.
A European Union (EU) official described ITA-II as an ambitious agreement with enormous potential.
Ex-outs is trade jargon for a sub-category or a part of the main harmonized tariff line. Effectively, the tariff elimination will not cover the part or the sub-category as specified in the ex-out but will include the main harmonized tariff line.
The core group that finalized ITA-II includes the EU, the US, Japan, China, Korea, Australia, Switzerland, Norway, New Zealand, Singapore, South Korea, Turkey, Taiwan, Malaysia, Thailand, the Philippines, Hong Kong, Costa Rica, Israel, Croatia, Bahrain, Montenegro, Iceland, Guatemala, Colombia, and Albania.
Products in ITA-II include, among others, several advanced medical devices, machines which perform two or more of the functions of printing, copying or facsimile transmission, duplicating machines, machines and apparatus for the manufacture of boules or wafers, machines and apparatus for the manufacture of semiconductor devices or of electronic integrated circuits, machines and apparatus for the manufacture of flat panel displays, microphones and stands, audio-frequency electric amplifiers, smart cards, solid-state non-volatile storage devices, memories, amplifiers, electro-cardiographs, ultrasonic scanning apparatus and X-ray tubes.
"Today's agreement is a landmark," said WTO director general Roberto Azevedo. "It is a big deal because the trade covered in this agreement is comparable to the annual global trade in iron, steel, textiles and clothing combined."
WTO has maintained that the overall trade of the products covered by the latest agreement is valued at about $1.3 trillion.
But several trade officials contested the WTO's projection of anticipated gains from ITA-II. "If big-ticket items are excluded from the list which now includes one-third of ex-outs, then you could safely argue that the potential of $1.3 trillion turnover is over the top," said an official from an IT-exporting country on condition of anonymity.
Another trade official argued that "the World Trade Organization had claimed $1 trillion gains from the Trade Facilitation Agreement but the actual benefits are between $64 billion and $300 billion and, therefore, one cannot take the $1 trillion for ITA-II seriously".
The ITA-II agreement, which includes 155 major tariff lines based on HS-2007 classification plus 46 ex-outs, was adopted on Friday even though some members sought time for getting approval from their capitals. The countries that sought time include Thailand, Turkey, Taiwan, Colombia and Mauritius.
"A small number of countries are in the process of receiving a clearance from their capitals," EU trade envoy Angelos Pangratis told Mint.
The EU played a major role in finalizing the ITA-II agreement after the talks collapsed last December when China refused to include LCD panels and several other items such as mobile phone processors.
After sustained consultations between negotiators from Korea and China last week at the EU mission, a final compromise was struck between Seoul and Beijing. During the negotiations, China agreed to include lenses used in the electronically complex devices from Korea in the final list instead of LCD panels.
Korea also secured a concession when two of its defensive items concerning medical devices from China were placed in the ex-out category.
But Taiwan expressed sharp concern over the final list of 201 items, suggesting that its products of interest were not taken on board.
China and Korea were unable come to an agreement over a dozen core IT products for the past nine months because Beijing adopted a hardline position on LCD panels, saying it had showed considerable flexibility in its bilateral agreement with the US last year.
The US-China bilateral agreement became the backbone of the ITA-II agreement with other countries merely securing inconsequential gains here and there, according to a negotiator familiar with the discussions.
A majority of developing countries, including India, Brazil, South Africa, and Indonesia, had opted out of ITA-II negotiations. Although India joined ITA in 1996, New Delhi chose to stay out of ITA-II negotiations when they began in 2012.
India has come to the conclusion that ITA, which has been implemented since 1997, severely undermined the growth of the semiconductor and other hardware industries in the country. If anything, the 1997 agreement resulted in the import bill shooting up.
 
Major Economies Agree to Eliminate Tariffs on 201 IT Products
Jiji Press English News Service
 
Major economies including Japan, the United States and China have agreed to eliminate their tariffs on 201 information technology products.
The deal, reached at a meeting in Geneva on Friday of World Trade Organization members participating in the Information Technology Agreement, is expected to be implemented from July 1, 2016.
Japan, whose annual exports of the IT products total 8 trillion yen, is likely to get a tailwind from the latest deal. As the country has already removed its tariffs on most of the goods, the deal's impact on the domestic market is seen to be limited.
The agreement covers digital video cameras, DVD players, game consoles, car navigation systems, and magnetic resonance imaging and computed tomography equipment.
The negotiations were joined by a total of 53 countries and regions, also including 28 European Union member states, South Korea and Australia. Among them, Taiwan and some others deferred their decisions, citing domestic adjustment.
In a statement, WTO Director-General Roberto Azevedo called the agreement as a "landmark," pointing out that annual global trade in the IT products exceeds 1.3 trillion dollars.
"This is the first major tariff-cutting deal at the WTO in 18 years," he said. "I hope that this success will inspire members in other areas of our negotiations."
 
Need to protect Indian interests in new ITA pact: NASSCOM
Sarkaritel
 
With WTO members on Friday agreeing to change the prevalent Information Technology Agreement (ITA), Nasscom said there is a need to protect Indian interests in this move.
While the new move in ITA will bring more goods within the duty-free ambit, NASSCOM president R. Chandrasekhar said restrictions and constraints are coming up outside the ambit of trade agreements like movement of technically skilled people and movement of data across borders.
"These trade agreements do give access to India's market to companies globally. So the question is what are we getting in return and whether our services are getting the reciprocal access," he told media persons on the sidelines of Retail Summit organised by the Indian Chamber of Commerce (ICC).
The ratification will increase the number of goods covered by zero tariff and duty free trade to more than 200 products. Goods including computer software and software media; video game console; printer ink cartridges; GPS devices, medical devices and others are covered under the ITA list.
"What is happening in trade is happening; but restrictions are coming up outside the trade agreements. I think it is important that we need to ensure that even as these global trade agreements are reached which cover the goods, that we do protect our interests in service and technology," said Chandrasekhar.
India has already expressed its reservation over the proposed changes and clauses to the ITA.
 
WTO to cut tariffs on IT products worth over a trillion dollars
Asian News International
 
The World Trade Organisation (WTO) has agreed to cut tariffs on IT products worth over a trillion dollars.
In a statement, it said the tariff cuts would take place over a period of three years on products ranging from GPS systems to touch screens.
The WTO further stated said that the agreement is a landmark one, as the deal covers more than 200 products worth 1.3 trillion US Dollar in annual global trade.
This is larger than global trade in automotive products or trade in textiles, clothing, iron and steel combined.
The WTO said that though only 54 member-states took part in the talks but all 161 nations that make up the organisation can benefit from its terms. (ANI with inputs)
 
Tariff agreement on IT products 'to benefit NZ exporters'
Fuseworks Media
 
Trade Minister Tim Groser has welcomed an agreement reached in Geneva to lower tariffs on over 200 IT related products, building on the WTO's 1996 Ministerial Declaration on Trade in Information Technology Products (ITA).
The agreement will lead to more than 20 WTO Members, including the European Union, progressively eliminating tariffs on a range of IT related products. The range of products covered has been expanded to reflect the significant technological developments that have occurred since the original deal was agreed in 1996. A timetable for eliminating tariffs is expected to be completed by December.
"New Zealand exporters stand to benefit from the expanded list of products, which covers products of export interest to New Zealand to a value currently approaching NZ$1 billion, and includes key exports such as telecommunications equipment," says Mr Groser.
Other products to be included are communication devices, audio-visual products, medical devices, navigational instruments, and machinery and parts used in the manufacturing of IT products.
"Liberalisation of tariffs on these products will allow New Zealand companies better access to a number of key markets, including some not covered by existing free trade agreements such as the European Union."
"The expansion of the range of products covered by the ITA means that New Zealand businesses will be better positioned to participate in global value chains, especially in the high-value manufacturing sector, and should benefit from enhanced innovation and increased productivity."
"The successful agreement - the first negotiated tariff-cutting deal within the WTO in 18 years - is also a positive signal at a time when WTO Members are seeking to forge a consensus on unresolved issues in the Doha Round in preparation for the 10th Ministerial Conference in Nairobi in December."
"There are still procedural steps to be taken before this welcome agreement can be implemented, including Cabinet approval and an examination of the agreement by a Parliamentary select committee."
 
Landmark trade pact on slashing tech tariffs
The Hindu
 
Major trade powers have reached a deal to cut tariffs on around 200 technology products, a decision that could pave the way for lower prices for consumers.
The Geneva-based World Trade Organization says 49 of its members including the United States, China and the 28-country European Union reached a tentative accord that caps three years of talks.
The products on which import duties will be scrapped under Friday’s deal include GPS navigation equipment, medical scanners and new-generation semiconductors.
The deal, which should be finalized by December, expands the scope of the 1996 IT Agreement involving 81 countries. WTO chief Roberto Azevedo called it a ‘landmark’ agreement that covers trade in products valued at over $1.3 trillion a year, or some 7 per cent of global trade. — AP
WTO says 49 of its members including the U.S., China and the 28-country EU reached a tentative accord that caps three years of talks.
 
 
WTO strikes landmark IT tariffs deal
AFP
 
Major exporters of IT products agree to cut tariffs on over 200 products worth about $US1.3 trillion.
The World Trade Organization says major exporters of information technology products have agreed, after years of talks, to cut tariffs in the sector, in the first such deal at the WTO in nearly two decades.
"Today's agreement is a landmark," WTO Director General Roberto Azevedo said in a statement, describing the accord as "the first major tariff cutting deal" at the organisation in 18 years.
The deal covers more than 200 products worth about $US1.3 trillion ($A1.77 trillion) in annual global trade.
The products account "for approximately 7 per cent of total global trade today.
"This is larger than global trade in automotive products - or trade in textiles, clothing, iron and steel combined," the WTO said.
While the full terms of the agreement will not be released until next week, the WTO said the highlights include the elimination of "the majority of tariffs" within three years on products ranging from GPS systems to touch screens.
The deal is an expansion of a pact reached in 1996 by 81 WTO members, known as the Information Technology Agreement (ITA).
In 2012, member states resolved that new terms for the ITA were needed because innovation had advanced so dramatically.
But there were considerable hurdles to striking a broader agreement, notably differences between the United States and China.
In November of last year, President Barack Obama said in Beijing that the two sides had "reached an understanding" on moving the talks forward.
While only 54 WTO member-states took part in the talks, all 161 nations that make up the organisation can benefit from its terms, the WTO said.
 
 
Trillion-Euro Global High-Tech Trade Deal Agreed
Exchange News Direct
 
The European Union, the United States, China and the vast majority of the World Trade Organization (WTO) members that were participating in the negotiations agreed today to eliminate custom duties on 201 high-tech products. The extension of the 1996 Information Technology Agreement (ITA) is the biggest tariff-cutting deal in the WTO in almost two decades. The agreement initiated and brokered by the EU, will benefit both consumers and firms alike by removing customs duties on a wide range of goods, including medical equipment, video games and consoles, home hi-fi systems, headphones, blue-ray/DVR players, semi-conductors, and GPS devices. All in all, the deal will cover €1 trillion in global trade, covering close to 90% of world trade in the products concerned. A total of 54 WTO members [1] [http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-15-5440_en.htm?locale=en#_ftn1] negotiated the expansion of the ITA.
A limited group of countries is expected to confirm its participation in the coming days.
"This is a great deal for consumers, and for companies big and small" said EU Trade CommissionerCecilia Malmström. "We've worked hard to broker this compromise between different countries and to find the best solutions for Europe. This deal will cut costs for consumers and business – in particular for smaller firms, which have been hit especially hard by excessive tariffs in the past. Just as important, this deal shows how we can use the EU's trade policy to encourage innovation in the IT sector – a part of our economy that is crucial for Europe's growth and for creating jobs."
The Commissioner added: "This major achievement adds much-needed momentum to the World Trade Organization. It clearly shows that countries around the world can work together to achieve solutions that benefit everyone. I count on other countries joining soon. And looking ahead, this agreement is an inspiration to step up our efforts in the run-up to the WTO ministerial in Nairobi in December. That will be the 'make or break' meeting for the Doha development round – it will be the last chance to conclude it."
The new, expanded ITA agreement concluded today will reduce the costs for consumers and for manufacturing IT products in Europe. It will offer new market access for many of Europe's high tech companies – some of which are leaders in their fields – and encourage innovation by simplifying access to state-of-the-art technology. As such, it will contribute to the further development of the digital economy in the EU.
The role of the EU
The EU made the original proposal back in 2008 to review and expand the ITA. Other WTO members finally took up the proposal in 2012, when negotiations started. From the outset, the EU proposed liberalising a wide range of goods, including consumer goods with relatively high tariffs in the EU (up to 14%), such as set top boxes, video cameras and cathode ray tube monitors. The EU then played a key role in brokering compromises throughout the negotiations, and chaired the last three negotiating rounds.
Background on ITA expansion
Tariffs will be eliminated within 3 years from the date of application of the agreement, which is foreseen for 1st July 2016. For sensitive products longer phase-out periods will be negotiated to give industry time to adapt to a zero-tariff environment The EU has a trade surplus in the products covered of around € 15 billion. The deal will not cover certain electronic products subject to duties in the EU, such as certain monitors, projectors, non-digital car radios as well as TVs.
The extension of the ITA aimed at broadening the original Information Technology Agreement between Members of the World Trade Organisation (WTO), which came into force in 1997. A total of 54 WTO members negotiated the expansion of the ITA.
Under the original ITA, participants eliminated all customs duties on IT products such as computers, telephones, digital cameras and their parts. Since the ITA was completed and entered into force in 1997, trade in the sector has quadrupled. In May 2012 a number of participants started negotiations to expand ITA to new products. The new agreement will substantially expand the range of products covered, that include consumer and other finished products, parts and components, and machinery used in the manufacturing of IT products (enclosed a summary of the products covered by the ITA expansion).
Commissioner Cecilia Malmström on Twitter [http://twitter.com/MalmstromEU]
ITA-expansion product list, explained
The expansion list covers both consumer and other finished products as well as components and manufacturing equipment.
Examples of finished products
* Multimedia products (GPS, DVD players, smart cards, optical media)
* Multifunctional printing and copying machines, ink cartridges
* Electronics (TV-cameras, video recording, digital car radios, set top boxes)
* Medical equipment: sophisticated medical equipment such as scanners, machines for magnetic resonance imaging, tomography or dental care and ophthalmology
* Video games and consoles
* Routers and switches, microscopes and telescopes
* Weighing and money-changing machines
* Loudspeakers, microphones and headphones
* Telecommunication satellites Examples of parts and components
* Parts and components for production of IT goods and semiconductors, including TV parts and parts and other machinery incorporated in IT products, from smartphones to optical or medical equipment. This includes e.g. lasers, LED modules, touch screens, measuring and weighing instruments, switches, electromagnets, amplification apparatuses, etc.
* Multicomponent integrated circuits (MCOs), which are the latest and future generation chips included in many electronic and other products: over 30 tariff lines included
* Instruments for aeronautical and space navigation Machinery for production of IT goods and semiconductors
* Machine tools for the manufacture of printed circuits or semiconductors and other IT products, filtering machines, and their parts [1] [http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-15-5440_en.htm?locale=en#_ftnref1] The European Union and its 28 Member States; Albania; Australia; Canada; China; Colombia; Costa Rica; Guatemala; Hong Kong, China; Iceland; Israel; Japan; Korea; Malaysia; Mauritius; Montenegro; New Zealand; Norway; the Philippines; Chinese Taipei; Singapore; Switzerland; Thailand; Turkey; and the United States.
 
Trade negotiators finalize ITA product expansion pact 

TR Daily
 
Negotiators from the United States and nearly 50 other countries today finalized an agreement to expand the Information Technology Agreement (ITA) to eliminate tariffs on information and communications technology products accounting for an estimated $1 trillion in annual global sales.
Following a breakthrough in the talks last weekend, the Office of the United States Trade Representative announced a preliminary agreement on the expansion of ITA's scope (TRDaily, July 20), and the pact was finalized today. As a result, tariffs will be eliminated on next-generation semiconductors, Global Positioning System (GPS) devices, video game consoles, software media, magnetic resonance imaging machines, computerized tomography scanners, printer ink cartridges, static converters and inductors, loudspeakers, printed matter/cards to download software and games, video cameras, and other devices.
“ITA’s expansion is great news for the American workers and businesses that design, manufacture, and export state-of-the-art technology and information products, ranging from MRI machines to semiconductors to video game consoles,” said U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman. “President Obama has made expanding trade central to his Middle Class Economics agenda because Made-in-America exports unlock opportunity for Americans. Nowhere is that economic promise more clear than ITA, which will alleviate over 200 tariffs burdening American technology exports all over the world.”
Telecommunications Industry Association Chief Executive Officer Scott Belcher said the expanded ITA would "benefit consumers and businesses alike and is a major victory for the tech sector.
"By removing tariffs on the next generation of high-tech products, this agreement will expand the production and trade of innovative technologies, lower costs and facilitate $1 trillion in global sales," Mr. Belcher said. "We commend U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman and his team for their efforts in negotiating this landmark deal and look forward to the remaining countries quickly signing on so that implementation of the ITA can move forward.”
Information Technology Industry Council President and CEO Dean Garfield called ITA expansion "game changing for the technology sector and people who use and love technology around the world.
"This agreement not only makes history by representing the biggest tariff-elimination undertaking achieved by the WTO in nearly two decades, it will open markets, create jobs and spur economic growth around the world, as well as bring down costs for consumers," Mr. Garfield added.
Sage Chandler, vice president-international trade at the Consumer Electronics Association, said, "Consumers around the world will benefit from lower tariffs on products ranging from life-saving medical devices to audio-video. Almost two decades after its implementation, the ITA is in desperate need of an update. “This expanded agreement means the removal of tariffs on more than $100 billion of products manufactured in the U.S.," Mr. Chandler said. "Among the key product sectors involved, tariffs on AV products such as videogame consoles and loudspeakers, as well as solid state drives and next-generation semiconductors, would fall from as high as 30 percent to zero. Additionally, an expanded ITA will support an estimated 60,000 additional jobs in our country." 

 
CEA Applauds WTO Members' Approval of ITA Product List, Urges Others to Join
Business Wire
 
The following statement is attributed to Sage Chandler, vice president of international trade, Consumer Electronics Association (CEA)(R) , regarding today's announcement that over 50 World Trade Organization (WTO) members have agreed to a product list of over 200 items slated for tariff removal as part of the Information Technology Agreement (ITA) in their countries:
"Today's announcement is a huge step in the right direction for ITA conclusion at the ministers' meeting in Nairobi this December. Consumers around the world will benefit from lower tariffs on products ranging from life-saving medical devices to audio-video (AV). Almost two decades after its implementation, the ITA is in desperate need of an update.
"This expanded agreement means the removal of tariffs on more than $100 billion of products manufactured in the U.S. Among the key product sectors involved, tariffs on AV products such as videogame consoles and loudspeakers, as well as solid state drives and next-generation semiconductors, would fall from as high as 30 percent to zero. Additionally, an expanded ITA will support an estimated 60,000 additional jobs in our country.
"The updated agreement should be finalized as soon as possible to announce the win at December's WTO Nairobi Ministerial, and implemented in July 2016. We urge capitals in Colombia, Mauritius, Taiwan, Thailand and Turkey to address any outstanding concerns and submit their approvals quickly. They are important partners and we would like to have them with us as soon as possible."
About CEA:
The Consumer Electronics Association (CEA) is the technology trade association representing the $286 billion U.S. consumer electronics industry. More than 2,000 companies enjoy the benefits of CEA membership, including legislative and regulatory advocacy, market research, technical training and education, industry promotion, standards development and the fostering of business and strategic relationships. CEA also owns and produces CES -- The Global Stage for Innovation. All profits from CES are reinvested into CEA's industry services. 
 
WTO seals landmark tariff-cutting IT deal
Deutsche Welle
 
World Trade Organization members have finalized a deal to cut tariffs on a wide range of information technology products. Economists said the impact of the accord would be huge, given the sector's economic clout.
WTO member states on Friday agreed to abolish duties on 201 technology products, ranging from advanced computer chips to GPS devices, printer cartridges and video game consoles.
"Today's agreement is a landmark," WTO Director General Roberto Azevedo told journalists.
The accord marked the organization's first tariff-reducing deal in almost two decades and would serve as an expansion of the 1997 Information Technology Agreement, (ITA) which included 80 WTO members.
Officials said the updated accord covered products generating $1 trillion (911 billion euros) in annual global revenues, equal to the trade in iron, steel, textiles and clothing combined, the WTO stated.
The removing of costly tariffs is expected to give the global economy a $190 billion (173.1 billion-euro) boost.
"This deal will cut costs for consumers and business - in particular for smaller firms, which have been hit especially hard by excessive tariffs in the past," said EU Trade Commissioner Cecilia Malmström.
Far-reaching accord
But five of the 54 WTO members that negotiated the deal did not end up signing it, leaving the pact short of the quorum it needed to bring it into force in all 161 WTO countries.
Although not all 161 member countries chose to sign the deal, it will benefit all nations as it eliminates the tariffs on products no matter which WTO country they come from.
"The deal will open markets, create jobs and spur economic growth around the world, as well as bring down costs for consumers," said the president of the Information Technology Industry Council trade group in Washington, Dean Garfield.
Negotiators will still have to sort out some technical details until December when WTO members are due to meet in Nairobi, Kenya.

 
WTO members try to seal trillion-DOLLAR IT trade deal
Business and Finance Daily News Service
 
World Trade Organization (WTO) members met in Geneva on Friday trying to finalize a deal to cut tariffs on dollar 1 trillion of information technology products from video games to medical equipment.
The United States said a deal had been struck, but WTO Director General Roberto Azevedo postponed a press conference at which he and the talks' chairman, European Union Ambassador Angelos Pangratis, had been due to announce the agreement.
"Some delegations needed more time to get full clearance from their capitals. They contacted the chairman Angelos Pangratis and he rescheduled the meeting for three hours later," WTO spokesman Keith Rockwell told Reuters.
Once finalized, the agreement to update the WTO's 18-year-old Information Technology Agreement (ITA) will add more than 200 products to the list of goods covered by zero-tariff and duty-free trade. The U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman said more than dollar 100 billion of U.S. exports alone would be covered by the updated agreement and industry estimates showed the removal of tariffs could support up to 60,000 additional jobs. "ITA's expansion is great news for the American workers and businesses that design, manufacture and export state-of-the-art technology and information products, ranging from MRI machines to semiconductors to video game consoles," Froman said in a statement issued in Washington. Azevedo said last week that the deal, which is the first tariff-cutting agreement in the WTO for 18 years, will jump-start the global economy. "The trade covered in this agreement is comparable to annual global trade in iron, steel, textiles and clothing combined," he said. Technology manufacturers like General Electric Co, Intel Corporation, Texas Instruments Inc, Microsoft Corp and Nintendo Co are among companies expected to benefit from the deal. Additional duty-free products include computer software and software media, video game consoles, printer ink cartridges, GPS devices, medical devices such as MRI machines and next generation semiconductors, the Technology CEO Council said. "That definitely impacts Intel and that's important, but also as important are the other technologies that it covers that were not even dreamt of when the original ITA was negotiated," said Intel communications director Lisa Malloy. "Things like ... health devices and GPS (are) technologies that semiconductors and Intel hope to power in the years to come." (Reuters) 
 
WTO strikes 'landmark' deal to cut tariffs on IT products
Agence France Presse
 
Major exporters of information technology on Friday agreed to cut global tariffs on more than 200 products, in the first such deal struck by the World Trade Organization in nearly two decades.
The pact which came after three years of frequently-stalled negotiations, covers products ranging from video games to touch screens and GPS navigation systems.
In all, the 201 products covered account for roughly $1.3 trillion (1.18 trillion euros) or seven percent of annual global trade.
"Today's agreement is a landmark," WTO Director General Roberto Azevedo said in a statement, describing the accord as "the first major tariff cutting deal" at the organisation in 18 years.
The European Union Trade Commissioner Cecilia Malmstrom described the deal -- which was initiated and brokered by the EU -- as "a great deal for consumers, and for companies big and small".
While the full terms of the agreement will not be released until next week, the WTO said the highlights include the elimination of "the majority of tariffs" on a diverse range of products within three years.
The trade value of the IT products covered amounts to more than the "trade in automotive products - or trade in textiles, clothing, iron and steel combined," Azevedo.
While only 54 WTO member-states took part in the talks, all 161 nations that make up the organisation can benefit from the outcome, the WTO said.
The EU said an additional, "limited" number of countries is expected to confirm its participation in the deal in the coming days.
The tariff reductions are set to start in 2016, but participating countries must by the end of October submit a draft schedule spelling out their plans to meet the terms of the deal.
The agreement is an expansion of a pact reached in 1996 by 81 WTO members, known as the Information Technology Agreement (ITA).
In 2012, member states resolved that the ITA needed to be revised because the world's most valuable IT products had been invented after 1996.
But there were considerable hurdles to striking a broader agreement, notably differences between the United States and China.
There were reports that China was fighting to exclude about 60 new product categories, including certain next-generation silicon chips.
In November 2014, President Barack Obama said in Beijing that the two sides had "reached an understanding" on moving the talks forward.
The WTO said that the deal finalised on Friday has provisions to expand the list of products covered, with changes possibly needed "to reflect future technological development."
The WTO chief claimed the agreement was set to have "a huge impact" by lowering prices, creating jobs and boosting economic growth worldwide.
For the EU's Malmstrom, much of the immediate benefit was likely to be felt by smaller producers.
"This deal will cut costs for consumers and business - in particular for smaller firms, which have been hit especially hard by excessive tariffs in the past," she said.
 
The Trans-Pacific Partnership: Into the home stretch
The Economist
 
For all its flaws, the biggest trade deal in years is good news for the world
FIVE years of trade negotiations, 29 chapters of dense rules and hundreds of tariff lines culminate, in one corner of Asia, in whirring spools of white fabric. Negotiators are still wrangling over the text that aims to establish a new Pacific trade zone, tying together 12 countries from America to Vietnam. But Penfabric, a textile company in Penang, north-western Malaysia, is not waiting around. In one of its mills, bright yellow flags distinguish rolls of high-end fabric from cheaper cloth. Lately, these flags have started to multiply. "We need to be in tune with what America wants," says H. S. Teh, Penfabric's managing director.
The zone, dubbed the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), is the most important free-trade agreement in years. If completed, it will be the largest regional trade deal ever, with its members accounting for nearly 40% of the world economy. The countries leading the negotiations want to set a new standard for what trade agreements cover. They are taking on the morass of regulations, such as local-content rules determining how much of a product must be made from local inputs, that have replaced tariffs as the main obstacle to the free flow of goods across borders. After repeated failures to seal big global deals--the World Trade Organisation (WTO) has turned its focus to specific industries rather than comprehensive agreements (see "Trade deals: Bargaining chips")--the TPP actually has a good chance at success. A meeting of trade ministers in Maui from July 28th to 31st is expected to put the final touches on the deal.
Gauging the exact benefits of the TPP is tricky, not least because the trade talks are still confidential. Critics have bemoaned the lack of disclosure but conducting negotiations in the open would have been a sure way to undermine them. Governments will have several months to review the final deal before deciding whether to give their assent.
Even when the details are known, it will still be hard to assess the impact. The most authoritative study, published by the Peterson Institute for International Economics, reckons the TPP will enlarge the economies of the 12 member states by $285 billion by 2025. But, as with any economic model, reality is more complex. Benefits could be smaller if exemptions on tariffs blunt its impact--Japan, for one, is still trying to protect its "sacred" food, such as rice, wheat and beef, from imports. But through knock-on effects--if, say, Vietnamese industry becomes more efficient--the gains could also be larger.
Trying to pin down the exact value of the deal misses the point, though. First, the TPP is not at its final destination. It is supposed to expand, drawing in more countries. The Philippines, South Korea, Taiwan and Thailand have expressed interest in joining. The hope is that it will eventually also attract China. If the initial 12-country zone is expanded to 17, the benefits could be much bigger (see chart). Second, TPP is not mainly about cutting tariffs (these are already low after years of trade liberalisation) but rather about setting new rules for global commerce.
By leaving China out, America has, to a certain extent, rigged the talks in its favour. Much as state-owned companies in Malaysia or Vietnam want to defend their fiefdoms, they do not have the clout to push back as strongly as their peers in China might have done. But if the TPP gets under way and proves successful, China may yet be compelled to join, or at least to agree to pacts with similar standards. "If China doesn't promote its own ideas for trade, it will be influenced by those of others," says Zhou Mi, a researcher in a think-tank under China's commerce ministry.
The rules that America is pushing have faced criticisms, some valid, some not. Particularly controversial has been a demand from big pharmaceutical firms for a 12-year freeze on sharing data on a group of new medicines called "biologics", which they say is necessary to spur more innovation. Groups such as Médecins Sans Frontières say that this would go too far and hinder the development of the cheaper alternatives needed for poorer countries. People familiar with the negotiations say the data-exclusivity term is likely to be pared back, perhaps to seven years.
Other rules are more welcome. Some economists have noted the TPP's focus on intellectual property and its mechanism allowing investors to sue states, and concluded that it is more a political agenda than a free-trade agreement. But such provisions are not unique to TPP. And its boldness in tackling the rules gumming up the gears of global trade is laudable. Firms that straddle borders know that local-content rules can be just as distortionary as tariffs. "In South-East Asia, you basically have to build cars in the country in which you want to sell them," says Matt Hobbs, vice-president of government relations at General Motors.
The TPP talks have dragged on since 2010 and there could be drama yet in the final weeks. Some think Canada could quit the group if its dairy farmers are not insulated. Malaysia might be pushed out because of American concerns about human trafficking. In America, Congress could scupper the deal, though goodies for beef farmers, carmakers and drug companies should tip the balance in favour. Japan will also face domestic blowback if it opens its door to agricultural trade. But as a hub of innovation, it has a strong interest in TPP. It has been a crucial ally for America in demanding more rigorous trade rules, says Matthew Goodman of the Centre for Strategic and International Studies.
The China syndrome
Ultimately, for TPP to really make a mark, it has to be bigger. Leaving out China is an expedient to get the deal done but, if kept that way, it would be a huge gap. China is the world's biggest manufacturer. Any Asian trade zone without it faces one of two sorry fates. Either, because of China's centrality to Asian supply chains, the deal is so riddled with exemptions that it becomes worthless. Or, if the zone gains traction, the effect is to divert trade away from the most efficient Chinese companies and hurt the global economy.
The TPP is likely to face both problems. In textiles, for instance, Vietnamese and Malaysian mills expect to be allowed to continue to source fabric from countries such as China or India that those inside the trade zone cannot produce. This exemption may be vast. Meanwhile, Vietnamese and Malaysian garment makers admit the exclusion of Chinese finished goods will help shelter them from their toughest competition--hardly the ideal of free trade.
In other areas, though, TPP could make waves of a good kind. Rules to protect labour rights, strengthen environmental safeguards and limit subsidies to state-owned companies should go further than any previous trade deal. Officials in China, who previously viewed TPP as a gambit to isolate it, now drop hints about wanting to join the club. "It won't be the gold-standard deal they've been talking about, and they will be lucky to get a silver. Perhaps it will be a bronze," says Jayant Menon of the Asian Development Bank. With other ambitious trade talks gathering dust, however, even a bronze would glitter.
 
(AE) INDIA: Contact to resume at end of August on free trade negotiations
Bulletin Quotidien Europe
 
At the end of August, the EU and India are to try and relaunch the process of free trade negotiations, which has been on hold since spring 2013.
The European chief negotiator, Ignacio Garcia Bercero, and DG Trade's new director for Asia and Latin America, Helena König, are due to meet the Indian chief negotiator, JS Deepak, and India's new secretary for trade, Rita Teaotia, in New Delhi at the end of August, for “an explanatory meeting” which aims “to assess the ground to continue talks”, it is said on the European Commission side.
This meeting will continue the contact established in the first half of 2015 between European Commissioner for Trade Cecilia Malmström and India's Minister for Trade Nirmala Sitharaman.
Launched in 2007, and after 13 sessions of technical level talks, the negotiations for a bilateral agreement on trade and investment have been at a standstill since 2013, before the Indian general elections in spring 2014 which brought India's Prime Minister Narendra Modi to power. During the last talks in May 2013, the parties failed to iron out their differences on several key chapters (see EUROPE 10931).
On the Indian side, “there is a strong political will to conclude the FTA (free trade agreement) with the European Union to get the latest technology and expertise from the EU to ensure the Make in India and Digital India initiatives of the government are successful”, says a source from the Indian trade ministry, quoted by India's daily newspaper The Telegraph this week.
The parties therefore need to bridge the gap on several sensitive issues.
India needs to be granted “data secure nation” status by the EU - a key requirement for its information technology (IT) industry. Although India has reformed its IT legislation since 2007 by adding arrangements on data protection, the robustness of its system was still deemed insufficient by the European side before the negotiations were put on hold.
India also wants an ambitious offer from the EU on temporary work visas for IT professionals. It is asking the EU to raise the threshold by 20% in the safeguard clause introduced under the Mode-4 quota of the WTO agreement on trade in services (GATS) on the free movement of Indian professionals in the flexible framework system.
On the EU side, more concessions are expected from India on market access for services - especially in the distribution sector and legal services, after commitments already taken by the Indian side in the banking and insurance sectors, and in trade, in the automotive sector and wines and spirits sector in particular.
In addition, the EU has strong ambitions on intellectual property - especially the protection of its geographical indications - and it wants to include an ambitious chapter on sustainable development.
Initially, the EU and India wanted to boost a trade relationship that saw trade in goods double in a decade, but fall from over €80 billion in 2011 to €72.5 billion in 2014 (€35.5 billion in exports for the EU, €37 billion in exports for India). Trade in services stood at €23.7 billion in 2013 (€11.5 billion in exports for the EU, €12.2 billion in exports for India). Bilateral investment was over €50 billion in 2013 (with an FDI stock of €41.8 billion for the EU in India, and of €8.8 billion for India in the EU). (
 




Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.