Sólo se esperan avances parciales de la Ronda de Doha: SE 
WTO Least Developed Country Services Waiver: Opportunities and challenges for Bangladesh
Plurilateral trading blocs and Bangladesh: opportunity or mirage
La instancia del Gobierno ante la OMC no figura en la agenda de la entidad
Las sobretasas de Ecuador pueden continuar según el análisis de la OMC 
La OMC definirá mañana su posición sobre salvaguardias de Ecuador
AHF Endorses Sen. Sanders’ Call on US & World Trade Organization to Back Waiver of Drug Patents in Poor Countries 


 
Sólo se esperan avances parciales de la Ronda de Doha: SE 
 
16 October 2015, 
Roberto Morales
El Economista 
La próxima reunión ministerial para las negociaciones entre los 161 miembros de la Organización Mundial del Comercio (OMC), a celebrarse en dos meses, sólo arrojará resultados parciales y aún se desconoce cómo cerrarlas, afirmó Fernando de Mateo, embajador mexicano ante ese organismo. La Décima Conferencia Ministerial se llevará a cabo en Nairobi, Kenya, del 15 al 18 de diciembre, tras un prolongado estancamiento de las negociaciones multilaterales, conocidas como Ronda de Doha, iniciadas desde el 2001 y con las cuales se pretende quitar barreras al comercio entre integrantes de la OMC. En Nairobi no podemos esperar concluir la Ronda de Doha y no vamos a hacerlo porque hay grandes diferencias entre países. No se trata únicamente de diferencias entre norte-sur, este-oeste, países en desarrollo y desarrollados. Es un poco de todo, es una negociación complicada , comentó De Mateo. 
El diplomático expuso que los miembros de la OMC esperan acordar un paquete que contenga la prohibición de subsidios a la exportación de productos agrícolas, y esto sería más de 50 años después en que se prohibió subsidiar a los productos industriales. Esto es fundamental porque hay una distorsión tremenda al comercio de productos agrícolas , destacó al participar en el foro Manteniendo los mercados abiertos , en la ciudad de México. rmorales@eleconomista.com.mx 
© NoticiasFinancieras - El Economista - All rights reserved 
 


WTO Least Developed Country Services Waiver: Opportunities and challenges for Bangladesh
 
The Financial Express
18 October 2015 07:00
Rumana Islam
The World Trade Organisation’s (WTO) least developed country (LDC) services waiver emerged from the decisions of the eighth WTO Ministerial in 2011 in Geneva. The following Bali Ministerial Conference in 2013 ratified the waiver through a road map to speed up the implementation and operationalisation of the waiver. The objective of the services waiver, by moving beyond the WTO Most Favoured Nation (MFN) clause, is to promote LDC services trade through preferential access to markets in developing and developed countries in modes and sectors of services export interest to LDCs. The waiver also allows for other non-market access preferences, in line with the authorization of the Council for Trade in Services (CTS). In addition, developed and developing countries are supposed to indicate sectors and modes of supply where they intend to provide preferential treatment to the LDCs.
“Diagnosing the potential for trade in services is a necessity in least developed countries, especially looking at possible niche sectors which offer opportunities for diversification” said Ratnakar Adhikari of WTO. This brief report explores the dynamics and effectiveness of the waiver on LDC services trade with special focus on the challenges and opportunities for Bangladesh.

The General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS) identifies services trade according to the following four modes, as outlined in Table 1.The services waiver aims at service trade facilitation, especially Mode 4, by opening up WTO members’ markets to the LDC suppliers. Currently, the LDCs’ share of global commercial services export is 0.7 per cent in 2013, despite a 13 per cent growth rate in the sector. This highlights the necessity of the services waiver to promote the LDCs’ services exports with the view to expanding their market overseas as well as enhancing domestic growth.
An analysis of services trade balance for 10 LDCs, including, among others, Bangladesh shows that overall deficit is US$5.034 billion (bn) in 2013. Only three countries, Cambodia (US$1.73 bn), Afghanistan (US$8.45 bn), and Nepal (US$2.05 bn) have positive service trade balance. Bangladesh, with a negative balance ofUS$3,444.6million (m), leads the group of countries facing services trade deficit, followed by Congo (US$2,729 m) and Liberia (US$739 m). Burundi has the lowest services trade deficit at US$103 m. Bangladesh’s deficit in services trade balance at 2.0 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP) contrasts with a surplus of about 1.0 per cent of GDP in its current account of Balance-of-Payments (BoP).

However, the LDCs as a group records a surplus in the tourism sector reflecting tourism as their main services export (Figure 1). Transport and communications record the second largest surplus after tourism. In this respect, the waiver is in place to open doors for the LDCs to participate in the international market of services as service exporters beyond tourism.
BANGLADESH: Bangladesh has long been suffering from a services trade deficit in its balance of BoP. There has been deepening of the services trade deficit since 1998 from US$ 0.37 bn to US$ 4.10 bn in fiscal year (FY) 2013-14. The country’s services exports and imports include transportations, travel, telecommunication, computer, and information services, business services and government services.

The LDC services waiver provides Bangladesh the potential to expand its services export to other sectors of interest such as tourism, Information Technology (IT)-Business Process Outsourcing (BPO), nursing and labour services. Nevertheless, there are opportunities and challenges in each of these sectors which have to be overcome in order for Bangladesh to correct its history of service sector deficits.
TOURISM PROSPECTS FOR BANGLADESH: Bangladesh still remains at the nascent stage of harnessing tourism services as a scope for expanding the economic contribution of this sector.  Aside from being a services export component in the BoP, tourism activities have forward and backward linkages’ unleashing a lot of derived demand. The tourism sector generates employment through the purchase of local goods and services.

Bangladesh has been blessed with natural beauty, boasting the world’s largest natural beach as well as the largest mangrove forest. Despite this the tourism sector falls behind its potential. In FY13 tourism export accounted for an estimated 2.2 percent of GDP at US$5.0 billion which is only 10 per cent of the global average of US$55 billion. Bangladesh would require investment and upgradation of services in tourism to untap its latent potential as well as achieve higher economic growth.

IT-BPO: Bangladesh been ranked among the top 30 software services outsourcing destinations, with a shift from low-value added tasks such as website development and graphics design to middle-value software and application development as well as higher-end engineering and product development services. The IT market in Bangladesh has matured by means of growing tele-density, rising internet penetration, falling bandwidth costs, and a growing market for telecom services. However, challenges remain due to a lack of scale economies which prevents entrepreneurs from securing large contracts. It should also be noted that Bangladesh’s negative image due to Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) protection deters services exports in this sector.

NURSING: There is a surge in global demand for nurses arising from demographic changes, ageing population, a surge in chronic diseases, and physician shortages in primary care. Bangladesh’s key interest in export of nursing services is especially to the USA and UK markets. However, the current nurse-to-doctor ratio is 0.4 in Bangladesh, whereas international standards dictate that there should be three nurses per doctor. Internal constraints include lack of proper training, lack of appropriate skill sets and the need to update training curricula and the quality of teaching. In addition, external barriers are non-recognition of qualification, language barriers, and prohibitive licensing requirements, along with meeting the minimum skill requirement such as fluency in English, bedside manners, and the ability to handle modern medical equipment.

LABOUR SERVICES: Remittance plays a major role in Bangladesh’s economic growth, stability and poverty alleviation. There is a lack of targeted strategies which has in turn resulted in problems such as inadequate training and orientation of migrant workers and growing competition from other labour-exporting countries. Awareness of labour rights in the importing country and non-adherence by employers to the terms and conditions of employment is a serious problem. As a result, foreign employers often treat Bangladeshi expatriate labour poorly.

CONCLUSION AND POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS: The LDC community should assess their own export interests and approach the WTO with proposals to expedite the benefits of the LDC services waiver. In order to claim the benefits of the LDC services waiver in the sectors of Bangladesh’s interest, policy measures have to be enacted to augment reform in relevant areas to meet the minimum standard of global services export. In the case of standard and quality not being met, as per the waiver, these countries are not obliged to open their markets for our services and service suppliers.

To enhance competitiveness and export promotion in the IT-BPO sector, Bangladesh needs to focus on creating a supportive domestic business environment which includes a steady supply of power, trained human capital, focus on marketing and networking activities, and stronger enforcement of the Intellectual Property Rights (IPR).

The nursing sector will require a strategically planned approach with a focus on capacity creation to meet domestic as well as export demands with a change in teaching methods and curriculum. The private sector should be included in providing qualifications and adapting international standards to improve the quality of skills.

In the case of export of labour services, government should provide legal and safe channels for migrant labour services’ export including the basic set-up for training, institutional arrangement for remittance flow and saving instrument, soft loans for travel and finally the protection of the rights of its workers.

Bangladesh’s comparative advantage lies in Mode 4 of services export including nursing and labour services. These sectors require crucial attention for Bangladesh to secure the benefits of the waiver. With these reforms in place, the WTO’s LDC services waiver holds the key for Bangladesh to open doors for product and market diversification beyond its primary export of Readymade Garments.

[Rumana Islam is an Economist at Policy Research Institute (PRI). HYPERLINK "mailto:ruemiime@gmail.com" ruemiime@gmail.com.]
 
 
Plurilateral trading blocs and Bangladesh: opportunity or mirage
 
write Ahsan H. Mansur, Zaidi Sattar and Muhammad Shafiullah
The Financial Express
18 October 2015 07:00

With the World Trade Organisation’s (WTO’s) multilateralism on tenterhooks, member countries, developed or developing, are aggressively pursuing alternatives. Consequently, regional trade and investment groupings—called plurilateral trading blocs—are gaining momentum around the globe. Since 1990, the number of regional trade agreements (RTAs) have risen from 70 to over 400 by 2013. Plurilateral agreements usually involve three or more countries negotiating liberalization or rule-making in trade and investment, and setting standards of cross-border transactions that could go well beyond WTO mandates. Sometimes referred to as trading blocs, plurilateral agreements are a reaction to the stalemate in multilateral negotiations at the WTO, especially since launching of the Doha Round (DR). Plurilateral agreements among a smaller group of nations with similar commitments to trade and investment liberalization are gaining momentum due to ease of the negotiation process.

There are different approaches to how plurilateral agreements are dealt with outside the WTO, and could take the shape of Regional Trade Agreements (RTAs), Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) and Preferential Trade Agreements (PTA).These arrangements are allowed under WTO rules as long as they are generalized and non-discriminatory with respect to the countries they benefit. Plurilateral agreements can often prepare countries for multilateral rule-making in the future, serving as stepping stones to a broader agreement. For instance, WTO’s Information Technology Agreement (ITA) was initially based on plurilateralism but has now morphed into a multilateral agreement. The ITA now has 74 participants covering 97 per cent of IT trade, but excludes emerging economies such as Brazil (0.1 per cent) and South Africa (0.0 per cent).Further broadening of scope of the ITA is currently under consideration and backed by major industrial powers such as the US, European Union (EU), Japan etc. However, the ITA has been opposed by India, Egypt, and El Salvador. Thus, plurilateral agreements, if designed in a more inclusive manner could offer benefits to developing countries. Yet, this can only happen if such agreements are established in a way that takes into consideration the economic interests and technical capacity constraints of developing countries, something the WTO does as a matter of principle.

In practice, plurilateralism tends to undermine the broader multilateralism that is enshrined in the WTO principles. Thus critics often question: How can plurilateral agreements be “multilateralised” when they are a reaction to the deadlock faced in multilateral agreements? They also observe that plurilateral agreements may also contravene the multilateral principles of universality, inclusiveness and transparency, unless carefully addressed and wholeheartedly endorsed in the negotiation process — a feature that appears missing in some upcoming regional trading blocs.

There are several plurilateral agreements for which negotiations are ongoing, or completed. In contrast with the multilateral negotiation process under the WTO, much of the negotiations seem to be shrouded in secrecy making it difficult to plausibly analyze impacts on non-members.  The most talked-about among these include the Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement (TPP) of 12 Pacific Rim countries, Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership Agreement (TTIP) of EU and North-South American countries on either side of the Atlantic, and the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP), an extension of ASEAN (Association of South East Asian Nations) PLUS that includes China, Japan, India, South Korea, Australia, New Zealand, and a few more. Together, such trading blocs coming into fruition would cover 80% of world trade and some 90% of world gross domestic product (GDP), if anybody is keeping count. Though in principle these trading blocs are largely compliant with the WTO rules – in a WTO plus functioning mode – once fully operational, they will no doubt pose a serious challenge to the status and global clout of the WTO. Critiques argue that the TPP and TTIP, both sponsored by Washington, are overtly discriminatory against low income countries, violating a fundamental principle of multilateralism – non-discrimination.

Much has been said about what has become of the  WTO decision making process, one that is based on the principle of decision by consensus of 161 members, and another that is based on the “single undertaking” i.e. all or nothing principle. Combination of these two principles often drive negotiations to the ground, as we have seen with the protracted Doha Round which is still inconclusive after 15 years of negotiations. So disillusionment with the WTO process is real. The speed at which the WTO and its rounds of trade negotiations are moving is acceptable to no one, given the fast pace of globalization and changing business environments. The result? While accepting the WTO as the bedrock of the global trading system, countries around the world are considering issue-based plurilateral agreements proactively in parallel with pursuing FTAs.

But what is the reality on the ground, particularly for developing countries like Bangladesh? First, getting into one of the plurilateral regional groupings that are primarily determined by geographical location leaves others out of consideration. Apart from SAFTA (South Asian Free Trade Area), and APTA (Asia-Pacific Free Trade Agreement), Bangladesh is currently not part of any other trade-related FTA, RTA or PTAs. The record of SAFTA shows that it has been largely ineffective in garnering trade and investment expansion in any significant magnitude, with intra-regional trade stagnant at about 5.0 per cent and investment barely 1.0 per cent. APTA, sponsored by the United Nations’ affiliate body — Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP) in 1975 — has led to periodic tariff reductions among its members but still falls far short of a free trade arrangement with countries maintaining high protective tariffs on far too many products.

What is perhaps disconcerting is that Bangladesh has not been able to initiate serious trade talks with any country or regional groups with regard to liberalization and rule-making in trade. For instance, for lack of any known overtures to the ASEAN secretariat, Bangladesh has been completely left out of the most dynamic trade group in its neighbourhood, whereas India, China, Japan, South Korea, Australia, and New Zealand, struck FTAs with the ASEAN. Consequently, Bangladesh has no part of the lucrative job-creating regional value chain integration that has been a boon to the East Asian economies for the past two decades. This contrasts with the proactive approach taken by our close neighbour, India, who has been actively pursuing FTA engagement with the ASEAN, Australia, China, the EU, Latin America and the USA.

Being one of the least developed countries (LDCs), Bangladesh does not need FTAs with the EU or most developed economies for the time being, but not for long as it is poised to graduate out of the LDC status in 2018 if not by 2021. What is our level of preparedness to face a more competitive trading environment? For the time being, the lack of active participation in large RTAs has not affected Bangladesh’s exports adversely since the country currently enjoys duty-free access to major markets like the EU, and substantially duty-free access to many other countries under the rubric of GSP (Generalized System of Preferences). This allows Bangladeshi exporters to gain competitive advantage over many of its larger competitors like China, India, Indonesia, etc.

Once Bangladesh graduates from its LDC status, lack of FTAs or not being part of any Plurilateral (PL) agreements could hinder its export expansion as it is likely to lose the preferential access it has been enjoying as a LDC. FTAs and RTAs not only provide greater market access for products within the member countries, these arrangements also promote investment from the more developed to less/least developed members of the RTAs. Mexico’s success in attracting vast investment from the USA is largely due to North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA); Myanmar is getting much more foreign direct investment (FDI) than Bangladesh because of its ASEAN membership; Vietnam’s FTA with the US was a stimulus to its export dynamism which will soon get a further boost from its inclusion in the TPP.

Plurilateral RTAs on the scale of mega trading blocs, such as the TPP, go well beyond free trade to include investment liberalization and enforcement of stricter product standards, labour standards, environmental standards and Intellectual Property Rights (IPR). The lack of RTA membership certainly hinders inflow of FDI into Bangladesh, and prevents it from integrating in the global or Asian value chain and moving up the value chain to achieve greater export diversification. However, not all RTAs are within reach of Bangladesh’s existing trade process or logistical infrastructure. Therefore, depending on the final outcomes, plurilateral agreements that are currently being negotiated have the potential to offer greater opportunities or pose serious challenges to Bangladesh’s future trade prospects, depending on our level of participation in, or absence from, these agreements.

Membership in a trading bloc (if it occurred) may require Bangladesh to significantly reduce its protective tariff structure and impose trade costs by way of conforming to labour and environmental standards imposed by these RTAs. At the same time, Bangladesh exporters may face competitive disadvantage if some of Bangladesh’s competitors such as Vietnam, Indonesia or India reap benefits out of their RTA membership when Bangladesh is a non-member.

Bangladesh needs to get a ‘fair treatment’ in global trade and aggressively fight for due access to global markets. While continuing to be an active member of the WTO and taking advantage of its Special and Differential Treatment (SDT) for less developed countries, Bangladesh need not wait for the WTO rounds to come to their natural conclusions. It needs to proactively enter into, or strike associations with, FTAs/RTAs with selected regional initiatives. It also needs to gain the experience and expertise required for carrying out such negotiations.

But there are entry barriers to be faced. Since FTAs typically begin with dismantling of tariffs, this puts Bangladesh at a disadvantage in moving forward in view of its current relatively high tariff structure which has to be brought close to the levels of the trading blocs of interest – a process that will need to begin sooner rather than later in order to acquire eligibility for membership. Without this minimum preparedness gaining membership or association in any of the mega trading blocs will remain a mirage. However, if Bangladesh were to be left out of all three mega trading blocs, its exports could face unequal tariff and non-tariff barriers while competitors who are part of these trading blocs (members or associates) will gain substantial competitive edge in Bangladesh’s key export markets. That adverse prospect should serve as a wake-up call for Bangladesh to proactively seek association with one or more mega trading blocs. But getting there would require substantial restructuring of its current trade regime and the way we manage our production structure.


[The article is prepared jointly by Ahsan H. Mansur, Executive Director, PRI (ahsanmansur@gmail.com), Zaidi Sattar, Chairman, PRI (zaidisattar@gmail.com), and Muhammad Shafiullah, Senior Economist, PRI (mshafiullah@pri-bd.org).]
 
 
La instancia del Gobierno ante la OMC no figura en la agenda de la entidad
 
Veda
17 OCT 2015, 12:00 AM 
TANIA MOLINA
SD. Aunque el Gobierno dominicano anunció hace menos de dos semanas que denunció a Haití ante la Organización Mundial del Comercio (OMC) por la veda que impuso de varios productos nacionales, a ese organismo no ha llegado ningún caso de manera oficial.
Un portavoz de la OMC en Ginebra informó a DL vía telefónica que hasta el momento no se ha presentado ninguna queja formal ante el Órgano de Solución de Diferencias, que es el mecanismo establecido para que puedan intervenir en un conflicto comercial entre países.
En una rueda de prensa conjunta entre el canciller Andrés Navarro, y el ministro de Industria y Comercio, José del Castillo Saviñón, se anunció el pasado 5 de octubre que la República Dominicana había sometido un recurso de consulta ante el organismo mundial, a través de su Misión Permanente del Ginebra.
“La República Dominicana, a través de su Misión Permanente en Ginebra, sometió un recurso de consulta hace varias semanas a la Organización Mundial del Comercio (OMC), lo cual permitió presentar el caso el pasado 29 de septiembre del corriente mes ante el Comité de Acceso a Mercados de dicha entidad, con lo cual mostró su preocupación frente a la medida comercial adoptada por el gobierno de la República de Haití”, informó al respecto la Cancillería en una nota que distribuyó a los medios de comunicación a la fecha.
Una fuente diplomática en Ginebra explicó que, en efecto, el 29 de septiembre, durante la reunión del Comité de Acceso a Mercados, la República Dominicana tomó la palabra en el apartado “Otros asuntos”, y cuestionó las medidas de Haití, calificándolas como discriminatorias. En ese momento, otros países habrían tomado turno para pedir que ambos gobiernos traten de solucionar el problema de manera amistosa.
Sin embargo, en la OMC no quedó ningún documento formal de la queja del Gobierno dominicano, según la fuente, que explicó que el tema se trató en “otros asuntos”, porque no estaba agendado.
La fuente explicó también que esas intervenciones constituyen una especie de alerta entre los países, pero que no implican la intervención oficial del organismo, que sólo media cuando existe una denuncia formal ante el Órgano de Solución de Conflictos.
De hecho, la próxima reunión de dicho órgano está pautada para el 28 de octubre y la República Dominicana no aparece en la agenda.
Proceso en OMC
  
Para que se conozca un caso ante la OMC, el país demandante deberá presentar su denuncia formal ante el Órgano de Solución de Conflictos que debe seguir el siguiente procedimiento:
Primero el demandante pide un período de consultas con el país demandado, para tratar de llegar a un acuerdo. Este período no debería pasar de unos dos meses. En este caso, la OMC sólo presta sus salones para que ambos países discutan el tema en cuestión.
Luego, el Órgano de Solución designa un panel de expertos para estudiar el tema, que debe recoger las informaciones del caso entre los países en conflicto y elaborar un informe. En caso de que el informe no sea acogido por una de las partes, se pasa al tribunal de apelaciones, que tiene la última palabra del caso. 
La Cancillería explica el trámite que siguió ante la OMC
En la discusión sostenida el pasado 29 de sepetiembre en el Comité Acceso a Mercado de la Organización Mundial de Comercio (OMC) de la denuncia ehcha por la República Dominicana a Haiti por haber dispuesto en forma unilateral la prohibición de entrada a su territorio vía terrestre de 23 productos, el país recibió el apoyo de de Ecuador, México, Guatemala y El Salvador. Los representantes de Cuba y Honduras se abstuvieron.
Anoche, consultado por DL, el vocero de la Cancillería, Miguel Medina, explicó el proceso que ha seguido el país desde el pasado 15 de septiembre, cuando se dio a conocer la veda, fecha en que fue apoderado Luis Manuel Piantini, embajador ante la OMC, quien habría iniciado el protocolo para esos casos. Reveló que ser incorporado a la agenda del Organo de Soluciones de Diferencias debe haber de 10 a 15 días de antelación, razón por la que no figura en la misma. 
 


Las sobretasas de Ecuador pueden continuar según el análisis de la OMC 
Expreso
16 October 2015 07:00 (Spanish) 
La Organización Mundial de Comercio (OMC) reconoce los esfuerzos de Ecuador para enfrentar los desequilibrios macroeconómicos, por factores externos que han generado dificultades en su balanza de pagos, por lo tanto el país continuará cobrando las sobretasas. 
Las salvaguardias multisectoriales se cobran a más de 2.000 subpartidas de importaciones, consideradas por el Gobierno como suntuarias, desde marzo de este año y por 15 meses a partir de dicho mes. Es así que los importadores están pagando entre un 5 % a un 45 % por artículos como televisores, zapatos, whisky.
Los miembros del Comité de Balanza de Pagos de la OMC se reunió ayer en Ginebra y analizaron por segunda vez la medida de las salvaguardias cobradas por Ecuador.
En la cita el Ministerio de Comercio Exterior explica el por qué era necesario la salvaguardia: el desplome del precio del petróleo y la apreciación del dólar. A ello se suman las amenazas naturales: el proceso eruptivo del volcán Cotopaxi y la prevista incidencia del fenómeno de El Niño. La Comisión se volverá a reunir en febrero del 2016.
Por otro lado, y que tiene que ver con la afectación de la devaluación del peso colombiano para Ecuador, el Gobierno nacional continúa trabajando para dinamizar el comercio de la provincia de Carchi. Para ello está vigente que los comerciantes de la frontera del norte puedan importar desde Colombia, sin pagar impuestos ni sobretasas.
Ayer el Servicio Nacional de Aduana del Ecuador dio a conocer cómo será el trámite y los documentos que se deben presentar para poder ingresar los productos colombianos al país. 
Son 49 subpartidas las liberadas de impuestos para Carchi, entre ellos televisores, tecnología y productos de higiene. Se puede importar productos por montos desde 8.496 hasta 33.984 dólares. LZA
 
 
La OMC definirá mañana su posición sobre salvaguardias de Ecuador
ElComercio.com
 
Mañana, 16 de octubre del 2015, se llevará a cabo en Ginebra la reunión del Comité de Balanza de Pagos de la Organización Mundial de Comercio (OMC), informó el ministro de Comercio Exterior, Diego Aulestia. El funcionario, quien se encuentra de gira por Turquía desde el pasado 12 de octubre del 2015, indicó que el viceministro de Comercio Exterior, Alejandro Dávalos, participará en el encuentro. En marzo pasado entraron en vigencia las salvaguardias para un total de 2961 partidas. Las sobretasas van entre el 5% y el 45% y estarán vigentes hasta el año que viene. La medida, según el Gobierno, se adoptó ante los impacto de la caída del precio del petróleo y la apreciación del dólar, tomando como base las normas de la OMC. La primera reunión del Comité se realizó en julio pasado, pero solo se escucharon los planteamientos del país para la aplicación de la medida. Allí se decidió realizar un segundo encuentro, en el que el órgano tomará una decisión sobre el tema. Aulestia dijo que en la cita se conocerán los informes del Fondo Monetario Internacional (FMI) sobre el tema y se espera que el Comité “le dé la razón al Gobierno ecuatoriano. Afrontamos una situación compleja. La medida fue el resultado de un análisis técnico”. El funcionario agregó que en la reunión se reiterará que las salvaguardias estarán vigentes en el tiempo que originalmente se planteó, es decir, 15 meses. En la cita también se responderá a cualquier otra consulta que tengan los integrantes del cuerpo colegiado. Ecuador ha mantenido contacto permanente con el Comité a través de la delegación diplomática en Ginebra y de países europeos. Desde el Ministerio de Comercio Exterior, dijo Aulestia, hay absoluta tranquilidad con relación a la decisión que tome el Comité y que se absolverá cualquier inquietud que pueda existir sobre el tema.


 
AHF Endorses Sen. Sanders’ Call on US & World Trade Organization to Back Waiver of Drug Patents in Poor Countries 
As World Trade Organization meets in Geneva this week, AHF lauds Senator Bernie Sanders for letter to U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman to “…request the administration endorse an indefinite waiver of the World Trade Organization’s (WTO) obligations to grant and enforce pharmaceutical patents for countries classified by the UN as LDCs (Least Developed Countries).” 
October 15, 2015 06:28 PM Eastern Daylight Time 
WASHINGTON--(HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/,DanaInfo=.awxyCfzypvn238v5tPt65+" BUSINESS WIRE)--HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/ct/,DanaInfo=.acuuCfzypvn238v5tPt65+CT?id=smartlink&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.aidshealth.org%2F&esheet=51202779&newsitemid=20151015006841&lan=en-US&anchor=AIDS+Healthcare+Foundation&index=1&md5=e1ecf72f2c98feabea0bb3b85c6e75ba" AIDS Healthcare Foundation (AHF) applauded HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/ct/,DanaInfo=.acuuCfzypvn238v5tPt65+CT?id=smartlink&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.sanders.senate.gov%2F&esheet=51202779&newsitemid=20151015006841&lan=en-US&anchor=Sen.+Bernie+Sanders&index=2&md5=91d6e53040529f492a6b792f1a398770" Sen. Bernie Sanders (I-VT) and endorsed his recent call on the United States to support an indefinite waiver of drug patents in least developed countries (LDC). In anticipation of World Trade Organization (WTO) meetings in Geneva this week to update WTO standards on granting and enforcing drug patents, Senator Sanders wrote a letter to U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman requesting that “…the administration endorse an indefinite waiver of the World Trade Organization’s (WTO) obligations to grant and enforce pharmaceutical patents for countries classified by the UN as LDCs.” 
“Making sure people in poor countries have access to life-saving medicine is our moral responsibility.”
HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/news/home/20151015006841/en/,DanaInfo=.awxyCfzypvn238v5tPt65+AHF-Endorses-Sen.-Sanders%E2%80%99-Call-World-Trade" Tweet this
In his September 28th HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/ct/,DanaInfo=.acuuCfzypvn238v5tPt65+CT?id=smartlink&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.sanders.senate.gov%2Fdownload%2Fsanders-letter-to-ustr-on-drugs-in-developing-countries-%3Finline%3Dfile&esheet=51202779&newsitemid=20151015006841&lan=en-US&anchor=letter&index=3&md5=a27e12d1a095ec3a110c6045bb992385" letter to Froman, Sanders noted “Based on conversations between my staff and the staff of the United States Trade Representative, I understand the administration does not support a permanent exception for drug patents for these poor countries.” He later added “Making sure people in poor countries have access to life-saving medicine is our moral responsibility.” 
According to Sanders, “…these impoverished countries submitted a request to the WTO (in February) for a permanent extension of the exception of the obligation to grant drug patents, for as long as a country is classified as an LDC by the UN. The WTO rules require such requests to be granted when they are ‘duly motivated.’ This is a reasonable standard. It means that poor countries will be able to afford medicine to keep their people alive.” 
“We once again thank Senator Sanders for his compassion and common sense leadership on drug pricing and policies and urge the U.S. Trade Representative to back—and the WTO to grant—the requested drug patent exemptions for these countries in order that they may afford lifesaving medicines they need,” said AHF President Michael Weinstein. “As Senator Sanders simply stated in closing his letter: ‘Too many lives are at stake’.” 
 
AIDS Healthcare Foundation (AHF), the largest global AIDS organization, currently provides medical care and/or services to over 492,000 individuals in 36 countries worldwide in the US, Africa, Latin America/Caribbean, the Asia/Pacific Region and Eastern Europe. To learn more about AHF, please visit our website: HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/ct/,DanaInfo=.acuuCfzypvn238v5tPt65+CT?id=smartlink&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.aidshealth.org&esheet=51202779&newsitemid=20151015006841&lan=en-US&anchor=www.aidshealth.org&index=4&md5=d4f7895e545c701623bf0a0a7a446cfc" www.aidshealth.org, find us on Facebook: HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/ct/,DanaInfo=.acuuCfzypvn238v5tPt65+CT?id=smartlink&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.facebook.com%2Faidshealth&esheet=51202779&newsitemid=20151015006841&lan=en-US&anchor=www.facebook.com%2Faidshealth&index=5&md5=4763c0abca98535249e7e886910edaac" www.facebook.com/aidshealth and follow us on Twitter: HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/ct/,DanaInfo=.acuuCfzypvn238v5tPt65+CT?id=smartlink&url=https%3A%2F%2Ftwitter.com%2Faidshealthcare&esheet=51202779&newsitemid=20151015006841&lan=en-US&anchor=%40aidshealthcare&index=6&md5=171dbc1e69e75586bbfdc6458dde52a5" @aidshealthcare and Instagram: HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/ct/,DanaInfo=.acuuCfzypvn238v5tPt65+CT?id=smartlink&url=http%3A%2F%2Finstagram.com%2Faidshealthcare&esheet=51202779&newsitemid=20151015006841&lan=en-US&anchor=%40aidshealthcare&index=7&md5=7bd694c63a9a7bce7b2551f6837aedba" @aidshealthcare 
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.