New Zealand : NEW ZEALAND GOVERNMENT accepts WTO deal accession
Burkina: Ablasse Ouedraogo submits presidential poll candidacy
Security Council meeting in Akorda discussed issues of national interests’ protection within WTO, EEU
EU PUSHES SERVICES IN EGA EVEN AS IT FACES HEAVY RESISTANCE IN TALKS
Russian consumer rights NGO intends to contest decree on banned food


New Zealand : NEW ZEALAND GOVERNMENT accepts WTO deal accession
14 August 2015
Bakhtar News Agency
 
The New Zealand government invited the nation's accession to the World Trade Organization's (WTO) Agreement on Government Procurement (GPA).
Economic Development Minister Steven Joyce said, "Kiwi companies now have more opportunities to do business with governments internationally than ever before."
Joyce said, "From today they have guaranteed access to bid for approximately 1.7 trillion U.S. dollars in annual overseas government contracts across 43 WTO member countries, including the U.S., Canada, Japan and 28 countries of the EU."
"This figure is expected to grow significantly as further countries join the GPA over time, creating new opportunities for Kiwi businesses to export more products and services to more destinations."
Accession would be a big support for New Zealand makers and information and communication technology suppliers, and would help with the on going change of the New Zealand economy.
The GPA secured the buying of a wide range of goods and facilities that government firms bought from the private sector, comprising the development.
Trade Minister Tim Groser said, New Zealand's accession followed 2 years of discussions.
Groser said, "Our accession to the WTO GPA, along with our other free trade agreements, is a welcome and significant step in opening up large overseas markets to our Kiwi suppliers."
 


 
 
 
Burkina: Ablasse Ouedraogo submits presidential poll candidacy
14 August 2015
APANEWS

 
APA-Ouagadougou (Burkina Faso) The President of Le Faso Autrement (A Different Faso), Dr. Ablass Ouedraogo has filed his candidacy for the October 11 2015 presidential poll to the Constitutional Council, becoming momentarily one of the first candidates to complete this formality.
 
According to a source close to the council, Ouedraogo arrived at their offices to file his candidacy at around 11 am on Thursday.
 
He along with the President of the Rassemblement de écologistes du Burkina Faso (Rally of Burkina Faso Ecologists) (REDFB) Ram Ouedraogo, are the two first candidates to submit their candidature to the CC on the same day.
 
The closing date for the submission of candidacies is on Friday 21 August.
 
Dr Ablasse Ouedraogo was appointed and designated as the presidential candidate following the first congress of his Le Faso Autrement party in Ouagadougou on 6 and 7 June.
 
As a trained economist, Dr. Ablasse Ouedraogo already served as Burkina Faso’s Foreign Minister from 1994 to 1999 and special adviser to former President Blaise Compaore in 1999.
 
Back home, in 2010, he created Le Faso Autrement which was allied with political opposition (CFOP) before the end of the October 2014 popular uprising.
 
Former deputy Director General of the World Trade Organization (WTO) Ablasse also served as regional adviser for Africa at the African Development Bank (AfDB).
 
Prior to joining the AfDB, he was, among other things, the international consultant partner director of the research department of the Performance Management Consulting, special adviser to the Director General of the International Labour Organisation (ILO) and special representative of the Secretary General of the International Organization of the Francophonie (OIF) on cultural diversity.
 
Mr. Ablasse Ouedraogo holds a PhD in Economics Development Economics at the University of Nice, France.
 
He defended his thesis on “Multinational Companies and the industrialization of developing countries”, on 15 December 1981.
 


 
Security Council meeting in Akorda discussed issues of national interests’ protection within WTO, EEU
14 August 2015
Kazinform International News Agency
 
ASTANA. KAZINFORM - Akorda has held a meeting of the Expert Council under the Security Council of the Republic of Kazakhstan.
 
According to the press service of Akorda the sitting addressed the issues of protection of national interests in the context of the situation in the world economy and integration processes.
 
The meeting was attended by the heads of government agencies, business associations, NGO "Atameken", leading national experts and scholars.
 
Speakers noted that Kazakhstan faces new challenges related to the protection and promotion of national interests amid the country's accession to the WTO and the Eurasian integration.
 
Assistant to the President - Secretary of Security Council N.Yermekbayev noted that the responsible government authorities should, with the advice of experts and business community, carry out a comprehensive analysis and assess all possible risks of the economic and integration processes.
 
Recommendations of the Expert Council will be used in the work of the Security Council and in preparation of Security Council sessions under the chairmanship of the Head of State.
 


 
 
 
EU PUSHES SERVICES IN EGA EVEN AS IT FACES HEAVY RESISTANCE IN TALKS
14 August 2015
Inside U.S. Trade
 
 
The European Union is seeking to include within the Environmental Goods Agreement (EGA) commitments on services like the installation and repair of products nominated for tariff elimination under the plurilateral deal, but other participants are insisting that the EGA is not the right forum to do so.
 
The proposal the EU tabled during the July 27-31 EGA round in Geneva is contained as part of a draft declaration for the agreement and would require the EGA members to liberalize services sectors that are related to the covered goods. These services include assembly, installation, analysis, testing, repair, maintenance and training of employees to operate the covered good, as well as any other services that are included in a related contract or warranty.
 
Additionally, the EU is pushing for a separate annex of services to be attached to the EGA. This annex would contain services like installation and maintenance, but also advisory services, research and development, technical testing and analysis, and other after-sale services.
 
But the EU proposal is already facing resistance from the other 16 members of the EGA. One Geneva source said while everyone supports the general idea of liberalizing services, EGA members are focused on concluding a deal that eliminates tariffs on environmental goods first. This source said it is also unclear how including services in the EGA would complement the ongoing Trade in Services Agreement (TISA).
 
TISA is a closed plurilateral negotiation in which many of the EGA countries are participating. The EGA, however, is an open plurilateral, meaning that any tariff cuts or services commitments that are covered by it would apply to all WTO members. China is participating in the EGA, but not the TISA negotiations.
 
The EU proposal envisions having all EGA members list their services commitments and limitations as annexes to the agreement and transpose them into their respective schedules under the General Agreement on Trade in Services. This would extend that treatment to all WTO members and make the commitments subject to dispute settlement under the WTO.
 
It would require the EGA members to grant both most favored nation status and national treatment on the covered services with regard to both cross-border supply, also known as "Mode 1," and consumption abroad, or "Mode 2."
 
The proposal would also include what is known as a standstill clause, which would prohibit the introduction of additional services trade restrictions in the covered areas. Additionally, any existing restrictions that EGA members maintain would have to be rolled back by 2022. But it is unclear whether 2022 is a placeholder year, or the actual target year the EU has settled on.
 
But not all of the services commitments would be substantive. With regard to "Mode 4," or the supply of a service via the movement of natural persons, the EU proposal would simply commit EGA members to begin consultations on whether to allow such services in connection with the covered green goods.
 
The EU push for services is being driven by the European Commission, member states and the European industry, according to informed sources. Member states like the Netherlands, Sweden and the United Kingdom are among those who have most strongly argued to maintain a link between services and goods trade, according to one informed source. EU Trade Commissioner Cecilia Malmstrom, a Swede, also has made this linkage a political priority.
 
In May 2014, two months before the EGA negotiations began, member states directed the European Commission to explore whether non-tariff barriers (NTBs) and environmental services could also be addressed in the negotiations. EU trade ministers laid out this demand in negotiating directives they approved to guide the commission in negotiating the EGA (Inside U.S. Trade, May 16, 2014).
 
Meanwhile, France is pressing for some sort of outcome on the EGA in time for the 2015 United Nations Climate Change Conference, also known as COP21. EGA members have long said they hope to have some kind of outcome in the talks in time for either COP21, which is set for Nov. 30-Dec. 11 in Paris, or the 10th WTO Ministerial, which is slated for Dec. 15-18 in Nairobi, Kenya.
 
But one Geneva source described this continued push by the EU as a "distraction," saying it could have used the hours hearing the EU's viewpoints to keep negotiating over the product list, which consists of roughly 650 tariff lines.
 
The EU member states are not united in their push for including services in the EGA, one informed source said. These member states are well aware of the fact that the EU proposal faces heavy resistance among the other EGA members. This includes the United States, which has said previously said that services should be addressed in TISA. The Office of the U.S. Trade Representative did not respond to multiple requests for comment on the EU's proposal.
 
One source skeptical of the proposal cautioned that if the EU continues to press the issue, that could end up costing Brussels either by forcing it to give up on other priorities, or else by having to accept tariff cuts on sensitive products like biofuels that have been proposed to be part of the EGA by other members.
 
EGA members would also lose a bargaining chip by agreeing to liberalize services in a MFN format, without gaining any additional access to markets like India and Brazil, who are not part of the plurilateral initiative and thus would not have to reciprocate.
 
The EU presented its draft text toward the end of the eighth EGA round, where the EGA members spent most of their time discussing the product scope. Geneva sources said the members have not had much opportunity to review the text and discuss it with their respective capitals, but their respective positions are known.
 
Also included within the EU draft text is a work program for NTBs -- namely, EGA members would commit to have a conversation about what can be done on NTBs to trade in environmental goods.
 
This would seem similar to the NTB language contained within the 1996 ministerial declaration of the Information Technology Agreement (ITA), which serves as the basis and model of the draft EGA text from the EU. The 1996 ITA declaration says that "participants shall meet periodically under the auspices of the Council on Trade in Goods ... to consult on non-tariff barriers to trade in information technology products."
 
The EU's draft EGA text also envisions no staging for the environmental goods that would be covered. This is a notable departure from the ITA, where members placed products into one of three tariff elimination phaseout categories -- immediate, three years, and five years. In exceptional circumstances, parties were able to negotiate a seven-year phaseout period. Geneva sources said that EGA members have not discussed how they will phase out the tariffs on the covered goods yet.
 
The informed source said the European Commission appears to be taking this position for tactical reasons, based on the assumption that it could extract concessions from other parties by agreeing to staging. But this source warned that this strategy could backfire, since other parties may use it as a basis to push the EU to drop tariffs on day one for all covered products, when in reality it has its own sensitivities and will likely want phaseout periods.
 
Finally, the EU text proposal includes a time-based review mechanism for the product list, according to informed sources. The proposal puts the target date for the EGA's entry into force as Jan. 1, 2017, with the review beginning one year later. But the EU envisions this as being a nearly continuous negotiating process. Each review would take no more than two years under the proposal and would be followed by a subsequent review starting a year after the previous one was completed.
 
While it is unclear whether other members would sign on to that kind of schedule, one Geneva source suggested there is general agreement that any review should occur within a "small amount of years," as the members do not want the EGA to repeat the experience of the ITA, which had remained static for 16 years until a subset of that agreement's membership launched expansion talks in 2012.
 
Meanwhile, EGA members continued to pore through the product list during the eighth EGA round, this time specifically going over products that had received little attention so far, Geneva sources said.
 
After this round, Australia -- which chairs the EGA -- will divide the consolidated list of roughly 650 goods into two parts, one consisting of products that are broadly supported by the members and another that have not received a lot of support. Those lists will be presented at the next EGA round, which is set for Sept. 16-22.
 
One Geneva source said the less-supported second list serves as "kick in the pants" for the EGA members who may be backing those products. Having an item placed on the second list means those EGA members are not doing a good enough job in lobbying for it, and will cause those members to decide whether to redouble their efforts to get that product on the consensus list or to abandon it altogether.
 
Still, Geneva sources refused to say that the products on the less-supported second list would be considered "dead," holding open the possibility that they could return to the consensus list in the future. "Only once a deal is absolutely signed and sealed, then that's that," the source said. 
 


 
 
 
Russian consumer rights NGO intends to contest decree on banned food
14 August 2015
BBC Monitoring Former Soviet Union
 
The Society for the Protection of Consumer Rights (OZPP) intends to challenge the decree on destroying sanctioned foodstuffs in the Supreme Court as it violated the law as well as moral values, Gazprom-owned, editorially-independent Ekho Moskvy radio reported on 14 August, quoting the society head, Mikhail Anshakov.
 
"In the first place, Russia has joined the WTO, and it is obliged to adhere to WTO rules. Apart from this, the decree on the destruction of banned food and a corresponding government resolution appeal to the need to ensure food security. In our view, this reference makes absolutely no sense," Anshakov said.
 
Commenting on the interpretation of the term "food security", he added: "The destruction of food can by no means be related to food security."
 
Anshakov expressed his confidence that the Supreme Court will pass a fair ruling if it is not guided by political motivation, the radio report said.
 
