WTO Chief: Advancing Doha Talks in 2015 Will Be ‘Incredibly Difficult,’ Not Impossible
WTO Panel to Discuss Latest Chinese Offer to Join Government Procurement Agreement
Malmström wants more cooperation on multilateral talks
Israel Expected to Join WTO Talks on Environmental Goods Agreement
Davos Ministerial Shows Few Position Changes On Post-Bali Work Program
Indian energy firm bars foreign bids for three solar projects
At DSB, India Appeals Poultry Ruling, 'Havana Club' Gains New Impetus
Solar cloud over India-US ties
India, US disagree over food security
Nearly 100 trade probes against China in 2014: government
Froman Holds Open Possible WTO Challenge To China Cotton Subsidies
EU fails to agree new Russia sanctions
House votes to speed reviews of natural gas export proposals
U.S. Democrats set high bar for supporting Obama on trade
Proposed Asia-Pacific free trade area signals start of new era of trade cooperation
China overtakes US as world's top investment magnet - UN
Oil’s fall pushes Germany into deflation
IMF working on alternate measures as US blocks reforms
 
 
WTO Chief: Advancing Doha Talks in 2015 Will Be ‘Incredibly Difficult,’ Not Impossible
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, January 30, 2015
 
Jan. 29 — World Trade Organization members maintained the intractable positions that have stymied the Doha Round despite a notable shift toward engagement, WTO Director-General Roberto Azevedo said.
 
“While substantive positions haven't changed a great deal since last time these issues were discussed, it is clear to me that the tone of the discussion has changed,” Azevedo told members at a Jan. 29 informal Heads of Delegation meeting in Geneva.
 
The meeting, which lasted nearly an hour, reviewed members' discussions in several panels held throughout the week, including at a Jan. 24 “Mini-Ministerial” trade meeting in Davos, Switzerland; an informal Committee on Trade and Development meeting on Jan. 26; and a pair of Jan. 28 WTO Agriculture Committee meetings in Geneva.
 
Thursday's meeting marked the second of the so-called “Room W” Heads of Delegation meetings that will be held between now and the July 31 deadline set by members to produce a highly developed and precise work program. Azevedo did not announce the date of the next meeting.
 
Engagement on Substance
 
Advancing a detailed, modalities-focused work program to resolve the remaining issues of the 2013 Bali Ministerial agreement “is still going to be incredibly difficult but I never thought it would be impossible,” Azevedo told meeting attendees.
 
Azevedo said the “big increase in the political will” he heard in his meetings with high-level trade ministers in Davos already has provided a “clarity which we didn't have before.”
 
“Members have started to go into more detail and to engage on the substance,” he said. “In addition, we have heard people express a willingness to entertain new thinking in certain areas.”
 
Members considered a new proposal aimed at narrowing the differences over trade-distorting agricultural subsidy rules during the Jan. 28 Agriculture Committee meeting (19 WTO, 1/29/15). They were unable to break new ground in the debate over market access rules and public stockholding proposals.
 
Plurilaterals Looming
 
Azevedo did not say what will happen if members fail to meet the July 31 deadline for a post-Bali work program.
 
Although members have six months to address the historically challenging issues of agriculture, non-agricultural market access (NAMA) and service rules, their inability to strike early compromises indicates a low level of ambition.
 
Concurrently, the U.S. is negotiating broad free trade agreements like the Trans-Pacific Partnership and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership that could supplement many of the WTO's multilateral goals.
 
The conclusion of these deals may accelerate if Congress grants President Barack Obama increased trade promotion authority via legislation.
 
 
WTO Panel to Discuss Latest Chinese Offer to Join Government Procurement Agreement
WTO Reporter, January 30, 2015
 
Jan. 29 — Members likely will discuss China's fifth revised proposal to open its state procurement market to foreign bidders at a World Trade Organization Government Procurement Committee meeting scheduled for Feb. 11.
 
China offered several improvements in its latest attempt to join the WTO's Government Procurement Agreement (GPA), but current members—including the U.S. and the European Union—have said the offer does not go far enough (03 WTO, 1/6/15).
 
China agreed to lower from its previous offer the thresholds at which GPA levels would apply to procurement contracts. China did not, however, expand its list of state-owned enterprises that would be subject to GPA rules sufficient to appease current members.
 
China agreed in 2001 to accede to the GPA, which sets out rules guaranteeing fair conditions of international competition for government procurement contracts and prohibiting discriminatory treatment between local and foreign suppliers as well as between foreign suppliers from different countries.
 
Expanding Membership
 
The goal of the GPA is to open up government procurement deals to international trade and competition, while ensuring transparency and a commitment to good governance. Last year members revised the GPA to modernize certain aspects of its rules and to expand its scope.
 
The GPA is a “plurilateral” agreement, meaning that the market access concessions are only granted to suppliers in those countries that have acceded to the agreement.
 
There are currently 43 parties to the GPA, including: Armenia; Canada; the European Union, with its 28 member states; Hong Kong; Iceland; Israel; Japan; Korea; Liechtenstein; the Netherlands with respect to Aruba; Norway; Singapore; Switzerland; Taiwan and the U.S.
 
China is among 10 WTO members that have started the process of acceding to the GPA, including: Albania, Georgia, Jordan, the Kyrgyz Republic, Moldova, Oman and Ukraine. Last year, GPA members invited Montenegro and New Zealand to join the agreement.
 
 
Malmström wants more cooperation on multilateral talks 
29 January 2015
Bulletin Quotidien Europe
 
Brussels, 28/01/2015 (Agence Europe) - Trade Commissioner Cecilia Malmström, speaking at an EU-China business seminar on Tuesday 27 January, called on China to increase cooperation with the EU on a series of plurilateral trade negotiations both within and on the sidelines of the WTO.

Malmström urged China to “engage closely” with the EU and the other WTO information technology agreement (ITA) members to finalise a revised agreement, following the breakthrough with the China-US agreement of November 2014.

She said, too, that she was “very pleased” to be working with China in the negotiations on the liberalisation of the trade in environmental goods and services (“green goods initiative”), launched at the start of 2014. The EU and China “have competitive industries in sectors like renewable energy, environmental equipment and resource-efficient technologies. An ambitious agreement that eliminates tariffs, as well as addressing non-tariff barriers and services, will create economic and environmental benefits for both our societies and for the world as a whole”, she argued.

The commissioner said she was looking for more from China in that country's negotiations on joining the WTO government procurement agreement (GPA). “Clearer, more open procurement rules would help modernise China's economy and improve governance overall … and would help tackle corruption. The EU is happy that China has now made a new offer but we still have some way to go yet”, she stressed.

The commissioner restated the EU's support for China's application to join the talks on an international agreement on services (TiSA) but highlighted that the “challenge” is now for China to demonstrate its “commitment to the other major players”.

She welcomed the cooperation between the EU and China on the new international guidelines on export credits, seeking to ensure they are “based on clear rules to make sure they don't distort competition and result in a race to the bottom”. She said that “the time has come to step up the pace of our work”.

Commissioner Malmström invited China to work with the EU to take forward the Doha Round talks at the WTO, after the historic breakthrough made in Bali in December 2013, and so help “remove the blockages that have held back progress for so long - particularly the difference of opinion between emerging and developed countries on the right balance to strike”. (EH)
 
 
Israel Expected to Join WTO Talks on Environmental Goods Agreement
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, January 30, 2015
 
Jan. 29 — Israel this week is expected to join World Trade Organization negotiations aimed at reducing or eliminating trade tariffs on 54 environmental goods and technologies, according to the European Union.
 
Participants in the WTO's Environmental Goods Agreement (EGA) met Jan. 26-30 to discuss ways to cut trade barriers on products that can make energy use more efficient, cleaner and renewable.
 
The addition of Israel would bring the total number of EGA participants to 15, including: Australia, Canada, China, Costa Rica, the EU, Hong Kong, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Singapore, South Korea, Switzerland, Taiwan and the U.S.
 
Iceland and Turkey also are expected join the negotiations at the next round of talks scheduled to be held March 16-20. The Office of the U.S. Trade Representative is seeking public comment on Iceland's participation in the EGA talks until March 6.
 
Fourth Round
 
Members are seeking to identify additional products to be included in the agreement following consultations with a group of United Nations environmental and energy policy experts, nongovernmental organizations, industry participants and academia.
 
EGA participants intend to nominate environmental products—like solar panels and wind turbines, water treatment filters and solar water heaters—for elimination of tariff duties based on certain environmental justifications.
 
The EGA is a plurilateral agreement that aims to eliminate import tariffs on a most-favored-nation basis, meaning that any duty-free terms would be applied to all WTO members.
 
Members also will discuss proposals to draft a “living agreement” that contains a “revision mechanism” to permit the EGA to evolve with future developments in environmental technologies, the EU said in a statement.
 
 
Davos Ministerial Shows Few Position Changes On Post-Bali Work Program 
Inside U.S. Trade - 01/30/2015 
 
An informal ministerial on the margins of the World Economic Forum produced few political signals from the 21 attendees that they were ready to make major changes to their approach on developing a post-Bali work program aimed at advancing the stalled Doha round, despite a strong plea from World Trade Organization Director General Roberto Azevedo to do so.
 
For example, at the Jan. 24 meeting, there were no clear indications that countries were ready to drop their linkages between progress on agriculture and non-agricultural market access (NAMA), or to bury their differences over the extent to which the 2008 modalities texts for agriculture and NAMA will need to be changed for a post-Bali work program.
 
Brazil repeated its long-standing position that it needs clarity on what can be achieved on agriculture in order to determine what it can do in the other core negotiating areas, one Geneva source said.
 
Another Geneva source said Brazil emphasized that agriculture has to be a priority in the work program and that the level of ambition there will determine the outcome of other areas.
 
In contrast, the European Union has taken the position that all three core areas must move forward in parallel and that there must be balance between the obligations on these areas as well as within each area. For example, in advance of Davos, European Union Ambassador Angelos Pangratis told a Jan. 21 informal heads of delegation meeting that an ambitious outcome in agriculture will only be possible with an equivalent effort on NAMA.
 
"[A]nd focusing on agriculture, it will be difficult to envisage an outcome in market access if export competition and domestic support do not follow," he said.
 
Within export competition, Pangratis signaled that export credit issues should be addressed if agricultural export subsidies are to be reduced. "We cannot have a situation where certain types of [export competition] subsidies are prohibited, while others continue to thrive," he said.
 
At the meeting in Davos, Azevedo urged ministers to "recalibrate" their positions on the 2008 modalities, arguing that could mean being more ambitious in some areas and less ambitious in others, he said at a Jan. 24 press conference.
 
But one Geneva source said recalibrating is really a euphemism for scaling back the goals. That source also said that there was a general agreement in Davos that ambitions would have to be lowered if members are to agree to a work program by July 31. However, New Zealand warned that ambitions should not be lowered to the point that an agreement becomes meaningless, the source said.
 
Azevedo urged ministers to move past their current debate on the future of the 2008 proposals for modalities, which he said involved a "lot of finger-pointing." "We are going to now look at the world and reassess" these texts, he said.
 
At the meeting, ministers agreed to discuss their differences on the 2008 modalities in response to Azevedo's request for a new look at the 2008 texts, according to a Geneva source.
 
Pangratis gave some indication at the Jan. 21 meeting in Geneva that the EU would like to take a "simpler, more realistic" approach than the 2008 texts on agricultural and NAMA tariffs. He said such an approach should allow members flexibility to cater to their sensitivities and suggested that it could involve "some use" of average tariff cuts.
 
But one source warned that average tariff cuts could allow countries to protect tariff peaks for sensitive products by cutting tariffs on less sensitive products. That effect could be tempered if those cuts were coupled with the obligation to make a certain minimum cut to all tariff lines.
 
This source said nobody has rejected the use of averages as a possible approach, but emphasized that the discussion has been focused on concepts only. No country has introduced a specific proposal, he said. The source said such a proposal would be necessary in the near future if the July deadline for a work program is to be met. The source said that as many as 10,000 tariff lines would need to be examined and that is a time-intensive process.
 
He also said that South Africa and Argentina prefer a request-offer approach to the 2008 modalities on NAMA and that countries need to reassess that approach as well.
 
The U.S. has long held the view that the 2008 modalities on agriculture no longer reflect trade realities and impose too few obligations on emerging markets and does not produce enough market access.
 
U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman testified to the Senate Finance committee this week that multilateral subsidies rules on agriculture must reflect that China and India have emerged as major subsidizers. This message was also part of his Jan. 22 posting on the USTR Geneva mission website.
 
A Geneva source said agricultural subsidies was the most contentious issue during the 2008 negotiations, and is likely to remain so.
 
The 2008 approach on NAMA was based on the "Swiss formula" aimed at reducing tariff peaks. These modalities assigned developed countries one coefficient to calculate tariff reductions while allowing developing countries to choose from three different coefficients based on how many tariff lines they wish to protect.
 
The 2008 modalities did not apply the Swiss formula to least developed countries (LDCs) and those countries are seeking reassurances in the current negotiations that they would not have to take on any additional tariff cuts, the source said. These countries do not want the U.S.'s demands that China and India take on more obligations to affect their tariff flexibilities, according to the source.
 
Azevedo also urged ministers to give their ambassadors more flexibility in Geneva to not only make demands, but to indicate what concessions they are willing to make.
 
"I asked [the ministers] to instruct their ambassadors in Geneva to stop speaking in general terms and to engage in the specifics and I urged them to give their ambassadors the green light to take risks and to put their cards on the table," he said at the Jan. 24 press briefing.
 
"We need to understand that it is not enough to say what you want, you also have to say what you're ready to give," Azevedo said. A Geneva source added that as part of this exercise, countries have to drop their maximal demands and be clearer about their real red lines.
 
Azevedo did not describe the response he received other than to say that the new approach is "beginning to sink in." He said that the "spirit of urgency is there, but also a spirit of realism." According to Azevedo, "ministers realize that we are again at a critical junction and we have to deliver results if the multilateral system is to prosper."
 
The deadline for a post-Bali work program was delayed seven months in November 2014 as part of the deal to implement the Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA). The original deadline was mid-December, but was pushed back after members were unable to meet the original TFA implementation deadline of July 31, 2014 and spent the next five months working to do so.
 
 
Indian energy firm bars foreign bids for three solar projects 
 
NEW DELHI, Jan 29 (Reuters) - Indian state-run utility NTPC has restricted the building of three new solar power projects to domestic manufacturers, even as India pushes for overseas companies to lead fresh investments into a renewable energy drive.

Only Indian companies will be allowed to bid for the projects, which will have a combined 750 megawatts (MW) capacity, a spokeswoman for NTPC said on Thursday.

The spokeswoman declined to say why foreign companies were not able to bid, and stressed that Indian subsidiaries of foreign manufacturers would be free to participate in its future solar projects.

Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi's ambitious plans for solar won the support of President Barack Obama last weekend, with the U.S. leader offering to help finance an expansion of solar energy during a visit to New Delhi.

Modi wants foreign companies to lead $100 billion of fresh investment to raise India's solar energy capacity 33 times to 100,000 MW by 2022, providing big opportunities for U.S. companies like First Solar and SunEdison.

However, the U.S. and India are embroiled in a battle at the World Trade Organisation over state support for solar power. The U.S. said last year that domestic content requirements (DCR) in India's national solar programme were in breach of WTO rules.

Jasmeet Khurana at consultancy Bridge To India played down NTPC's decision, arguing that the DCR were restricted to a small portion of the government's solar target. He expects a majority of the planned expansion will be open to overseas firms.

NTPC, which produces a quarter of the country's electricity, largely through thermal plants, plans to commission more than 11,500 MW of renewable energy by 2032. (Reporting by Tommy Wilkes and Aman Shah in Mumbai; Editing by Vincent Baby) 
 
 
At DSB, India Appeals Poultry Ruling, 'Havana Club' Gains New Impetus 
Inside U.S. Trade - 01/30/2015 
 
India this week appealed a World Trade Organization panel decision from last fall that faulted New Delhi for imposing import restrictions on certain agricultural products from the United States due to an outbreak of low-pathogenic avian influenza virus in parts of the U.S.
 
The appeal was made during a meeting of the WTO's Dispute Settlement Body (DSB) on Jan. 26, which was the deadline for India to file its appeal in the case. The U.S. and India in November agreed to push back the deadline by more than a month until that date, in an effort to ease the workload on the Appellate Body.
 
India's move was announced in a WTO press release, but the formal notice of appeal detailing India's claims had not been released as of press time. Its arguments, however, are almost sure to take on the panel's finding that India had failed to recognize the concept of "disease-free areas and areas of low disease prevalence," and therefore violated Article 6.2 of the Agreement on Sanitary and Phytosanitary measures (Inside U.S. Trade, Oct. 17, 2014).
 
The U.S. won on almost all claims, and there was no indication that the U.S. had cross-appealed.
 
The longstanding "Havana Club" rum dispute between the U.S. and European Union also gained new life at the DSB meeting in the wake of President Obama's announcement of a shift in U.S.- Cuba policy.
 
Cuba criticized the U.S. as being non-compliant with the 2002 Appellate Body ruling in favor of the EU. Some of the 20 members that spoke in support of Cuba said they hoped the announcement that U.S. would restore diplomatic relations with Havana would restore would lead to a resolution of the case, but the U.S. rebuffed that idea, saying that the DSB was not the appropriate forum to have discussions on diplomatic relations.
 
The fight stems from a 2002 Appellate Body that faulted a U.S. law allowing Bacardi USA to use the "Havana Club" rum brand, despite the brand already being marketed by France-based Pernod Ricard, which licenses the Cuban trademark.
 
In its statement to the DSB, the U.S. also complained that China has maintained a ban on foreign suppliers of electronic payment services by requiring them to have a license without providing any procedures to obtain one.
 
The U.S. also raised issue with the EU's refusal to approve any new agricultural biotechnology products for import in 2014, claiming that the lack of approvals is "seriously disrupting trade in agricultural products between the United States and EU." Several U.S. lawmakers raised that same issue with U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman at a Jan. 27 Senate Finance hearing on U.S. trade policy (see related story).
 
Also at the DSB meeting, the body adopted an Appellate Body ruling that upheld a panel ruling that faulted two Argentine import policies as violating the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT).
 
Buenos Aires continued to express dismay over the result of the case, reiterating previous arguments that the complainants were unable to properly identify an "overarching measure" that can be challenged in the WTO.
 
"Argentina regrets that the three complainants may have advanced through all stages of the case without having to identify properly and accurately the specific normative content of the alleged overarching measure as a different measure from its specific components," it said at the meeting.
 
The Argentinian measures were challenged by the United States, European and Japan. Australia, Canada and Taiwan were third parties in the case.
 
 
Solar cloud over India-US ties 
M Ramesh 
30 January 2015
Business Line (The Hindu)
 
WTO panel to hear US complaint on Feb 3 
The solar dispute hovers like a cloud over the growing friendship between India and the US. Observers in India are watching what the US will do between now and February 3, when a WTO dispute panel will hear the US complaint.

The US feels that India’s ‘domestic content requirement’ (DCR) under the the Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission (JNNSM) violates WTO rules.

The DCR provision requires some solar power projects to be set up using only India-made photovoltaic cells and modules. (Solar modules are made with cells produced from polysilicon.)

Anti-dumping duties

In August, the Indian government refrained from imposing anti-dumping duties on solar cells and modules imported from a few countries including the US. The anticipation, therefore, is that the US will reciprocate by dropping its complaint with the WTO against the DCR provision.

Recently, JNNSM bid out projects worth 750 MW — solar companies had to bid for ‘viability gap funding’ given by the Centre. Half of that capacity was mandated to be under DCR.

Industry observers believe that the Indian government has provided sufficient grounds for the US to withdraw its complaint.

First, the government has since raised the solar capacity target to 100,000 MW to be achieved by 2022, up from 20,000 MW earlier. As such, part of the capacity to be created with domestic modules will be too small to affect business opportunities for American companies.

Second, India is getting government-owned, companies such as NTPC to set up solar power projects with domestic modules. For starters, public sector undertakings will set up 1,000 MW of projects and Defence establishments another 300 MW.

This, the government hopes, will be treated as ‘government procurement’ — WTO rules allow local product preference under ‘government procurement’.

Subsidy issue

“The market is large and American companies may not be too keen on lobbying against India,” says Jasmeet Khurana, an analyst at Bridge-to-India, an India-centric solar consultancy. Khurana feels that, in any case, the government intends to abolish subsidies for solar beyond 2017, and if there is no subsidy there can be no DCR. As such, the buy-India mandate is also for a short period, for a small slice of the market.

“The US has been talking so much about clean energy. I hope they allow India to develop its solar industry,” a senior official of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy told BusinessLine on Thursday.

 
India, US disagree over food security 
Subhash Narayan 
29 January 2015
Financial Chronicle
 
After the brouhaha comes the crash. Days after the high-pitched bonhomie on evidence during President Barack Obama’s three-day visit here, differences between India and US now threaten to derail the consensus on stock holding of food grains procured at below market price.

The differences came starkly to fore at the first informal meeting of key WTO members held in Geneva on Thursday as the multilateral trade body made efforts to find a permanent solution to the issue of holding food stocks, procurement price and bench-mark price on which the subsidy was computed.

Interestingly enough, India rallied with China and other developing countries as part of G-33 while US-led grouping had Australia and European Union.

This vertical split on food stocks and subsidies has cast fresh doubts on the perceived improvement in bilateral relations between US and India best showcased during President Obama’s visit this week to India. During prime minister Narendra Modi’s visit to the USA last September, a temporary truce had been achieved at a one-on-one meeting with President Obama.

On Thursday, G-33 countries led by India wanted public stockholding for food security purposes to be brought under the “Green Box”, a euphemism for non-trade distorting domestic support for agriculture.

“There could be some minor problems in negotiating long term solutions but the peace clause gives enough comfort room to India,” former member Planning Commission Anwarul Hoda said.

Under current WTO rules, developing countries are subject to only minimum disciplines on farm subsidies. Other countries like US, EU and Australia have taken the position that procurement made for food security purposes was by definition “market distorting”. News agencies quoted US officials as saying that “members cannot create a loophole in discipline” and were disappointed on the G-33 move. US-led advanced countries’ lobby also claimed that the G-33 proposal to include subsidy, procurement price, stock limits has been rejected.

But, the developing countries block led by India has maintained that its proposal was never rejected. The EU has maintained that there were “legitimate concerns” on both food security and trade distortions.

The G-33 proposal mooted that acquisition of food grain stocks by developing nations to support low-income producers should not be bracketed with aggregate measurement of support (AMS) denoting trade distorting domestic support.

Developing countries also expressed serious concern on calculations made under AMS, the difference between procurement price and the external reference price that determines subsidy to the farmer. The external reference price was still being kept at 1986-88 levels, a position not acceptable to developing countries.

India’s position had caused a furore among developed nations last year when it blocked the trade facilitation agreement unless issues related to its food security programme was accepted under WTO rules. The logjam was broken by an interim peace clause in November 2014 that legally protected existing stockholding programmes of developing countries if purchases at government-set prices take the countries' above the limits they have agreed for trade-distorting domestic support.
 
 
Nearly 100 trade probes against China in 2014: government 
29 January 2015
Agence France Presse
 
China's trade partners launched nearly 100 investigations into its exports last year, Beijing said Thursday, blaming rising protectionism due to a lacklustre global recovery and the country's growing economic clout.

The Asian powerhouse was targeted by 22 countries and regions with 97 trade probes, including 61 anti-dumping cases and 14 anti-subsidy investigations, commerce ministry spokesman Shen Danyang said.

"To a certain extent, the intense trade friction is a by-product of China becoming the world's biggest trading country in goods and second-largest economy," he told reporters at a briefing.

He also put it down to governments strengthening protection of their own domestic industries at a time when the world economy is lacking momentum.

The number of trade investigations targeting Chinese products was expected to "continue to be high" this year as manufacturers become ever more competitive, he added.

Products affected last year ranged from wind power generators to mobile phones and food, he said.

A 2013 trade row with China over solar panels sparked the EU's biggest-ever trade probe covering a market worth some 21 billion euros ($25 billion) at its zenith.

Last month, EU trade authorities opened an investigation into alleged Chinese dumping of solar glass, a key component of solar panels.

"China hopes the European side will strictly comply with the law in their investigation, give Chinese companies adequate chances to defend themselves and... come to a fair and just ruling," Shen said.
 
 
Froman Holds Open Possible WTO Challenge To China Cotton Subsidies 
Inside U.S. Trade - 01/30/2015 
 
U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman this week held open the possibility the United States could challenge Chinese cotton subsidies at the World Trade Organization, though he emphasized he has been largely looking at this issue in the context of creating new multilateral subsidies disciplines.
 
"We're looking at all our options [on China cotton subsidies]," he told the Senate Finance Committee on Jan. 27. "We have not yet determined whether there is a case to be brought in this area."
 
Froman said he has been engaging with China on cotton subsidies so as to get new disciplines on agricultural subsidies at the WTO. "We're hoping to engage with China on this and create some disciplines around this," he said.
 
Froman responded to a question from Sen. Johnny Isakson (R-GA) on what can be done to rein in China's market distorting actions. Isakson charged China is subsidizing its cotton producers at twice the world market price and stockpiling cotton, which is suppressing the cotton market.
 
Froman noted that, over the past 10 to 15 years, the pattern of agricultural subsidies has changed significantly. When the Doha round started in 2001, the U.S. and European Union were the major subsidizers. Since then, China and India have increased their agricultural subsidies while the U.S. and EU have reduced theirs, he said.
 
"I think it's important that we update our view where subsidies are coming from and what impact that has," he said. The U.S. has revamped its cotton subsidies program in the last farm bill in response to a successful WTO challenge from Brazil.
 
Froman said China, by some counts, could be considered the largest cotton subsidizer in the world. The National Cotton Council has charged that China has been paying subsidies to its cotton farmers at levels exceeding its WTO limits at least since 2011 (Inside U.S. Trade, Oct. 3, 2014).
 
In the context of the efforts to find a way forward for the Doha agenda, the U.S. has refused to accept the 2008 agriculture modalities text as the basis for the post-Bali work program, partially because it imposes too few disciplines on emerging markets like China (see related story).
 
 
EU fails to agree new Russia sanctions
By Christian Oliver in Brussels and Stefan Wagstyl in Berlin 
Financial Times
Last updated:January 29, 2015 7:28 pm
 
Increasingly divided EU ministers failed to issue a specific threat of further economic sanctions against Russia on Thursday, despite fears that the conflict in Ukraine was entering a dangerous new phase.

European foreign ministers held an emergency meeting in Brussels to determine how to respond to the collapse of a ceasefire in eastern Ukraine, fearing that this weekend’s bombardment of the port city of Mariupol marked a dramatic escalation of the fighting.
 
However, diplomats in Brussels said it was increasingly difficult to preserve a united front among the 28 members of the EU, partly because of the recent election of a leftwing government in Greece which has vowed to act as a bridge between Europe and Russia.

In a weak final statement, the ministers simply instructed the European Commission to undertake more preparatory work on loosely defined “appropriate action”. No deadline was given for this work to be completed.

Earlier in the day, some nations had pushed for a more specific threat of “restrictive measures” against Russia — diplomatic code for sanctions.

Federica Mogherini, the EU’s foreign affairs chief, said European leaders would have a final say on how to interpret “appropriate action” against Moscow at a summit on February 12.

The difficulty in issuing a clear threat to Russia highlights the EU’s faultlines. Arriving at the meeting, Nikos Kotzias, the new Greek foreign minister, said Athens would work to prevent a “rift between the European Union and Russia”. 
 
His government, which came to power this week, had already expressed a “general reservation” towards EU measures aimed at expanding sanctions against Moscow.

Linas Linkevicius, Lithuania’s foreign minister, slammed this weekend’s attack on Mariupol by pro-Russian rebels as “terrorism” that merited a direct response by the EU, such as more financial restrictions on Russia.

“How many people should be killed before we say ‘je suis Ukrainien’?” he asked, in reference to the “Je suis Charlie” placards that became common after this month’s terrorist killings at the Charlie Hebdo satirical newspaper in Paris.

EU sanctions imposed last year have targeted Russia’s energy, defence and banking sectors and have been seen as a critical factor in crippling Moscow’s economy, which has been weakened further by the collapsing oil price. Hawkish countries in the EU want more curbs on Russia’s access to international capital markets.

Countries such as Britain, Sweden, Poland, Romania and the Baltic states also want a more specific timeframe for the imposition of new economic sanctions.
 
However, diplomats from this hardline camp said France, Italy and, to a lesser extent, Germany were guarded about a tough response to Russia.

Speaking before Thursday’s meeting, Sigmar Gabriel, Germany’s economy minister, said it was too early “at the present time” to speak about further sanctions.

Pavlo Klimkin, Ukraine’s foreign minister, said he understood the difficulty for some countries but that the EU needed to show it was willing to defend the rule of law. 
 
“At the end of the day, this is not just about Donbass itself or Ukraine?.?.?.?we need to have mechanisms to respect the rules,” he said.

In a largely symbolic move, the EU ministers agreed to prolong until September the blacklisting of Russians and Ukrainians seen as instigating the conflict. Asset freezes and travel bans against them had been due to expire in March.

Diplomats argue that the internal EU friction will make it far harder to renew the broader sanctions against whole sectors of the Russian economy when they expire in July.Business
 
 
House votes to speed reviews of natural gas export proposals 
Jennifer A. Dlouhy 
29 January 2015
Houston Chronicle
 
WASHINGTON - The House of Representatives on Wednesday passed legislation to accelerate natural gas exports, despite muted opposition from the Obama administration and even as the Senate rejected a more aggressive plan.

The bill, passed 277-133, would force the Energy Department to decide whether to grant licenses to pending projects to broadly export liquefied natural gas within 30 days after they clear an environmental review. Under the Energy Department's current practice, there is no deadline for those decisions. Officials wait until environmental reviews are done before taking up applications to export LNG to countries that aren't U.S. free trade partners.

For onshore LNG export projects, the environmental reviews typically happen as the ventures are under Federal Energy Regulatory Commission scrutiny. It can still take months after those environmental analyses are done - and even after a FERC approval - for the Energy Department to deliver a verdict on a project's export license.

Rep. Bill Johnson, R-Ohio, who sponsored the House-passed bill, said that's too long. The answer, he said, is legislation "cutting through the bureaucratic red tape."

"With dozens of projects seeking approval, Washington is making it difficult for businesses to make the investment decisions needed to take advantage" of abundant natural gas, Johnson said. Rep. Gene Green, D-Houston, also said the current process "is taking far too long."

The White House did not issue a formal "statement of administrative policy" registering its views on the House bill. But administration officials have been wary of changes.

"The Department of Energy has already taken steps to modernize the LNG export approval process and ensure applications are looked at efficiently and expeditiously," said White House deputy press secretary Eric Schultz. "We believe the process is working well, and that bill is totally unnecessary."

Similar moves are afoot in the Senate, with the Energy and Natural Resources Committee set to hold a hearing examining a nearly identical bill from Sen. John Barrasso, R-Wyo.

But on Wednesday, the Senate voted 53-45 to reject a much broader proposal that would have put LNG exports to World Trade Organization member nations on the same legal footing as those destined for countries that have free trade agreements with the U.S.

Current law requires the Energy Department to grant approval for gas exports to those free trade partners without modification or delay. Sponsored by Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, the WTO measure was being considered as an amendment to legislation that would authorize the Keystone XL pipeline.

Although his proposal won a majority of votes, it fell short of the 60 needed for adoption under a Senate agreement.
 
 
U.S. Democrats set high bar for supporting Obama on trade 
By David Lawder and Richard Cowan

PHILADELPHIA, Jan 29 (Reuters) - Senior Democrats in the House of Representatives said on Thursday they would insist President Barack Obama provide hard evidence that proposed free trade deals will boost median U.S. incomes, laying out tough terms to support his trade agenda.

The demands, hours before Obama's address to a House Democratic retreat, are part of a renewed focus by the party on middle-class economic issues.

Republicans have made free trade a top priority and have called on Obama to bring Democrats into line.

Obama last week proposed shifting tax breaks from the wealthy to the middle class. He also asked Congress to give him "fast-track" authority to negotiate trade agreements, something many Democrats oppose, fearing American workers would lose more ground.

"Show me a trade deal that not only increases GDP (gross domestic product), but increases the average worker's monthly paycheck and I'll be for it," Representative Steve Israel told reporters.

"That's the message. We're open to a trade deal, but it's got to increase median household income and not just GDP. And if the administration can get us there, it will pass with Democratic votes."

Virginia's Gerry Connolly, a leader of the pro-trade New Democrats, sees no more than 50 Democratic votes and other pro-trade Democrats see 25-40 votes.

Representative Chris Van Hollen, the top Democrat on the House Budget Committee, said each trade deal will need to demonstrate stronger paychecks and wages for American workers, but it will be difficult to evaluate the 12-nation Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) agreement now being negotiated.

Israel, who headed House Democratic campaign efforts during November elections that ceded Senate control and more House seats to Republicans, now has a senior role shaping the Democratic Party's message.

He said many middle class workers felt cheated by manufacturing job losses after the 1994 North American Free Trade Agreement, and worry the U.S. economy could slip back into recession.

Illustrating the resistance within the party, Senate Democratic leader Harry Reid and three colleagues are circulating an online petition against fast-track.

Obama, in a question-and-answer session with the lawmakers on Thursday, acknowledged that previous U.S. trade deals had not been perfect, according to a source in the room. Obama also pledged to work with House Democratic leader Nancy Pelosi to ensure lawmakers had more information about the substance of the deals as they come together.

Some Democrats, including the party's senior member on the House committee responsible for trade, Sander Levin, say they will only support the TPP if it tackles currency manipulation and enforceable labor rights.

Others such as Senator Michael Bennet are looking for a good deal for farmers, while Senator Robert Menendez said that 12 years of protection for biologic drugs is a "critical issue" for him. (Reporting by David Lawder; Additional reporting by Jeff Mason in Philadelphia and Krista Hughes in Washington) 
 
 
Proposed Asia-Pacific free trade area signals start of new era of trade cooperation
Sijia Jiang sijia.jiang@scmp.com 
30 January 2015
scmp.com
 
The proposed Free Trade Area of the Asia-Pacific (FTAAP), which includes China and the United States, would one day render Apec redundant, according to the latter's executive director, Alan Bollard.

The FTAAP, which will contain all of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation's 21 member economies, is the most extensive plan for Asia-Pacific economic integration to date, far exceeding the membership of two other regional blocs also in the works: the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) and the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP).

The US-led TPP, which includes Japan and 10 other Apec countries but excludes China, seeks to eliminate tariffs and is aimed as the biggest free-trade agreement for the US.

The 16-member RCEP - comprising the 10 member states of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and six states with which Asean has free-trade agreements, including China - is more focused on market access.

"FTAAP could render TPP and RCEP unnecessary in the long run, but it's quite a long run," Bollard said. "FTAAP could also render Apec unnecessary, and if that happens, that's for the good."

But he emphasised it is still a distant scenario as Apec's 21 members have only just agreed to begin a "strategic study" of the FTAAP - a prerequisite for actual negotiations - in a breakthrough achieved at the Apec meeting in Beijing in November, years after the idea was first mooted.

"We are thinking most probably it's 2020s [that the FTAAP could be realised]," Bollard said.

China has been pushing for FTAAP to pre-empt the US from reasserting its leadership as a Pacific power through TPP.

Negotiations for TPP started in 2005 but have dragged on because of the difficulties of getting all the members to agree on the thorny issues of intellectual property, labour and environmental standards, and also because of differences within the American political dispensation.

"We are hearing there is a US political window of opportunity over the next couple of months, where there might be an agreement between Congress and the president on fast-track authority," Bollard said.

President Barack Obama, who is seeking trade promotion authority from his own Democratic Party as well as the Republicans, last week said in his State of the Union address to Congress that the US, not China, should be writing world trade rules.

"I think he's just saying to his countrymen that they've got a chance to set the standard with TPP that would be a new standard for regional and international trade agreements. That's a visionary statement, [but] yet to be seen whether achievable," Bollard said.

No one country should be writing world trade rules, he said. "The WTO should write the rules.

"The only way these trade agreements could be signed is by consensus ??The FTAAP should be looking at the best rules wherever we can find them."

The TPP might be forged earlier than the RCEP, Bollard said, although expectations on both might have to be lowered to achieve consensus.

"At the moment, chief negotiators for TPP are meeting in New York and the hope is that they might get something that is pretty close to being able to go to the ministers for sign-off, [but even] then it will still be pretty long term before anything practical happens as all 12 member states will need to ratify it," he said.

"RCEP is going to take longer. It does have a deadline at the end of this year but I think the general feeling is that it will take longer."

How to move services, people and capital, rather than just goods, across borders would be the common challenge in global trade negotiations in the new era, Bollard said.

 
China overtakes US as world's top investment magnet - UN 
By Tom Miles 
 
GENEVA, Jan 28 (Reuters) - China overtook the flagging United States to become the top destination for foreign direct investment (FDI) last year, according to the United Nations economic thinktank UNCTAD.

The United States has long been the world leader in attracting FDI, traditionally made up mainly of cross-border mergers and acquisitions and new corporate projects overseas, but last year its net inflows fell by two-thirds to $86 billion, preliminary data published on Thursday shows.

That was largely down to a deal between U.S. firm Verizon Communications Inc and its British partner Vodafone , which included a share buyback that reversed $130 billion of foreign investment out of the United States.

Meanwhile China's share of global FDI has been creeping up, reaching $128 billion last year.

James Zhan, director of UNCTAD's investment and enterprise division and lead author of the annual report, said the U.S. figure might rebound this year but China's rise had momentum, with a change in the kind of projects attracting FDI there.

"There's an increase of FDI into the services sector, and a slowdown of growth into manufacturing. And within manufacturing, investment into high tech is growing while labour intensive FDI has been declining," Zhan said.

Moreover, a new draft foreign investment law pointed to a liberalising trend that would make China even more attractive, even though some sectors would remain off-limits for foreign investors, he said.

"They are going for the regulatory model like the U.S. and Europe, (moving) from the traditionally tightly controlled tight screening of a project-by-project approval review model, into a more liberal model."

Globally, FDI flows fell by 8 percent last year to $1.26 trillion, the second lowest level since the start of the financial crisis.

"Overall, a solid FDI rise remains distant," Zhan said.

The fragile world economy, hesitant consumer demand, currency volatility and geopolitical instability could all deter investors, the UNCTAD report said.

In 2014, many economies saw an increase -- including the European Union, which attracted $267 billion, 13 percent up from 2013, and India, with a 26 percent surge to $35 billion.

Security worries contributed to a slowdown in the Middle East and North Africa, while lower commodity prices helped cut FDI flows to Latin America by 19 percent to $153 billion.

Flows to Russia fell to about $19 billion, a drop of 70 percent from 2013, a year when its FDI was boosted by a single big oil deal. (Reporting by Tom Miles; Editing by Ruth Pitchford) 
 
 
Oil’s fall pushes Germany into deflation
Claire Jones in Frankfurt 
Financial Times
Last updated:January 29, 2015 3:20 pm
 
Germany has become the latest eurozone member state to slump into deflation, with the first fall in prices since the autumn of 2009, supporting the case for last week’s landmark quantitative easing package from the European Central Bank.

Germany’s Federal Statistics Office said on Thursday it expected harmonised consumer prices, calculated to fit with the broader eurozone calculation, to decline 0.5 per cent in the year to January — a fall from a rise in costs of 0.1 per cent in the year to December. 
 
The plunge was almost entirely down to the collapse in oil prices, with energy costs falling 9 per cent over the 12 months. The last time prices fell in the eurozone’s largest economy was in September 2009 and the latest dip all but confirms that deflation across the currency area worsened in January. 
 
Analysts polled by Bloomberg expect figures to be released on Friday by Eurostat, the European Commission’s statistics agency, to show prices fell 0.5 per cent in January. With German prices falling at a faster pace than expected, the eurozone figure could undershoot forecasts. 
 
“[The German inflation figure] means expectations for eurozone inflation now carry a decidedly downside risk,” said Jörg Krämer, chief economist at Commerzbank. “The drop in oil prices suggests that eurozone headline inflation should stay below the zero line until autumn.” 
 
Prices dipped 0.2 per cent across the region in the year to December, falling in 12 out of 19 eurozone member states. 
 
Germany’s separate estimate of consumer prices (see chart) showed a drop of 0.3 per cent from the year-earlier month.

The ECB, which targets inflation of below but close to 2 per cent, announced a €1.1tn quantitative easing package last Thursday to tackle the threat of a vicious bout of deflation. 
 
The ECB and the eurozone’s national central banks will buy €60bn worth of assets a month until September 2016 to counter a negative spiral of falling prices, weak credit and stagnant demand. 
 
Neither of the central bank’s German policy makers, Bundesbank president Jens Weidmann and executive board member Sabine Lautenschläger, backed QE — a policy which has faced fierce criticism from the economic and political establishment within the currency area’s most powerful member state. 
 
While the German economy is strong enough to weather a spell of falling prices, deflation threatens to create havoc in weaker members of the currency area. 
 
The plunge in oil prices is likely to boost consumers’ spending on other goods and services in relatively strong economies such as Germany’s, where unemployment is at a post-unification low. The danger for the eurozone is that in weaker parts of the region, deflation will lead consumers to delay purchases, weighing on already anaemic demand. 
 
Low wage inflation in the eurozone’s largest economy is, however, causing problems at the country’s central bank. 
 
Andreas Dombret, the Bundesbank board member responsible for banking and financial supervision, has complained to the German press that he is losing staff to the ECB because it pays its supervisors about twice as much for the same jobs. 
 
Mr Dombret told German daily Börsen Zeitung on Wednesday that it was a “challenge” for the Bundesbank, which is constrained by a German civil service settlement on pay, to retain employees. 
 
The ECB took over supervision of the eurozone’s largest lenders in November when its regulatory wing, the single supervisory mechanism, opened for business. The SSM intends to employ about 1,000 people. 
 
Mr Dombret said 80 of the Bundesbank’s 1,300 supervisors had left for the ECB.
 
 
IMF working on alternate measures as US blocks reforms 
From Lalit K Jha

Washington, Jan 29 (PTI) With the US stalling quota reforms in the IMF that would increase the stakes of emerging countries like India, the world body today said it is working on alternate measures to go ahead with much-needed reforms that reflect the ground realities of the 21st century.

The IMF Executive Board said it would take another six months to map out the reform and thus complete the 15th review by December 15, 2015.

The 2010 reforms were backed by the US but now are being blocked by the US Congress.

The IMF Executive Board, in a statement, proposed to adopt a resolution expressing "deep regret" that the 14th review quota increases and the Board Reform Amendment have not become effective and that the Fifteenth Review has not been completed.

Urging members to accept the 2010 reforms without further delay, with the US being the main stumbling block, the resolution calls on the Executive Board to work expeditiously and to complete its work as soon as possible on interim steps in the key areas covered by the 2010 reforms.

As such, this would enable to reach an agreement on the steps that represent meaningful progress towards the objectives of the 2010 reforms by June 30, 2015, the statement said.

The proposed resolution stresses that such interim steps should not in any way be seen as a substitute for the 2010 reforms, which remain the highest priority, it said. 
