6000 delegates to attend WTO conference in Kenya
Trade proposal would open up foreign health coverage
L’OMC fédère les exclus du commerce des services;
Kazakhstan's WTO accession hampered by Mongolia and Ukraine: Deputy PM
EU GMO Approval Gridlock Could Trigger Renewed WTO Action, U.S. Exporters Say
Ecuador alista solicitud de salvaguardia ante la OMC por la balanza de pagos
No safeguard duty on imported newsprint
India considering separate duty structure for Goa iron ore exports- minister
Australian Trade Minister sees Pacific deal just weeks away
Official Signals U.S.-Japan Ag, Auto Talks Nearly Ready To Go To Ministers
US lawmaker urges caution tackling currency in trade deals
Strong dollar revives angst in Congress; Trade: Currency manipulation
Debt mountains spark fears of another crisis
G20 meeting to focus on Europe economy -Canada finance minister
CBP's Hinojosa Nominated for Key WCO Post
 
6000 delegates to attend WTO conference in Kenya
Kenya KBC
February 4, 2015
By Melline Myendo
WTO M.C meets bi-annually
 
Over 6,000 delegates from across the globe are expected in the country for the 10thMinisterial Conference by the World Trade Organization to be held for the first time on African soil.
Foreign Affairs Cabinet Secretary, Amina Mohammed says the government will leverage on the conference to market Kenya’s tourism as well as negotiate trade deals with WTO member countries.
The highest decision making body of the World Trade Organization is the ministerial conference which meets bi-annually.
During the meeting decisions can be taken on matters under multilateral trade agreements. Visiting WTO officials lauded that Kenya has taken to make the 10th WTO ministerial conference that would be held for the first time on African soil a success .
The government says it would leverage on the ministerial conference which will be held in December to market Kenya’s tourism and negotiate trade deals.
The 10th ministerial conference is expected to make Africa a key player in multilateral trade globally.
 
 
Trade proposal would open up foreign health coverage 
By Adam Behsudi | 2/4/15 3:02 AM EST
POLITICO
Countries negotiating a new services trade deal are considering a proposal that would allow them to tap into a growing stream of “medical tourists” seeking cut-rate treatments on everything from bypass surgery to knee replacements.
A concept paper introduced by Turkey in the Trade in Services Agreement negotiations would make health care a more tradable commodity, giving patients the opportunity to have foreign care covered by their own public or private insurance plans.
“Trade in health services may create opportunities and have a number of benefits not only for the business partners involved in trade, but for the population as a whole,” the proposal says. “Some countries suffer from shortages in the health sector (human or capital).”
The paper, which POLITICO obtained after it was leaked by the Associated Whistleblowing Press, was reportedly circulated among trade officials from the 28 European Union member states at an Oct. 3 meeting.
The EU, Turkey, United States and 20 other countries participating in the services negotiations discussed proposals on “patient mobility” at the latest round of talks in December, according to the Australian government. The 10th round of services negotiations, which will be chaired by the United States, will take place next week in Geneva.
The leaked paper argues that health care services in different countries often offer lower costs, shorter wait times and other comparative advantages that consumers find in other services sectors. But because most health services are funded and provided by state or nonprofit organizations, the sector “is of virtually no interest for foreign competitors.”
“In short, there is a huge untapped potential for the globalization of health care services,” the proposal says, citing a 2006 study as its primary source.
That 2006 study, by economists Mattoo Aaditya and Randeep Rathindran, argues that health care providers should be willing to reimburse patients seeking low-risk surgical treatments abroad because lower costs would create savings for the industry and improve treatment options for patients. Their paper points out that most U.S. health plans, both public and private, don’t cover non-emergency care overseas.
The CDC estimates that up to 750,000 Americans travel to countries in Asia and Latin America each year in search of cheaper medical services, including everything from cosmetic and heart surgery to dental work.
But critics of the proposal were quick to point out the potential to undermine health care systems in developed countries. Such coverage could also raise the price of medical care in developing nations and create a two-tiered health system in those countries that caters to wealthier tourist patients, according to a study by Odile Frank, health and social services officer for Public Services International, a trade union group for public sector workers.
People seeking treatment offshore means that “money is drawn out of the national health system, whose low level of investment is cited as one of the rationale for offshore treatment, and makes the problem self-perpetuating,” University of Auckland law professor Jane Kelsey says in a separate analysis of the proposal.
In a country with a strong public health care system, such as New Zealand, Kelsey says, the proposal could provide a justification to decrease investment in the system. Taxpayer funding for a patient would also be transferred into another country’s private health system, she argues.
Public Services International estimates that the weighted average share of gross domestic product that goes to health care in the 50 countries negotiating the services trade deal is considerable at 12.5 percent. The organization argues that the proposal would lead to huge profits for private health care companies, with the countries’ combined $6 trillion in GDP expenditures on health care per year amounting to 90 percent of the annual global expenditure on health.
“Health is a human right and is not for sale or for trade,” says Rosa Pavanelli, the labor group’s general secretary. “The health system exists to keep our families safe and healthy, not to ensure the profits of large corporations.”
The proposal would add a health care services annex to the services agreement, creating a system in which health professionals would grant prior authorization to their patients to be treated in other countries in the deal. Patients would then have the right to have a procedure reimbursed up to the cost of the treatment in their home countries by their public or private insurers.
A country would be able to accredit health providers in another country to ensure “quality and standards” for citizens seeking treatment there, according to the proposal. Upon completion of the medical procedure, the home country would bear the responsibility of any necessary care after treatment.
The paper suggests the annex be a “framework deal,” allowing the countries to decide the details of implementation.
Despite the criticisms, the paper is careful to state that any system the proposal might establish shouldn’t prevent countries from organizing their healthcare and social security systems to determine eligibility for treatment.
“We recognize that health is not a typical commodity or service but a public good,” the paper says. “Trade objectives in the health sector should be compatible with other social objectives like universal access.”
 
 
L’OMC fédère les exclus du commerce des services;
Les Etats membres de l’entité basée à Genève s’apprêtent, dès ce jeudi, à formuler leur offre concrète de dérogation aux échanges du secteur tertiaire pour les pays les moins avancés
Dejan Nikolic 
5 February 2015
Le Temps
 
La libéralisation généralisée des échanges de marchandises a été, en près de septante ans d’histoire contemporaine, un facteur parmi les plus déterminants dans la croissance économique mondiale. Bien qu’elle ne soit pas partagée de manière uniforme, cette progression du PIB à l’échelle planétaire a contribué globalement à réduire la pauvreté dans le monde. Toutefois, il aura fallu attendre ces vingt dernières années pour voir amorcer un mouvement parallèle de dérégulation en ce qui concerne le commerce des services. Avec très peu de progrès réalisés depuis.

Pourtant, ce secteur est le plus dynamique de l’économie universelle: en 2013, les exportations mondiales de services commerciaux, en progression de 6%, ont atteint les 4600 milliards de dollars, contre 18800 milliards de dollars pour les marchandises (+2% sur un an). L’importance des services est encore plus parlante si l’on dépasse une lecture basée sur les volumes, stricto sensu. Ils représentent aujourd’hui plus de 70% des richesses mondiales, 45% de l’emploi, plus de 40% du commerce en termes de valeur ajoutée et environ deux tiers des investissements étrangers directs réalisés à ce jour.

Pourquoi ce grand écart entre la réalité des chiffres et l’état des négociations? Dans l’intervalle des Conférences ministérielles de l’OMC en 2011 et en 2013, la question est revenue au centre des préoccupations à Genève. Au sein de l’organisation multilatérale, qui ambitionne de clore un cycle de Doha moribond avant la fin de cette année. Mais aussi, et avec plus d’intensité encore, en marge de cette dernière: à travers l’initiative TiSA (Trade in Services Agreement), lancée à huis clos en 2012 par un club de 21 économies avancées.

La Suisse, l’Union européenne, l’Australie et les Etats-Unis figurent parmi les fers de lance de cet effort en comité restreint. Rien d’étonnant: le secteur des services englobe par exemple 70% de l’emploi outre-Atlantique et représente 700 milliards de dollars de chiffre d’affaires annuel. Alors que moins de 5% des entreprises américaines actives dans ce domaine exportent leurs prestations. Du moins, pour l’heure.

Le dossier TiSA semble avancer à grands pas. Contrairement à son reflet multilatéral, négocié à l’OMC. Dans un cas comme dans l’autre, les pays les moins avancés (PMA) paraissent exclus de l’échiquier. Mais ce jeudi marque un tournant potentiellement important pour ces économies les plus vulnérables. Une trentaine d’Etats sont concernés, sur les 160 membres que compte l’OMC. La partie se joue à Genève. Où l’organisation accueille, durant deux jours, une réunion au sommet consacrée aux dérogations en matière de commerce des services. Pour la première fois, les PMA ont rendez-vous avec leurs partenaires d’économies développées et émergentes pour tenter de briser un verrou historique.

L’enjeu? Un système généralisé de traitements préférentiels est déjà en vigueur, depuis des décennies, dans le domaine des échanges de produits manufacturiers, de matières premières industrielles ou denrées alimentaires. Mais il n’existe à ce jour pas de dispositif comparable pour les flux de prestations allant de l’informatique à la distribution et du transport à la construction, en passant par le tourisme. Secteur qui, soit dit en passant, est le plus gros employeur de la planète, avec un salarié sur dix au monde, et représente 45% des services fournis par les PMA.

Ces derniers sont les économies les plus pauvres de la communauté mondiale. Ils concentrent environ 12% de la population du globe mais concentrent moins de 2% du PIB de la planète et environ 1% du commerce des marchandises. Leur participation aux échanges mondiaux de services est encore plus faible. Voire carrément marginale: elle représente environ 0,6% de leurs exportations et 1,7% de leurs importations.

Ainsi, les membres de l’OMC promettent la mise en œuvre concrète d’un régime exceptionnel, valable pendant quinze ans et enfreignant le sacro-saint principe de la nation la plus favorisée (traiter sur un pied d’égalité l’ensemble des pays membres). Les volontés politiques semblent, pour une fois, alignées. Les Etats s’apprêtent donc à formuler, dès aujourd’hui, leur offre unilatérale de «discriminations positives» (accès favorisé aux marchés, frais administratifs allégés, reconnaissance de qualification, permis de travail, assistance technique, etc.) à l’égard des prestataires les moins intégrés au libre-échange du secteur tertiaire.

Voilà pour la théorie. Car si les PMA peinent à exporter leurs services, c’est que la plupart d’entre eux ne disposent pas de statistiques fiables en la matière, et ne maîtrisent donc pas encore totalement les enjeux liés à ce secteur. Gageons que l’objectif du processus en cours, consistant à parvenir à une meilleure intégration des PMA dans le commerce international des services, ne restera pas un vœu pieux.

 
Kazakhstan's WTO accession hampered by Mongolia and Ukraine: Deputy PM 
Tengri News
5 February 2015
 
Kazakhstan’s entry into the World Trade Organization (WTO) is hampered by two countries - Ukraine and Mongolia, Deputy Prime Minister of Kazakhstan Bakytzhan Sagintayev said during his visit to Pavlodar Oblast in Kazakhstan, Tengrinews reports.

The reason for the talk was the proposal of Pavlodar authorities to develop a new state program for development of local content. The currently implemented program has served well to improve the exiting regulations and develop new measures to enhance coordination between the government agencies and national companies for development of local content and non-tariff regulation, they said, proposing to bring the work forward even further with the next program.

"The program was designed for the years 2010-2014. Under this program we held cooperation forums on a regular basis, where potential buyers could meet with companies to discuss cooperation. The program has proven its effectiveness, so we kindly ask to either renew the program for the development of local content or develop a new one," Deputy Akim (Mayor) of Pavlodar Oblast Duisenbai Turganov said at the meeting the the Deputy Prime-Minister of Kazakhstan where they discussed government support to industrial enterprises.

However, Sagintayev did not support this proposal and said that all the efforts had to be pulled into Kazakhstan’s accession into the WTO. 
 
"We cannot do this, we are entering the WTO. We have almost completed all the preparations and the negotiation processes for the accession onto the WTO. But we still have some unresolved issues with Mongolia and Ukraine. There are some unclear points. Mongolia opposes, citing some historical issues. It probably wants to bargain a better deal for itself, you know how talks happen in such cases. There are also issues with Ukraine. But I think that in the near future all of these issues will be resolved," Sagintayev said.
Writing by Dinara Urazova, editing by Tatyana Kuzmina
 
 
EU GMO Approval Gridlock Could Trigger Renewed WTO Action, U.S. Exporters Say
By Joe Kirwin
WTO Reporter, February 5, 2015
 
Feb. 4 — Continued gridlock in the European Union's process for approving genetically modified (GM) crops, food and feed could trigger the re-opening of a successful World Trade Organization complaint brought by the U.S. in the early 2000s, according to U.S. grain exporters as well as officials with the European biotechnology and food processing industries.
 
Speaking at a stakeholder conference held Feb. 4 during the eighth round of Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership talks between the EU and the U.S., Floyd Gaibler, director of trade policy and biotechnology for the U.S. Grains Council, told Bloomberg BNA that he and others have talked with the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative (USTR) about re-opening the WTO case, in which the WTO ruled in 2006 that the EU had violated international rules by maintaining a de facto moratorium on the approval of GM crops and foods made from them (26 WTO, 2/8/06).
 
“The EU now has another de facto moratorium in place similar to what they had in the early 2000s when the WTO case was launched by the United States,” Gaibler said. “The U.S. won that case and it is still open. The EU has not approved a GM crop since November of 2013. They have 12 applications pending that have been given scientific approval.”
 
“Now the new European Commission is reviewing the whole approval process,” Gaibler said. “We are talking with USTR officials and re-opening the WTO case is an option.”
 
EU Industries Share U.S. Concerns
 
U.S. corn and soybean exporters are frustrated with the approval process, a feeling also shared by the European biotechnology, food processing and livestock sectors, which urged the European Commission in 2014 to approve six pending applications they consider economically crucial to their industries.
 
The same EU groups renewed their efforts in a Feb. 3 letter sent to the new European Commission in advance of a special meeting of the EU executive body to be held Feb. 5-6, during which the stalemated GM approval process will be discussed.
 
“The EU relies on imports from third countries to cover 75 percent of its use of protein-rich ingredients for animal feeding purposes,” the groups said in the letter, a copy of which was obtained by Bloomberg BNA. “The EU food, feed and livestock sectors will face a substantial shortage of raw materials supply, which will also trigger cost increases both for basic food products and major feed ingredients if the decisions for authorization are delayed any further.”
 
Officials from the EU food and feed industry, speaking to Bloomberg BNA on condition of anonymity, said that they would support the U.S. re-opening the WTO case against the EU if the current gridlock does not change.
 
“We hope it does not come to that but it might be the only way to change the current situation,” an EU food processing official told Bloomberg BNA on condition of anonymity.
 
‘Stacked Events,' Sound Science
 
An official from the EU biotechnology industry said that even if the EU approval gridlock were to end in the near future, it would not trigger new imports because of what is known in the biotechnology industry as “stacked events,” where new genetic traits have been added to a previously authorized GM crop.
 
“Unlike in the U.S., the EU regulatory approval process requires any GM crop with a stacked event to undergo a whole new evaluation,” Beat Spath, director of agricultural biotechnology with EuropaBio, which represents the EU biotechnology industry, told Bloomberg BNA.
 
Meanwhile, both U.S. grain exporters and EU food processing, animal feed and livestock officials also said that they are concerned the European Commission could try to give each of the 28 EU member states the right to ban GM crops for food and feed in the same way the EU recently approved legislation giving member states the right to ban the cultivation of GM crops for reasons other than sound science.
 
“This would be a disaster,” said Gaibler.
 
A high-level European Commission official confirmed that such a plan is being considered and will be discussed at the Feb. 5-6 EU executive body meeting.
 
“There are various options on the table,” said the official, who spoke to Bloomberg BNA on condition of anonymity. “This is one of them. The new EU laws on GM cultivation will take effect in April. It is being considered to make a similar proposal for the GM food and feed applications.”
 
 
Ecuador alista solicitud de salvaguardia ante la OMC por la balanza de pagos 
5 February 2015
La República (Colombia)
 
 
Con la noticia de que Ecuador decidió que a más tardar el 27 de febrero finalizará la salvaguardia cambiaria de 21% a las exportaciones colombianas, el gobierno de Rafael Correa alista la solicitud pero ante la Organización Mundial del Comercio (OMC) para que sea por la balanza de pagos.

Ayer, se dio a conocer que la viceministra de Comercio, Mariana Sarasti y su homólogo Genaro Baldeón, llegaron al acuerdo de que 49% de los productos nacionales estarán exentos de este arancel. Los bienes comprendidos son materias primas, bienes de capital e insumos, que están dentro de 977 subpartidas que se suman a las exentas que emitió Ecuador el pasado 21 de enero. No obstante, se confirmó lo que Ecuador venía diciendo de tramitar una salvaguardia ante la organización. Oliva Díaz-Granados, directora de la Cámara de Comercio Colombo Ecuatoriana, dijo que esta nueva salvaguardia no discrimina a Colombia sino que aplica para todo el mundo. Javier Díaz, presidente de Analdex, agregó que de ser aceptada la solicitud no se aplicarían simultáneamente la salvaguardia cambiaria y la nueva.Además se llegó al cierre de la negociación del Acuerdo de Reconocimiento Mutuo, que facilitará la entrada de productos colombianos sin tantos requisitos técnicos. Por útlimo, Colombia aceptó la importación de un contingente de 80.000 toneladas de arroz, lo que significa que Colombia acata la orden de la Comunidad Andina de Naciones de permitir las compras de este grano desde Ecuador
 
 
No safeguard duty on imported newsprint 
5 February 2015
Manila Bulletin
 
The government has decided not to impose preliminary safeguard duty against imported newsprint from EU but instead proceeded with the full investigation over alleged injury to domestic industry caused by surge in imports of newsprint.

Walter van Hattum, head of Economic and Trade Section of the EU Delegation to the Philippines,  told reporters covering the CS Garment plant visit in Cavite Economic Zone by EU Delegation officials led by EU Ambassador Guy Ledoux that the Tariff Commission conducted a public hearing last December where all stakeholders were asked to submit their position papers within a 60-day period.

The  investigation was initiated under the Safeguard Measure Act following an evaluation of the petition filed by the domestic newsprint industry, represented by Trust International Paper Corporation (TIPCO), which  accounted for about 100 percent of the total Philippine production.

Van Hattum said the EU welcomed the decision of the government not to impose preliminary or temporary duty against newsprint imports, which will directly impact newspaper companies.

"It is a good sign," Van Hattum said.

Under the normal process, the agency concerned, in this case the Department of Trade and Industry, should have imposed a preliminary duty when it endorsed to the Commission  the petition to impose safeguard duty versus imported newsprint from EU.

But the non-imposition of preliminary duty does not preclude the Commission from imposing a punitive import duty anytime.

Van Hattum, however, cautioned the use of Safeguard Measure citing it is a very stringent  trade tool that must be used sparingly by trading partners.

It could be recalled that the Philippines has also launched a Safeguard investigation  against steel (galvanized sheets) imports from EU. There has been no progress on this investigation.

"That's why we are closely monitoring these safeguard initiatives being launched by the government against EU products," he said.

Van Hattum stressed that the petitioner must prove the causality of import-export of products to establish material injury on the domestic industry.

"But that causality is difficult to prove," he said.

Among EU countries, the United Kingdom is the biggest exporter of newsprint to the Philippines.

The Philippines had notified the WTO's Committee on Safeguards that it initiated on 20 September 2013 a safeguard investigation on newsprint  classified under HS Codes classified under AHTN Codes 4801.00.10 and 4801.00.90.

The documents submitted by the petitioner showed that increased imports have caused  serious injury to the local newsprint industry as indicated in their declining market share, production, sales, capacity utilization, productivity, profitability, price suppression, depression and undercutting.
 
 
India considering separate duty structure for Goa iron ore exports- minister 
 
MUMBAI, Feb 5 (Reuters) - India is considering implementing a separate duty structure for exports of iron ore from the country's top exporting state and will look at raising import duties to stop dumping of steel, the country's mines and steel minister said on Thursday.

Mining in India's top iron ore-exporting state of Goa has been hit hard by a two-year ban on mining and a 30 percent tax on exports, which has made it even more difficult for companies to sell iron ore to a world market where prices have almost halved in the past year.

The mines ministry has recommended that a different duty structure be implemented only for Goa because the iron ore mined from the state is of low-grade which Indian steelmakers are not keen on buying, Narendra Singh Tomar, the federal mines and steel minister, told reporters.

Tomar also said his ministry was looking at raising import duties to curb dumping of steel into the country, adding that he expected a decision could be reached before the federal budget on Feb. 28. (Reporting by Krishna Das in New Delhi; Writing by Aman Shah in Mumbai; Editing by Sunil Nair) 
 
 
Australian Trade Minister sees Pacific deal just weeks away 
 
SYDNEY, Feb 5 (Reuters) - Australian Trade Minister Andrew Robb said an ambitious Pacific trade pact could be reached within weeks after years of contentious negotiations. 
 
The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) trade agreement includes 12 countries covering 40 percent of the world economy, among them the United States and Japan. 
 
Last month, U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman official told lawmakers the deal could be wrapped up within months. 
 
"We are very close to agreeing this TPP," Robb told Australian Broadcasting Corp radio on Thursday. "We've got a meeting in mid-February where we're hoping to conclude it." 
 
A small number of issues remained to be worked out, Robb said without giving details, but there was a strong appetite to conclude a deal. 
 
 
Official Signals U.S.-Japan Ag, Auto Talks Nearly Ready To Go To Ministers 
World Trade Online
Posted: February 4, 2015 
Bilateral talks between the United States and Japan on agricultural market access and auto trade under the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) have progressed to the point that they are nearly ready to elevate to the ministerial level, although at least one more technical-level meeting is needed, a Japanese official signaled Tuesday (Feb. 3).
 
Takeo Mori, Japan's lead negotiator on auto trade, made that assessment during a press conference at the close of two days of U.S.-Japan talks in Washington that also involved Hiroshi Oe, the country's lead negotiator for agricultural market access with the United States.
 
"I think Ambassador Oe has already stated that we are going to have another meeting at our level, at least once and we are aiming at preparation for another ministerial," he said.
 
But Mori stopped short of saying an agreement could be reached after those two meetings. "If you ask me how fast we can [move forward], I don't have a definite answer," he said.
 
Mori said the two sides had made progress on autos during their two days of talks, but are still short of reaching an agreement. He declined to discuss what issues are outstanding on autos, saying he could not address the substance of the negotiations.
 
In a Feb. 3 interview, Rep. Charles Boustany (R-LA) pointed to auto issues with Japan as one of the major outstanding issues in the TPP negotiations, along with agricultural market access and the level of intellectual property protection for biologic medicines, among others.
 
The auto talks, led on the U.S. side by Acting Deputy U.S. Trade Representative Wendy Cutler, encompass a range of issues including special dispute settlement procedures to address non-tariff measures in the Japanese market; a special auto safeguard that the U.S. could put in place if auto imports from Japan surge after the U.S. reduces its tariff; and Japanese safety and environmental standards.
 
Earlier this month, Cutler said the two sides made progress on closing gaps on issues related to non-tariff measures and dispute settlement in the auto sector.
 
The agriculture talks that took place Feb. 2-3 were led on the U.S. side by Cutler and USTR Chief Agricultural Negotiator Darci Vetter, and on the Japanese side by Oe and Makoto Osawa, director general at Japan's Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, according to USTR.
 
 
US lawmaker urges caution tackling currency in trade deals 
 
WASHINGTON, Feb 4 (Reuters) - The United States has to walk a fine line when trying to address currency manipulation in trade agreements, the head of a congressional committee responsible for trade said on Wednesday.

Lawmakers from both parties have called for the administration to use trade deals to force trading partners to stop deliberately weakening their currencies to make their exports cheaper.

U.S. House of Representatives Ways and Means Committee Chairman Paul Ryan said the dollar's role as reserve currency meant the United States had to find a balance and also make sure it did not fall foul of any rules it might suggest.

"It has to be done very carefully so that it doesn't come back to bite us," he told reporters, adding that he shared the Obama administration's view on the issue.

"No one denies manipulation, the question is, what's the most effective way to address it?"

Ryan said he hoped to move quickly to introduce legislation to streamline the passage of trade deals through Congress, known as trade promotion authority (TPA), but had no firm timeline in mind.

How to improve lawmakers' access to draft negotiating texts was one issue still being worked through, he said.

But Ryan said he wanted to have the fast-track bill passed before negotiators from 12 nations reach final agreement on the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), a trade pact which would cover 40 percent of the world economy.

Officials say it will take at least six months to translate any agreement into legislation Congress can vote on, and if the deal is not voted on this year it risks being sidelined by the U.S. presidential race.

"It's fair to say: TPA spring and TPP fall," he said. (Reporting by Krista Hughes; Editing by Peter Cooney and Tom Brown) 
 
 
Strong dollar revives angst in Congress; Trade: Currency manipulation 
By Shawn Donnan in Washington 
5 February 2015
Financial Times
 
When Jack Lew, the US Treasury secretary, sits down today to brief members of the Senate finance committee on the president's 2016 budget and plans for tax reform he will be bracing himself for questions on at least one other subject.

A strong dollar now hitting corporate profits and US exports and the moves by central banks around the world to weaken their own currencies have revived an old angst on Capitol Hill and drawn new battle lines for Congress and its currency warriors.

Where once the target was China, now the push is to include tough provisions against currency manipulation in its trade agreements, particularly the Trans-Pacific Partnership, the deal with Japan and 10 other economies that is at the heart of the US international economic agenda and is nearing conclusion.

That push has been resisted until now by President Barack Obama. But with the dollar marching ever higher, the carmaking industry - and particularly Ford - lobbying heavily and both Democratic and Republican legislators clamouring for action, it is an issue that Mr Obama's foot soldiers are going to have to face.

"Pretending these concerns don't exist will not suffice," Orrin Hatch, the Republican senator who chairs the finance committee, warned recently.

The demands from Congress are fairly clear. A majority of both houses demanded in 2013 that "strong and enforceable" provisions against currency manipulation be included in the TPP and those calls continue today.

The US car industry argues that trading partners such as China and Japan have been subsidising exports to the US by keeping their currencies weak, a step that has also made US goods less competitive on the return trip.

"Tariffs were last century's trade barrier . . . The 21st-century trade barrier is currency manipulation," said Ziad Ojakli, Ford's chief lobbyist in Washington.

The administration has been loath to act on that call for at least two reasons.

The first is that the TPP is already a complex beast and adding in currency provisions might just kill it. The second is a question of jurisdiction. Within the US government trade deals have traditionally been negotiated by the US trade representative's office, while the Treasury addresses currency issues. That corresponds with global practice, where currency is the domain of the International Monetary Fund while trade rules are for the World Trade Organisation.

Many analysts think including currency rules in a trade agreement would set an awkward precedent. Yet just what the White House can do to satisfy the Congress currency hawks without killing the TPP is unclear.

In private conversations officials struggle to offer a solution bar pressing ahead with the that the issue will not be enough on its own to see the TPP die when it comes time for Congress to ratify it. They also point out the US was recently accused of currency manipulation as a result of its quantitative easing.

The simplest and most likely option may be for Washington to be more vocal on currency concerns at meetings such as next week's G20 gathering of finance ministers, to show adequate concern to Congress over the issue.

In an article for Foreign Affairs magazine last month, Fred Bergsten of the Washington-based Peterson Institute for International Economics argued that a three-pronged, more aggressive US policy would be the "smart strategy", whatever happened with the TPP.

First, the administration should enforce existing law and restore its international credibility on the issue by formally designating countries such as China currency manipulators. Second, any country manipulating its currency should have its goods subjected to countervailing - or punitive - duties. And third, the US should be prepared to wage war in the markets and use "countervailing currency intervention".

China buying a billion dollars to weaken its currency should be countered by a US move to buy the same in renminbi and maintain the status quo, Mr Bergsten argued in his article.

"A few implementations of this policy, or perhaps even just its announcement, should be enough to deter future currency manipulation," he wrote.

That approach is unlikely to become US government policy any time soon. But in Washington, the politics of currency are becoming volatile once again.
 
 
Debt mountains spark fears of another crisis
Ralph Atkins 
Financial Times
February 5, 2015 12:02 am
 
The world is awash with more debt than before the global financial crisis erupted in 2007, with China’s debt relative to its economic size now exceeding US levels, according to a report. 
 
Global debt has increased by $57tn since 2007 to almost $200tn — far outpacing economic growth, calculates McKinsey & Co, the consultancy. As a share of gross domestic product, debt has risen from 270 per cent to 286 per cent. 
 
McKinsey’s survey of debt across 47 countries — illustrated in an FT interactive graphic — highlights how hopes that the turmoil of the past eight years would spur widespread “deleveraging” to safer levels of indebtedness were misplaced. The report calls for “fresh approaches” to preventing future debt crises. 
 
“Overall debt relative to gross domestic product is now higher in most nations than it was before the crisis,” McKinsey reports. “Higher levels of debt pose questions about financial stability.”

Overall, almost half of the increase in global debt since 2007 was in developing economies, but a third was the result of higher government debt levels in advanced economies. Households have also increased debt levels across economies — the most notable exceptions being crisis-hit countries such as Ireland and the US.

“There are few indications that the current trajectory of rising leverage will change,” the report says. “This calls into question basic assumptions about debt and deleveraging and the adequacy of tools available to manage debt and avoid future crises.”

Countries that McKinsey warns face “potential vulnerabilities” because of high household debt include the Netherlands, South Korea, Canada, Sweden, Australia, Malalysia and Thailand. “It is like a balloon. If you squeeze debt in one place, it pops up somewhere else in the system,” says Richard Dobbs, one of the report’s authors.

One “bright spot,” McKinsey says, is evidence of deleveraging by banks. Financial sector debt relative to GDP has declined in the US and a few other crisis-hit countries, and stabilised in other advanced economies.

China’s total debt, including the financial sector, has nearly quadrupled since 2007 to the equivalent of 282 per cent of GDP. That was higher than in the US — although China is lower if financial sector debt is excluded to avoid double counting. McKinsey warns of risks in China’s property sector, local government financing and a rapidly expanding “shadow” banking system.

The country’s overall debt “appears manageable”, McKinsey says, but its indebtedness would restrict its ability to compensate for slower long-term growth in advanced economies.

“Before the [post-2007] crisis there was one area where debt was very low and stable, and that was China,” says Luigi Buttiglione, head of global strategy at hedge fund Brevan Howard and co-author of a report in September on global indebtedness. “When there was a crisis in the west, China could lever up. Now that is not the case.”

The report is likely to fuel debates among economists about what is an appropriate level of debt in an economy. McKinsey argues much of the expansion in developing countries has reflected the healthy development of financial markets, but in advanced economies high debt could constrain growth and create fresh financial vulnerabilities.

High debt levels could make it harder for central banks to “normalise” monetary policy without disrupting the real economy — the US Federal Reserve plans to raise interest rates this year for the first time since 2006. “High debt levels are an outward sign of structural problems,” says Charles Dumas, chairman of Lombard Street Research. 
 
The report comes as Greece this week has pushed for a radical rethink by its creditors of ways of tackling its debt and economic problems. Among the “fresh approaches” McKinsey suggests are innovations in mortgages and other debt contracts to better share risks between borrowers and creditors. Other steps it discusses to prevent future crises include debt reschedulings and even writing off debt bought by central banks under “quantitative easing” programmes. 
 
If debt held by government agencies and the central bank were excluded, Japan’s government debt to GDP ratio would fall from 234 per cent to 94 per cent. But such quick-fix “deleveraging” could itself cause financial turmoil, McKinsey acknowledges.

McKinsey’s conclusions echo warnings by the Bank for International Settlements in Basel, which acts as a think-tank for central bankers. BIS research had found that “when private sector credit-to-GDP ratios are significantly above their long-term trend, banking strains are likely to follow within three years”, Jaime Caruana, BIS general manager, said in a speech late last year.
 
 
G20 meeting to focus on Europe economy -Canada finance minister 
 
OTTAWA, Feb 4 (Reuters) - Europe's economic troubles will be a key focus when Group of 20 (G20) finance ministers and central bankers meet in Istanbul next week, Canadian Finance Minister Joe Oliver said on Wednesday.

"The focus has been, of course, on Europe where the growth is stagnant and where we're in a deflationary period. The (European) central bank has launched a massive quantitative easing program...and so we're hoping that will be part of the solution," Oliver told reporters.

"We're going to be talking about monetary policy, fiscal policy and structural change to try to address that issue, and we'll be discussing some of the other geopolitical concerns that have financial and economic implications."

A conundrum facing the G20 at the Feb. 9-10 meeting is figuring out what kind of joint action is appropriate given the current economic disparity: the United States growing relatively strongly and Europe flagging.

Asked about such joint action, Oliver said a major focus this year will be on implementing the 950 individual action plans that G20 members agreed on last year to try to boost global gross domestic product by 2 percent.

Washington believes the U.S. economy has turned a corner but U.S. officials acknowledge slower growth abroad will be a drag. The Obama administration says foreign policymakers can't rely on U.S. consumers to prop up their economies.

"The rest of the world cannot depend on the United States to be the sole engine of growth," Treasury Secretary Jack Lew told lawmakers on Tuesday. (Reporting by Randall Palmer; Additional reporting by Jason Lange in Washington; Editing by Peter Galloway) 
 
 
CBP's Hinojosa Nominated for Key WCO Post
WTO Reporter, February 5, 2015
 
Feb. 4 — Ana B. Hinojosa , a member of the senior executive service and a U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) deputy assistant commissioner, has been nominated by the U.S. for the position of World Customs Organization (WCO) director of compliance and facilitation, CBP announced in a news release.
 
Hinojosa has 27 years of experience in her field. Currently, she serves as CBP's deputy assistant commissioner, Office of International Affairs.
 
“Ana Hinojosa is highly qualified for and extremely well suited to help lead the World Customs Organization as its Director of Compliance and Facilitation,” Customs Commissioner R. Gil Kerlikowske said in the statement. “The breadth and depth of her experience will significantly enhance the WCO's ability to meet the continued and new challenges associated with securing the global supply chain while facilitating international commerce.”
 
The World Customs Organization, an intergovernmental independent body headquartered in Brussels, is charged with improving customs administration. The organization works closely with the World Trade Organization in a number of areas, including market access, Information Technology Agreement, customs valuation, rules of origin and trade facilitation.
END
 
 


  ________________________________  
Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.