US submits letter of acceptance on trade facilitation pact
Global trade should top Davos agenda, urges Amina
Kenya: Prioritise global trade in Davos, Kenya urges global leaders
AGRICULTURE: Commission advocates eu solution to Russian embargo
Washington's Boeing 777X tax breaks win national award despite continued controversy
Davos 2015: Businesses try to rally support for TTIP
FROMAN TAKES ON CRITICS CHARGING FAST TRACK RUSHES CONGRESS ON TRADE DEALS
FINANCE, WAYS & MEANS SET JAN. 27 HEARINGS ON TRADE AGENDA WITH FROMAN
EDITORIAL: Give Obama authority on trade deals
EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT LAYS OUT TISA DEMANDS, INCLUDING CHINA PARTICIPATION
Obama is wrong about 'fast track' trade policy
Commentary: China-Switzerland FTA sets example for China-EU cooperation
Suisse: Franc fort L’agriculture va souffrir, elle aussi, de la parité entre le franc et l’euro.; 
Op-Ed Columnist : Opinion :Don’t Blame Nafta
Pakistan: Appointment of representative to WTO: Officials idling over summary
Foreign firms in China: You're still welcome


US submits letter of acceptance on trade facilitation pact
23 January 2015 Press Trust of India
Davos, Jan 23 (PTI) The United States today submitted its letter of acceptance for the trade facilitation agreement to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation.
Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA), the first multilateral trade pact to be concluded since the inception of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO two decades ago, would help boost global economic activity.
The US is the third country after Singapore and Hong Kong to deliver the letter of acceptance to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO for the global trade deal.
US Trade Representative HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Michael Froman submitted the letter to WTO Director General HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevedo here.
This event marks the final step of a long journey and is expected to create momentum for other countries to follow suit soon.
Further, the agreement promises to improve global trade efficiency and is projected to generate hundreds of billions of dollars of economic activity. PTI BJ RAM KSR
Press Trust Of India Limited

Global trade should top Davos agenda, urges Amina
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Gerald Andae
23 January 2015
Business Daily
Foreign Affairs and International Trade Cabinet Secretary Amina Mohamed has called on world leaders to prioritise the development of global trade in the agenda of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Economic Forum that begun Wednesday in Davos, Switzerland.
Noting that trade remains the key engine of economic growth, the CS said discussions on the same should be put first, even as the world looks to launch a transformative trade agenda at the 10th HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation (WTO) Ministerial Conference that will be held in Nairobi in December this year.
“Trade has enormous potential to create employment, catalyse investments and foster growth and should be prioritised as top world leaders converge in Davos,” said Amb Mohamed.
Observing that conflicts, terrorism and violent extremism are significantly fuelled by unemployment, poverty and inequalities, the CS called for enhanced global trade that will help in the generation of investments and jobs.
“Africa needs investments and jobs, which are an integral part of the solution to conflicts, terrorism and extremism in the continent,” she said.
The CS was speaking shortly on arrival in Davos, Friday morning, where she joined Deputy President William Ruto who is representing President Uhuru Kenyatta at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Economic Forum.
Amb Mohamed will also be attending the WTO Informal Mini-Ministerial Conference as chairperson and host of the WTO 10th Ministerial Conference (MC10).
The mini-MC, which will be attended by trade ministers from around the world and WTO officials led by Roberto Azevêdo, is convened to informally discuss the global trade agenda ahead of the MC10 in Nairobi.
READ: Nairobi to host WTO meeting
“The ministers’ meeting will deliberate on the multilateral trading system and prospects for progress ahead of the 10th WTO Ministerial Conference,” said Amb Mohamed.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Economic Forum brings over 2,500 business, political, academic, and other leaders together to discuss the world’s most pressing issues.
The theme of this year’s forum is “New Global Context” and key topics include climate change, poverty eradication, conflict and extremism.
Nation Media Group Limited
Kenya: Prioritise global trade in Davos, Kenya urges global leaders
23 January 2015
PANAPRESS - Pan African News Agency
Nairobi, Kenya (PANA) - Kenya's Cabinet Secretary (CS) Amina Mohamed, has called on world leaders to prioritize enhancement of global trade in the agenda of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Economic Forum (WEF) that began Wednesday in Davos, Switzerland.
Saying that trade remains the principal engine of economic growth, the CS said trade discussions should be prioritized in Davos, the Foreign Affairs Press Office said in a news dispatch from Davos Friday.
She made the call as the world seeks to unveil a transformative trade agenda at the 10th HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) Ministerial Conference that will be held in Nairobi in December this year.
Trade has enormous potential to create employment, catalyse investments and foster growth and should be prioritized as top world leaders converge in Davos,” said the Foreign Affairs and International Trade Cabinet Secretary.
And this is more so as we look forward to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO negotiations at the 10th Ministerial Conference to be held in Nairobi in December this year,” added the CS.
Saying that conflicts, terrorism and violent extremism are significantly fueled by unemployment, poverty and inequalities, the CS called for enhanced global trade that will help in the generation of investments and jobs.
Africa needs investments and jobs, which are an integral part of the solution to conflicts, terrorism and extremism in the continent,” said the Cabinet Secretary.
The CS was speaking shortly on arrival in Davos, Friday morning, where she joined Deputy President William Ruto who is representing President Uhuru Kenyatta at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Economic Forum.
Mohamed will also be attending the WTO Informal Mini Ministerial Conference as Chair and host of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO 10th Ministerial Conference (MC10).
The mini-MC, which will be attended by trade ministers from around the world and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO officials led by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevêdo, is convened to informally discuss the global trade agenda ahead of the MC10 in Nairobi.
The Ministers’ meeting will deliberate on the multilateral trading system and prospects for progress ahead of the 10th WTO Ministerial Conference,” said Mohamed.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Economic Forum brings over 2,500 business, political, academic and other leaders together to discuss the world’s most pressing issues.
The theme of this year’s HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Economic Forum is New Global Context” and key topics include climate change, poverty eradication, conflict and extremism.
-0- PANA DJ/VAO 23Jan2015
Panafrican News Agency
AGRICULTURE: Commission advocates eu solution to Russian embargo
23 January 2015
Bulletin Quotidien Europe
English
Brussels, 22/01/2015 (Agence Europe) - The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Commission wants to avoid any ill feeling regarding the introduction of greater flexibility to the Russian embargo on EU agricultural products. On Thursday 22 January, it called for the introduction of a “European framework for ensuring the resumption of exports of certain products”, according to a statement by Enrico Brivio, the spokesperson for the Commissioner for Health and Food Safety, Vytenis Andriukaitis
The Commission does not want any bilateral agreements but rather, a European framework that is applied in the same way by Russia for all EU member states, explained the spokesperson (see EUROPE 11234).
France has adopted an agreement of principle, which is expected to allow for the resumption of exports of live pigs from France to Russia, over the next few weeks (see EUROPE 11233).
The Commission repeated that it had recently had technical discussions in Berlin between the Commission services and the Russian veterinary services to discuss sanitary and phytosanitary subjects involving pork meat products and potatoes (products subject to the Russian embargo). Enrico Brivio explained, however, that there was not as yet any formal agreement. The Commission had believed that it had detected a certain opening up from the Russians but the Commission has insisted on the need to have European certificates. Brivio indicated that “the Commission is waiting for a response from the Russians and is hoping that the sanitary and phytosanitary barriers will be able to be lifted on these products”. Russia has also requested that certain “high-value products” are added to the list of products that can be exported. In February 2014, Russia imposed an embargo on European pork products (the EU filed a complaint at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO). Since August 2014, Russia has imposed a ban on many different European food products (meat, fruit and vegetables, milk). (LC)
Agence Europe SA
Washington's Boeing 777X tax breaks win national award despite continued controversy
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Steve Wilhelm
23 January 2015
Puget Sound Business Journal Online. 
Washington's efforts to keep HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Boeing's 777X assembly in Washington state has won acknowledgment from an unusual source: New Jersey-based Business Facilities Magazine.
Specifically, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" Washington won a Silver Award for passing HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" $8.7 billion in tax incentives through 2040, which was pivotal in HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Boeing's decision to assemble the aircraft – and its high-tech carbon fiber wings – in Washington.
It wasn't just the tax breaks that kept the 777X facility in Washington, though. Just over half of the participating union workers of Machinists District Lodge 751 voted to accept a 10-year contract extension that cost the Machinists their pensions.
"Nearly two dozen states threw their hats into the ring when the aircraft giant signaled it might relocate its primary production hub during negotiations over a new contract with the machinist's union," said an announcement on the magazine's website. "The state stepped in with a huge long-term incentives package and the union accepted a new contract that secured nearly 30,000 direct and indirect jobs with an annual economic impact of more than $14 billion."
Washington was running in good company for the award.
First place, the Gold Award, went to The Economic Development Authority of Western Nevada for landing the $5 billion factory to build batteries for Tesla automobiles.
That 5 million-square-foot solar-powered factory, to be built in northern Nevada, is expected to generate 6,500 jobs for the region.
Despite the positive press, Washington's tax breaks for HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Boeing's 777X facility are hardly without controversy.
In December, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union filed a complaint with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade OrganizationHYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"  contending that Washington state's tax incentives are illegal under HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO rules.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO in 2012 ruled that similar tax breaks HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Boeing (NYSE: BA) received to subsidize the 787 also are illegal.
In addition, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Boeing's two big unions have been pushing for more accountability about what HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Boeing does with the money, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" seeking state legislation union leaders are calling the Aerospace Tax Incentive Accountably Act.
In particular, union leaders dislike the fact that HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Boeing received support from state taxpayers, and then moved some jobs, like engineers, out of state.
"We want this industry to have the tax incentives, and that's why we've consistently testified in favor of them," said HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Larry Brown, political director for International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers, District Lodge 751. "We just want to be make sure it's a good idea for everybody."
Did you find this article useful? Why not HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" subscribe to Puget Sound Business Journal (Seattle) for more articles and leads? Visit bizjournals.com/subscribe or call 1-866-853-3661.
American City Business Journals
Davos 2015: Businesses try to rally support for TTIP
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" andrew hill, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Gillian Tett, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Sarah Gordon
Andrew Hill and Gillian Tett in Davos, Shawn Donnan in Washington and Sarah Gordon in London 
544 words
23 January 2015
15:44
Financial Times (FT.Com)
FTCMA
English
Copyright 2015 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web. 
Business executives are rallying support in Davos for a controversial transatlantic trade deal, after being caught on the hop by popular and political protests against a possible agreement.
Leading business figures admit they were slow to make the case for the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, which HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Michael Froman, the US trade representative, said on Friday was strategically, political and economically important.
In an interview with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Financial Times at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Economic Forum, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Frank Appel, chief executive of Deutsche Post DHL, the German logistics group, said that business leaders were open to criticism "for not explaining why this is very beneficial for Europe and the US".
Ahead of this week's conference, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" John Cridland, director-general of the CBI, the British business organisation, said TTIP was his priority for the summit. "We've got to get back on the front foot with the business community on TTIP," he told the FT.
Unions and lobby groups have caught free-trade advocates by surprise with the strength of their protests against the TTIP's investor protection clauses, which they say give too much power to big business to sue national governments.
Mr Appel said on Friday that "the claim [TTIP] undermines European laws is a completely fact-free statement, but it's popular".
Even if the problems can be ironed out, a TTIP deal is unlikely before 2016. But on the back of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Barack Obama's State of the Union speech earlier this week, in which the US president stressed the important of free trade, Mr Froman is meeting a series of counterparts in Davos to thrash out a joint strategy to break through the logjam. He was due to speak on a panel with Mr Appel and Roberto Azevêdo, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation's director-general, later on Friday, with the theme "Rebooting global trade".
In a briefing, Mr Froman argued a TTIP deal was important because it would support small companies on both side of the Atlantic, boosting growth. It would also display Europe and America's shared liberal values "when there are a lot of [alternative] models out there".
The TTIP would also provide a bulwark to Europe in the face of Russia's resurgence. "At a time when there is geographical instability a [transatlantic trade deal] could help," he argued. This last view is also shared by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Angela Merkel, chancellor of Germany, where public opposition to TTIP is very vocal. She sees it as a strong anchor for the transatlantic alliance in a time of uncertainty and has made clear while at Davos that it will also be one of her priorities for 2015.
Despite President Obama's enthusiasm for free trade, such deals do not have the support of all Democrats. Democrat senators attending the Davos forum have pointed out that only Republicans applauded the trade passages of the State of the Union address. They said it would need a "change in the weather" to get trade through the Democrats, though with the Republicans in charge of both houses of Congress, not many would have to back such deals for the administration to gain approval.
The Financial Times Limited (AAIW/EIW) 
FROMAN TAKES ON CRITICS CHARGING FAST TRACK RUSHES CONGRESS ON TRADE DEALS
23 January 2015I
nside U.S. Trade
U.S. Trade Representative HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Michael Froman on Jan. 21 took on critics of Trade Promotion Authority (TPA), or fast-track legislation, who have charged that it serves to limit public scrutiny of future trade agreements, congressional debate of such deals and the ability to amend them.
Fast-track bills lay out a general blueprint for future trade agreements as negotiating objectives, but also the exact timeline for congressional consideration of a completed deal.
"Under previous TPA bills, the president was required to provide three months' -- 90 days' notice -- before signing an agreement," Froman told a meeting of the U.S. Conference of Mayors. "Even when Congress begins its work, the process is designed to take up 90 legislative days, those are legislative days, different than calendar days."
Froman said that 90 legislative days typically amount to five calendar months or more.
"So five calendar months, and three months advance notice -- this is hardly "rushing to ram something through in the dead of night," he said. "The one thing about so-called 'fast track' is that there is nothing fast about it."
But Froman's defense of fast track seemed limited to the argument that it allows ample time for public and congressional scrutiny. He did not address the key objection raised last year by 151 House Democrats that Congress has little say in whether agreements are eligible for fast-track procedures since the administration determines whether it has met the conditions that make a trade agreement eligible for fast track (Inside U.S. Trade, Nov. 15, 2013).
Under previous versions of TPA, as well as under the bill introduced last January by the chairmen of the congressional trade committees, a trade agreement is fast-track eligible if it makes "progress" toward achieving the stated negotiating objectives and the administration has satisfied the conditions for congressional consultation, oversight and reporting requirements.
Froman's message comes the same week as key fast-track critic Rep. Rosa DeLauro (D-CT) charged publicly on Jan. 20 that TPA is "designed to limit public scrutiny, to limit Congress's ability to debate and amend the negotiated text, and it gives up congressional constitutional authority to carefully review the [Trans Pacific Partnership (TPP)] and make changes if necessary to protect American workers and consumers."
TPP is likely to be the first trade agreement that will be considered under a new fast-track bill since it is further along than the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership. The "contours" of a TPP agreement are coming into focus, Froman told the conference of mayors. He also made the general point that the administration's trade policy is a key part of its effort to "restore" America as a nation that manufactures products.
He highlighted President Obama's comments during his Jan. 20 State of the Union address that he is looking to Congress to pass a TPA bill. Similar to Obama, Froman said TPP is an alternative to a trade and investment model advocated by China that he charged is not consistent with American values. "We can set clear, consistent rules about how to sell goods in markets abroad or we can allow corrupt bureaucrats in foreign capitals to continue picking winners and losers," Froman said.
He made three points that expressly contrasted TPP with the terms of the "network of agreements" that China is seeking to create in the Asia Pacific. The first is that TPP will include the "highest and most enforceable" labor and environmental standards in any trade agreement, while China's alternative has none. He also said that TPP for the first time will put disciplines on state-owned enterprises and ensure a free and open Internet, while China's alternative would not.
This language echoes a White House fact sheet released alongside Obama's speech, which said the president would work with Congress to promote U.S. jobs and workers "by signing new trade deals so the United States, not China, sets the fair wage, safe workplace, and clean environment rules of trade."
Froman did not expressly say that senior officials in Obama's economic team, led by National Economic Council Director Jeff Zients, have been working to secure more votes for a TPA bill (Inside U.S. Trade, Jan. 16). He did that the administration is "working with Democrats and Republicans in Congress, underscoring what's at stake, as the president did last night," and that this effort would continue to ensure the administration has the necessary support.
Froman also said the TPP provisions on labor and environmental obligations are making good on Obama's promises in the first presidential campaign to renegotiate the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" North American Free Trade Agreement. "What that meant was take labor and environment from being side issues -- not fully enforceable -- and making sure that they are treated just as seriously," he said. "And that's exactly what we're doing in TPP." 
Inside Washington Publishers
EDITORIAL: Give Obama authority on trade deals
The Wisconsin State Journal 
Tribune Content Agency, LLC
23 January 2015
The Wisconsin State Journal (Tribune Content Agency)
Jan. 23--You don't often hear U.S. Rep. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Paul Ryan say he "agrees with every word" of something the president says.
So let's highlight and encourage this moment. It's a big opportunity for Wisconsin's economy and jobs.
Ryan, R-Janesville, chairman of the House Committee on Ways and Means, said this week he backs President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Barack Obama's views on trade, as outlined in the president's State of the Union address.
"I agree with every word he said in the speech with respect to trade and Asia and getting in there and helping write the rules instead of China writing the rules," Ryan told HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" MSNBC's "Morning Joe." "The president is in the middle of negotiating a trade agreement with Asian nations, representing 40 percent of global GDP. This means more jobs for America. This means more exports for us. This is something we have to get on top of, and I agree with him on that."
That's good to hear, because Congress needs to approve trade promotion authority for the president, giving the administration a stronger hand when negotiating with global partners.
During his speech Tuesday night, Obama stressed that more American exports will increase jobs and pay here. The Obama administration is pursuing a Trans-Pacific Partnership with Japan and other nations. The president also hopes to seal a deal with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union.
Free-trade zones across the Atlantic and Pacific oceans would lower tariffs and smooth commerce for all while encouraging higher environmental and labor standards. Past trade agreements "haven't always lived up to the hype," Obama acknowledged. But "95 percent of the world's customers live outside our borders. We can't close ourselves off from those opportunities."
No, we can't -- especially in a top manufacturing and dairy state such as Wisconsin, where research and technology are strong.
Half of manufacturing executives say they're actively looking to bring jobs back from China, Obama said, "So let's give them one more reason to get it done."
America needs one person -- not 535 members of Congress -- negotiating trade deals. That way, other nations know a deal is a deal after carefully balancing demands with concessions.
Congress would still get the final say. By granting trade promotion authority to the president, Congress merely agrees to vote for or against a trade package without amendments.
Some progressive Democrats and tea party Republicans have objected to the speed and secrecy of trade promotion power. But as HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Michael Froman, the president's trade representative, pointed out this week, the Trans-Pacific Partnership has been "under negotiation for five years, during which we've had more than 1,600 briefings in Congress."
The White House must notify Congress 90 days before an agreement is concluding and give lawmakers 90 legislative days to debate and vote on a bill.
We trust Obama to negotiate trade deals that respect American workers and the environment. Wisconsin's Democratic lawmakers should, too. At the same time, Ryan has to convince more of his peers not to reflexively vote against giving Obama more authority.
The U.S. is running a trade surplus in manufacturing, agriculture and services with the 20 countries it has bilateral agreements with. Wisconsin should welcome more deals like that.
EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT LAYS OUT TISA DEMANDS, INCLUDING CHINA PARTICIPATION
23 January 2015
Inside U.S. Trade
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Parliament rapporteur on the Trade in Services Agreement (TISA) has laid out 10 demands that must be met for a final agreement to be acceptable to its members, including having China participate in the negotiations now taking place among selected members of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization.
"China will certainly become one of the main trading partners in services," said Viviane Reding, the parliament's TISA rapporteur and a member of the European People's Party in a Jan. 13 press conference. "It will be very important to have China on board and I think there is a general agreement in Europe that China should be granted access -- if it so wants -- to the negotiation table."
She said that as negotiations advance, other emerging economies such as Brazil, Russia, India, and South Africa will join.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Commission formally backed China's membership in March 2014, but has met with push-back from the United States. The U.S. opposes including China in TISA with the argument that China has not shown a lot of flexibility in the ongoing negotiations to expand the Information Technology Agreement and has failed to implement the adverse HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO decision on electronic payments. The U.S. opposition is backed only by Japan, and to a lesser extent Canada (Inside U.S. Trade, May 16, 2014).
In addition to laying out her conditions, Reding also emphasized that the parliament will take a more active interest in the negotiations, after not having been closely involved so far." You will hear a lot on this subject [of TISA] in 2015 [from the Parliament]," she said.
She dismissed as "completely wrong" claims that TISA could be concluded this year and said 2015 will be a working year to push the negotiations ahead "with the contribution on the parliament."
Parliament will hold a public hearing on TISA on Feb. 24, but Reding did not provide further details. That will be less than two weeks after the first TISA round of 2015, hosted by the U.S. Mission in Geneva from Feb. 9-13. Parliament will also this year present a report detailing its position on TISA after further consulting with the public and private sectors, NGOs, social partners and national parliaments, according to Reding. She gave no timeline for the release of the report.
Reding split her conditions into two groups: five that must be included in the TISA and five that must be excluded from a final deal which she designated as red lines.
In the second group, Reding highlighted the need to keep strong protections for personal data, and said she was "rather nervous when I see what's going on so far in the TISA negotiation" in light of an April 2014 U.S. proposal on the free flow of data leaked late last year. "We will not accept that through the back door our established rules on data protection could be wiped out," she said. "So we will be extraordinarily cautious on this chapter and we expect from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union that it acts on this in order to defend the basic rules" of its privacy protection regime.
In a Dec. 3 Committee on International Trade hearing, Reding attacked a U.S. proposal on ensuring the free flow of data as seeking to specifically create exemptions to privacy and data protection.
The U.S. proposal would seek to establish broad rights for private service suppliers to transfer information -- including personal data -- into and out of a party's territory, as long as it is in connection with the conduct of the firm's business (Inside U.S. Trade, Dec. 19, 2014).
The language being advocated by the U.S. does not contain an explicit exception for data privacy measures or other reservations, in contrast to the other provisions in the proposal aimed at removing localization requirements. The data transfer provision is contained in "Article X.4: Movement of Information" of the leaked text, and appears to be a proposal for TISA's e-commerce annex. It would apply across all sectors covered by the agreement.
Her demands for TISA exclusions also cited health, education, and water services. "They are not for sale," she said.
She also said there can be no chapter on the movement of natural persons, as the issue of immigration must be left to member states. There would be a "tsunami of public opinion if the EU were to remove its rules" on immigration, according to Reding.
The temporary movement of natural persons -- known as the Mode 4 of services supply -- is being raised in the TISA negotiations by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Commission, which in June 2014 tabled a proposal that would delineate three categories of professionals covered by such commitments
Among the items that Reding said must be included, she cited high international standards for doing business in such areas as telecommunications, air and maritime transport sectors. These should reflect the EU's existing standards in those areas, she said.
The agreement must result in foreign services markets becoming as open as the EU market, Reding said. Non-tariff barriers drive up the cost of doing business for EU companies an additional 15 percent in Canada and go up to as high as 68 percent additional cost in China, she said. An acceptable TISA deal would have to bring those costs closer to the 6 percent additional cost that foreign companies are faced with when operating in the EU, according to Reding.
The parliament also expects to see tangible benefits for EU citizens in the areas of online shopping, consumer protection in online banking, and when traveling abroad, she said. In addition, she said a state-to-state dispute mechanism should be included in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's framework to ensure that the agreement is enforced. 
Inside Washington Publishers
FINANCE, WAYS & MEANS SET JAN. 27 HEARINGS ON TRADE AGENDA WITH FROMAN
23 January 2015
Inside U.S. Trade. 
U.S. Trade Representative HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Michael Froman will testify before the Senate Finance and House Ways & Means committees in separate Jan. 27 hearings on the administration's trade policy agenda, both panels announced this week.
The timing of the hearings is unusual, as the Ways & Means and Finance committees typically hold their annual hearings with USTR on the trade policy agenda in the spring -- after the agency delivers a written version of the president's trade agenda. For instance, last year Ways & Means held its hearing with Froman on the trade policy agenda on April 3.
Under Section 163 of the Trade Act of 1974, as amended, USTR is required to submit to Congress by March 1 of each year a report that includes "the national trade policy agenda for the year in which the report is submitted."
A spokesman for Ways & Means Chairman HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Paul Ryan (R-WI) said on Jan. 20 that the committee scheduled an early hearing because "there is a lot moving quickly on the trade issue and we want to get started right away." He also said it is "very possible" that Ways & Means would hold additional trade hearings in the months to follow.
The announcements come as Republicans on Ways & Means and Finance are pressing for quick action on a bill to renew Trade Promotion Authority (TPA), and for President Obama to build support for the legislation among congressional Democrats. They are doing so even though TPA legislation has not yet been introduced in this Congress.
Staff for Ryan, Finance Chairman Orrin Hatch (R-UT), and Finance Ranking Member Ron Wyden (D-OR) have been holding discussions on potential changes to the TPA bill introduced in the last Congress by Hatch, former Ways & Means Chairman Dave Camp and former Finance Chairman Max Baucus.
Hatch referred to these discussions in a Jan. 20 speech to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" U.S. Chamber of Commerce. "I'm currently working with Ranking Member Wyden and Chairman Ryan to see if there are improvements that might be made to TPA so that we can introduce a bipartisan, bicameral bill in this Congress that we can move in short order," he said. Hatch also said he plans to move "carefully but quickly to introduce and mark up a TPA bill" in the Finance Committee.
But the Ryan spokesman said he does not expect a bill from those conversations to be introduced before the two hearings next week. Sources have said congressional Republicans hope to release a new TPA bill in early February.
The Finance hearing is titled "President Obama's 2015 Trade Policy Agenda" and will be held at 10 a.m. in Room 215 of the Dirksen Senate Office Building, an advisory said. The Ways & Means hearing, which is titled "U.S. Trade Policy Agenda," will be held at 2 p.m. in Room HVC 210 of the U.S. Capitol Visitor Center.
In addition to TPA and ongoing trade negotiations, other issues that could come up are the lapsed Generalized System of Preferences, which expired in 2013, and the African Growth and Opportunity Act, which will expire on Sept. 30 if Congress does not renew it.
Froman will be the only witness at the hearings, though any individual or organization may submit a written statement for consideration by the committee and for inclusion in the printed record, according to the committee announcements. 
Inside Washington Publishers
Document IUST000020150123eb1n00007
Obama is wrong about 'fast track' trade policy
By Sally Kohn 
23 January 2015
CNN Wire. 
Editor's note: Sally Kohn is an activist, columnist and television commentator. Follow her on HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Twitter: @sallykohn. The opinions expressed in this commentary are solely those of the author.
(HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" CNN) -- During the 2004 presidential election, I spent time near Canton, Ohio, trying to turn out votes for John Kerry. I visited neighborhoods around the struggling Rust Belt town, knocking on doors and repeating a campaign-prepared script about Senator Kerry's plans to put the middle class back on track.
The voters scoffed at me, surveying their decaying porches with the decaying economy all around them. They blamed trade deals, especially the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) for the loss of good manufacturing jobs in the area, and laws giving steel and auto plants the chance to move jobs overseas. One after another, each voter reminded me that both parties supported the crappy NAFTA deal that got us into this mess. How could we trust any of them to get us out?
A decade later, just after the 20th anniversary of NAFTA, President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Obama is marking the disastrous legacy of free trade policies by working with Republicans to push for even more bad trade deals that would benefit big businesses at the expense of America's economy and workers.
President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Obama has outlined an ambitious agenda to help the middle class. But his eagerness to find some area of compromise with Republicans in the form of trade policy risks undermining all his other plans.
"I'm asking both parties to give me trade promotion authority to protect American workers, with strong new trade deals from Asia to Europe that aren't just free, but fair," President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Obama said in his State of the Union address on Tuesday night as Republicans stood and applauded while Democrats rightly stayed in their seats.
Trade promotion authority is a new synonym for "fast-track authority" which would give the president authority to negotiate international trade agreements on his own. Congress could veto such deals, but could not amend or filibuster them. Fast-track trade authority removes important checks and balances not only in our legislative process but in our economy as a whole. This is a bad idea for two reasons.
In recent history, trade deals enacted by Washington have been bad for American workers and our economy. President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Obama and Republicans promote trade deals as good for economic growth and job creation. "Ninety-five percent of the world's customers live outside our borders, and we can't close ourselves off from those opportunities," President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Obama said.
However, government data analyzed by the nonprofit HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Public Citizen shows that under two decades of fast-track trade agreements, U.S. trade deficits have gotten worse -- increasing by over 440%. Nearly 5 million U.S. jobs -- 1 in 4 manufacturing jobs in America -- have been lost since fast-track deals like NAFTA and related agreements.
While President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Obama has emphasized that he wants to reduce income inequality, numerous studies say such trade deals have contributed to the rise in income inequality. In fact, wages in the United States have remained mostly stagnant, adjusted for inflation, since the mid-1970s --- when fast-track trade authority was first enacted -- even though worker productivity has doubled in the same period.
All of this suggests we need more scrutiny on these trade deals, not less. Given the evidence of the destruction of previous trade deals, we need giant caution signs, speed bumps and roadblocks -- not a fast track.
The other problem with fast-track trade authority is that it allows our trade negotiators to unilaterally undermine democratically passed legislation. For instance, the Trans-Pacific Partnership, an 11-nation deal championed by both President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Obama and top Republicans in Congress, is not really about trade.
Of the partnership's 29 chapters, only five address trade issues. The other chapters do things like create new monopoly patent extensions for pharmaceutical companies that would raise medicine prices for average Americans, and create a right for foreign firms to import food to the U.S. exempt from our current food safety standards.
The Trans-Pacific Partnership would even restrict certain "buy local" and "buy American" initiatives -- in other words, preventing American consumers from protesting the trade deal with their own votes and wallets.
I should add that this is what watchdogs think is in the Trans-Pacific Partnership deal -- because of document leaks. We don't know for sure, because while 600 private corporations have been involved in negotiating the terms of the trade deal behind closed doors, even Congress won't get to see the terms of the deal until after it's signed. That's why many Democrats oppose the deal, and similarly disastrous trade deals like it.
If more crummy job-killing trade bills are what comes from bipartisanship, I would rather take more bitter acrimony.
Cable News Network LP. 
Commentary: China-Switzerland FTA sets example for China-EU cooperation
liuyue 
23 January 2015
Xinhua's China Economic Information Service
BEIJING, Jan. 23 (Xinhua) -- The Free Trade Agreement (FTA) between China and Switzerland has brought concrete benefits to both sides and set a good example for China-EU cooperation.
When meeting with President of the Swiss Confederation Simonetta Sommaruga in the Swiss ski resort of Davos on Wednesday, Chinese Premier HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Li Keqiang said that both sides should further implement the FTA, expand two-way investment and deepen cooperation in high-end manufacturing and modern agriculture so as to benefit the two countries.
Switzerland has become China's first free trade partner in the world's 20 leading economies. Under the trade agreement, almost all Chinese exports to the European country are exempt from tariffs, while nearly 85 percent Swiss exports to China are duty-free.
There is no doubt that the China-Swiss FTA has yielded fruitful achievements. Under the FTA framework, Switzerland and its competitive industries, including medicine, machinery, watch making and tourism, benefited from the vast Chinese market.
Meanwhile, China imported cutting-edge technology from Switzerland, which helped accelerate industrial transformation and upgrade, and Chinese consumers are enjoying more tariff-free Swiss products.
According to statistics, bilateral trade rose steadily and the trade structure has been optimized. From January to November 2014, trade volume between the two countries reached 38.86 billion U.S. dollars.
The FTA between China and Switzerland serves as a model for economic cooperation between China and Europe as a whole.
China and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union (EU), two world economic giants, have been involved in a series of trade disputes. However, Beijing is committed to resolving economic and trade frictions through dialogue and consultations and expressed its willingness to start a joint feasibility study on a China-EU FTA.
China, which is going through a structural economic slowdown, and the EU, which is struggling for recovery, need each other.
An FTA between China and the EU, the largest trading partner of China, will definitely promote the economic development of both sides and help fuel the world economy.
South Korea has signed an FTA with the EU and Japan is also itching to get involved. Thus, it is high time for China and the EU, which together account for nearly 33 percent of the global economy, to start FTA negotiations as soon as possible to give full play to their respective advantages.
Enditem
Suisse: Franc fort L’agriculture va souffrir, elle aussi, de la parité entre le franc et l’euro.; 
Les paysans craignent une perte de près de 125 millions de francs
24 January 2015
L’Express-L’Impartial
Philippe Castella
Parmi tous les secteurs économiques qui vont souffrir de la parité entre l’euro et le franc, l’agriculture n’est pas le premier auquel on pense. Et pourtant, pour les paysans aussi, la facture risque d’être salée… comme un vieux gruyère. «L’impact de cette parité est évalué à près de 125 millions de francs de pertes», confie Jacques Bourgeois, directeur de l’Union suisse des paysans (USP). Dont les trois quarts sur les fromages justement, qui sont le principal produit d’exportation agricole. «Environ 40% de nos fromages sont exportés, 85% d’entre eux au sein de l’Union européenne», rappelle le Fribourgeois.
«L’agriculture n’est pas un cas à part», développe-t-il. «Nous sommes touchés comme d’autres secteurs économiques, que ce soit au niveau des exportations ou que ce soit au niveau du marché intérieur, par le fait qu’on subit la pression des produits importés, d’un coup 20% moins chers.»
Depuis l’annonce, il y a dix jours, par la Banque nationale de la fin du taux plancher, les organisations paysannes se sont concertées pour mesurer les conséquences de la chute de l’euro et voir comment y remédier. Une lettre sera envoyée en début de semaine prochaine au ministre de l’Agriculture Johann Schneider-Ammann. Elle va dresser un état des lieux et faire part des revendications paysannes.
Parmi elles, l’Union suisse des paysans demande à la Confédération d’agir par le biais de la loi «chocolatière». C’est là une aide à l’exportation qui permet d’indemniser l’industrie alimentaire pour l’utilisation de matières premières indigènes (lait et céréales), plus chères qu’à l’étranger.
«Les producteurs en bénéficient par ricochet», explique Jacques Bourgeois. «Nous avons tout intérêt à ce que des grandes entreprises comme HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Nestlé aident à écouler sur les marchés extérieurs la production suisse.» Cette aide concerne des produits transformés tels que le chocolat, le lait en poudre ou encore la pâte brisée. Environ 7% de la quantité de lait produite en Suisse et 10% de la production de céréales panifiables passent par ce canal.
Après de longs débats en décembre dernier, le parlement a inscrit à ce titre 70 millions de francs au budget 2015. Eveline Widmer-Schlumpf a annoncé que la Confédération était prête à compenser 85% de la différence de prix entre la Suisse et les pays voisins. Si les 70 millions n’y suffisent pas, la ministre des Finances s’est dit disposée à faire voter un crédit-cadre supplémentaire.
Avec la chute du cours de l’euro, à coup sûr, cela ne devrait pas suffire. L’USP demande donc d’augmenter cette aide jusqu’au plafond fixé par l’Organisation mondiale du commerce (OMC) à 114,9 mio. Soit une rallonge de quelque 45 millions.
En ce qui concerne toujours les céréales panifiables, l’USP réclame une hausse des droits de douanes à l’importation, actuellement fixés à 23 francs le quintal. Elle veut une adaptation afin de maintenir le prix-cible de 53 francs le quintal sur le marché suisse.
Autre action envisagée par l’USP, un renforcement de la promotion des produits à l’étranger, pour le vin et le fromage en particulier. En la matière, l’aide fédérale est proportionnée à l’argent investi par la branche. «Il y a là peut-être des synergies à trouver avec la promotion touristique», envisage Jacques Bourgeois, le tourisme étant l’une des principales victimes de la cherté du franc.
Dans sa lettre, l’USP va encore demander à Johann Schneider-Ammann de réunir sous son égide tous les acteurs de la branche agroalimentaire pour débattre de la situation et imaginer d’autes pistes, pour venir en aide aux exportations de fromage et de sucre notamment.
La pression sur le marché du lait est aussi tout particulièrement préoccupante. Avant même l’abandon du taux plancher, les producteurs ont dû encaisser en ce début d’année une baisse d’environ 10 centimes le litre de lait industriel, par rapport à il y un an. Et l’abolition prévue au mois d’avril des contingents laitiers au sein de l’Union européenne suscite les pires craintes.
Pour les paysans aussi la facture risque d’être salée à cause de la parité entre l’euro et le franc… Leur organisation faîtière va envoyer une lettre au ministre de l’Economie en début de semaine pour faire part de ses revendications. Keystone
Op-Ed Columnist : Opinion :Don’t Blame Nafta
By JOE NOCERA 
24 January 2015
NYTimes.com Feed
On Wednesday, the day after President Obama’s State of the Union address, a handful of Democratic House members, along with one senator, Bernie Sanders of Vermont, held a news conference to denounce one of the very few proposals the president put forward that actually has a chance of passage. The objects of their displeasure were the new trade agreements currently being negotiated by the administration.
“Since I’ve been in Congress, I’ve never seen a trade bill that in any way benefited U.S. manufacturers and workers,” said Representative Louise Slaughter, who has represented the Rochester area for 28 years. She pointed to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Kodak as an example of a company harmed by trade accords, especially the landmark HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" North American Free Trade Agreement, or Nafta. Since the deal between the U.S., Canada and Mexico went into effect in 1994, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Kodak’s Rochester work force has shrunk to 2,300 from 39,300.
“We are fighting for the future of middle-class families,” said Representative Rosa DeLauro of Connecticut. “These trade deals make it much easier for corporations to send American jobs overseas.” Over the past 20 years, Connecticut has lost more than 96,000 manufacturing jobs, she said, because of agreements that failed to protect American workers.
Sanders told the assembled media that while he liked the president’s speech, “he was wrong on one major issue, and that is the Trans-Pacific Partnership.” He added, “I do not believe that continuing a set of bad policies, policies that have failed, makes any sense at all.”
The Trans-Pacific Partnership is a trade agreement currently being negotiated between 12 countries, including Japan, Canada, Vietnam, Mexico, Australia and Peru; the countries involved in the negotiations represent nearly 40 percent of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" global gross domestic product. It is as complex as it is ambitious.
Yet, while the Republican leadership has vowed to work with President Obama on the Trans-Pacific Partnership (as well as on another deal being negotiated with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union), the Democrats have been vocal in their opposition. In the short term, they don’t want to give the president so-called fast-track authority, which would allow the administration to negotiate the deal and then hand Congress a finalized agreement that it could only vote up or down, with no amendments. (Fast-track procedures have been used to conclude 14 trade agreements since 1974.)
You’d need a heart of stone not to be sympathetic to the concerns of the Democrats. Over the last two decades, lots of manufacturing jobs have vanished in the United States, inflicting a great deal of pain on workers. During those same 20 years, Nafta has been in force. Linking those job losses to the existence of Nafta is a leap the Democrats — and progressives in general — have made.
The question that needs to be asked, however, is whether that link is justified. “I am skeptical of definitive judgments on Nafta,” said HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Edward Alden, a senior fellow at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Council on Foreign Relations. “We started offshoring television assembly in the 1960s” — decades before Nafta. Yes, many assembly plants have been built in Mexico since Nafta went into effect. But HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" China, where millions more manufacturing jobs have migrated — and with which we have a huge trade deficit — doesn’t even have a trade agreement with the United States.
Edward Gresser, the executive director of Progressive Economy, a left-leaning think tank, noted that other factors were taking place at the same time as Nafta: the growth of container ships, the lowering cost of communications, the rise of global industries. With or without trade deals, globalization is an unstoppable force. What Nafta really is, Gresser told me, is a proxy for globalization.
One mistake the Nafta negotiators made more than two decades ago was taking worker rights and environmental protections out of the agreement itself and putting them into a side letter. They were never effectively enforced. Those negotiating the Trans-Pacific Partnership expect to rectify that error this go-round. They are also aiming to pry open the Japanese auto and agricultural markets to American producers, and include protections for a free and open Internet. It has, in other words, a lot more potential to do good than harm.
When I spoke to Slaughter on Thursday afternoon, she was still riled up. “These crazy trade agreements,” she called them at one point. She added, “Rochester really suffered.”
She told me about all the jobs lost at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Kodak. “I think Nafta brought down HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Kodak,” she said. But of course it didn’t. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" Kodak’s problems came about because digital photography made film unnecessary and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Kodak didn’t shift course in time. She was blaming Nafta for HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Kodak’s self-inflicted wounds.
But then her tone brightened. She told me about all the new companies — 55 in all, she said — that had taken space in the old HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Kodak buildings. Some were even run by former HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Kodak engineers.
Which, of course, is precisely the way globalization is supposed to work.
The New York Times Company
Pakistan: Appointment of representative to WTO: Officials idling over summary
MUSHTAQ GHUMMAN 
24 January 2015
Business Recorder
 Prime Minister''s close top bureaucrats are said to be idling over a summary of Commerce Ministry on appointment of permanent representative (ambassadorial rank) to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO), sources close to Secretary Commerce told Business Recorder.
The sources said Prime Minister''s Additional Secretary Fawad Hasan Fawad, a very powerful bureaucrat in the present set-up, was also one of the short listed candidates for this very attractive post but he did not appear before the interview committee headed by Commerce Minister Engineer Khurram Dastgir and comprising four Federal Secretaries.
The committee interviewed Dr Tauqeer Shah, former Principal Secretary to Chief Minister Punjab, Mian Shahbaz Sharif, an accused in Model Town tragedy, Umar Hameed, Niaz Muhammad Khan and Dr Asad Majeed Khan - a Washington-based diplomat - through Skype.The committee, sources said, rechecked the marks given to the candidates after which Commerce Ministry sent a summary to the Prime Minister about a month ago to select one suitable officer as permanent representative to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO). A week ago, there was a strong rumour that Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif had selected Dr Tauqeer Shah as a reward for loyalty to the Sharifs.
When contacted, Commerce Ministry officials told Business Recorder that nothing has been received from the Prime Minister''s Office on the appointment of a permanent representative to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO). "We have not received approved summary from the Prime Minister''s Office till today," said an official on condition of anonymity.
Commerce Minister Khurram Dastgir argued that all candidates should have international exposure and knowledge of trade affairs because he has to run a secretariat and hold trade negotiations. He has also to guide Pakistani team at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO and protect Pakistan''s interests. Most of the previous Permanent Representatives at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO preferred to stay abroad or got a job as consultants in Pakistan after the end of their HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO responsibilities.
Emmay Zed Publications (Private) Ltd
Foreign firms in China: You're still welcome
24 January 2015
The Economist
The country's leaders seek to reassure nervous foreign businesses
THE bosses of foreign firms with operations in China grumble that their lives have got harder of late. China used to be a frontier market offering endless double-digit growth. Officials put out the welcome mat, and were open to wining and dining. Regulators were no more bothersome than in other emerging markets.
Now, growth is slowing: official data released this week confirm that the economy grew by 7.4% last year, the slowest rate in 24 years. A crackdown on official corruption has made it impossible to win friends in government. And antitrust authorities have taken a tough line with foreign carmakers, drugmakers and other firms that had hoped their guanxi (connections) offered them protection. Many foreign bosses are now convinced that the golden age for multinationals in China is over.
That may explain the charm offensive the government launched this week. The prime minister, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Li Keqiang, led a delegation of Chinese worthies to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Economic Forum's meeting in Davos, Switzerland. He promised the assembled global business elite his country would "treat Chinese and foreign companies as equals" and "rigorously reject protectionism".
Ahead of his speech the government unveiled a dramatic proposal to ease its restrictions on foreign investment. Over the past two decades, China has maintained a highly restrictive, complex set of rules on how foreigners can invest on the mainland. In the many industries deemed "strategic", for example, they must invest only through a joint venture and must transfer technology to the local partner. Flows of funds in and out of the country are also tightly controlled.
The draft reforms, which are now open for comment, include scrapping almost all of these cumbersome controls. Foreign firms would supposedly be treated the same way as national ones. The clunky system of case-by-case approvals will be replaced by a simpler "negative list": if your industry is not on it, you do not need permission to invest. Daniel Roules of the Shanghai office of Squire Patton Boggs, an American law firm, believes the new law--if and when it comes into force--could usher in a significant and welcome change in the climate for foreign firms.
Mr Li is also pushing for bilateral investment treaties with the United States and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union, which could further reassure foreign investors worried about putting more money into China. His boss, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xi Jinping, agreed a sweeping free-trade agreement with Australia on the heels of the recent G20 summit in Brisbane. This provisional deal, which must now be ratified, goes much further than previous accords in opening up China's service industries to foreign investment.
Taken together, say optimists, there could yet be another golden age for foreign direct investment (FDI) into China. A recent report by King & Wood Mallesons, China's biggest law firm, forecasts that FDI could reach $188 billion in 2020, up from about $120 billion last year.
Nevertheless, foreign businesspeople should not break out the champagne yet. The proposed reforms are a strong signal that foreign money will continue to be welcome in China. However, they may do nothing to help foreign-owned firms compete on equal terms with politically well-connected domestic ones, to end the subsidies lavished on state-backed enterprises, or to rein in regulators keen on bashing outsiders. The areas of business most tempting for foreigners, such as finance and the internet, will still have restrictions on foreign ownership. If China's leaders were to take on all these distortions, then they would get a far warmer round of applause at their next Davos appearance.
The Economist Newspaper Limited (The Economist)
