Headlines:
Paris attacks: The global consequences
Obama set to challenge China at Asia-Pacific summit
Spotlight: Better coordination urged for G20 members to boost openness of world economy
TPP shortfalls await Trudeau's attention
Trade agreement will cost American jobs
FAQs ON FTAs; What lies ahead for free trade?
Free trade talks expected to take centre stage at Asia-Pacific summit in Manila
WTO Delegates to Inject Sh2.1bn Into Kenya's Economy
WTO: Africa backs India on affordable, lifesaving drugs
 
Paris attacks: The global consequences
Gideon Rachman
FT, 14 November 2015
 
Terrorists strike at a particularly sensitive moment in the history of both France and Europe 
Every New Yorker and Londoner will instinctively understand what Parisians are going through this morning: a combination of shock, horror, disorientation and fear for the future.
Yet the memory of the terror attacks of 2001 in New York and 2005 in London also demonstrates the resilience of great cities. They can bounce back from acts of terror, with surprising speed and vigour. To say that terrorists will not “beat Paris” is not a statement of defiance. It is simply a statement of fact.
Paris is a city whose history, often violent and shocking, is ever present. There are memories of revolutions, massacres, wars and occupation everywhere — not just in museums, but in street names and in the very architecture of the city. Through it all, Paris has become a byword for beauty, serenity and creativity.
But while there can be no doubt that Paris will bounce back, it is also true that this attack comes at a particularly sensitive moment in the history of both France and Europe.
It was just 10 months ago that Paris was the victim of the murderous attacks at Charlie Hebdo magazine and on a Jewish supermarket that brought millions out on to the streets in defiant demonstration. But the death toll from these latest attacks is much higher. The fact that a second wave has come so soon after the Charlie Hebdo atrocity will also heighten the sense of insecurity.
The immediate political questions concern French involvement in the Middle East, as well as the impact of the attack on next month’s regional elections. The terrorists are reported to have shouted comments about the war in Syria. France launched its first air strikes on the militant jihadis of Isis in Syria in September, and has been involved in bombing raids on the group in Iraq for many months. It is highly unlikely that President François Hollande will respond to the terror attacks by calling off French involvement in the war on Isis. Indeed, in the short term, an intensification of military involvement is more likely. 
The reaction of French voters in next month’s regional elections will be watched closely. Opinion polls were already suggesting that Marine Le Pen, leader of the far-right National Front, will win in the Nord-Pas-de-Calais region; her niece, Marion Maréchal-Le Pen, has also topped some polls in the Provence region in the south. The National Front, which has a long history of hostility to Muslim immigration and which has also argued for the restoration of frontier controls, may well benefit in the aftermath of the attacks. Some of its arguments were, in any case, already seeping into the discourse of the traditional centre-right parties.
The terror attacks in Paris also come at a time when Europe is in the midst of a “migrant crisis”. With Germany set to receive more than 1m refugees this year — most of them from the war-torn Middle East — the domestic pressure on Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, to close her country’s borders to new migrants was already mounting. Even before the Paris attacks, Sweden — which has taken more migrants per head than any other EU country — had announced a closure of its borders to new refugees, albeit as a temporary measure. In the aftermath of Paris, Ms Merkel will surely be tempted to take a similar measure, easing the political and social pressure on her government. But she will also be aware of the dangerous knock-on effects such an action could have on Balkan countries further down the migrant route.
The precise origins of the terrorists (which are not yet known as I write on Saturday morning) will certainly change the post-attack debate. However, if and when the assumed connection to Islamist terror movements is fleshed out, the debate over western policy in the Middle East will intensify but will not necessarily be clarified.
One possible consequence would be for western policy to focus even more tightly on the defeat of the jihadis of Isis while playing down subsidiary goals, such as the removal of President Bashar al-Assad of Syria. But France has been at the forefront of those countries arguing that Mr Assad is at the centre of the problem of Syria. A complete reversal of the anti-Assad policy seems unlikely in the coming weeks. 
What is more likely is that policy will evolve in the coming months, as the impact, lessons and sheer shock of the Paris terror attacks is absorbed.
 
Obama set to challenge China at Asia-Pacific summit 
Karl MALAKUNAS 
15 November 2015

US President Barack Obama is set to challenge China when Asia-Pacific leaders gather in the Philippines this week, speaking out on a territorial row and lobbying to set pro-American trade rules.
Chinese President Xi Jinping will also be in Manila for the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) summit, an annual event that is meant to forge unity on free trade within the region.
But this year's meeting risks becoming entangled in various US-China power struggles, including over the South China Sea where Chinese island building in disputed waters has caused alarm in the United States and with its Asian allies.
The global menace of terrorism will also be an unwanted talking point after gunmen massacred more than 120 people in a series of coordinated attacks in Paris on Friday.
Philippine authorities had already undertaken their biggest security operation for the summit, which will gather leaders from 21 Pacific Rim economies on Wednesday and Thursday, but they vowed after the French carnage to do even more.
While China said it wanted the summit to focus only on trade, the French attacks and US attention on the South China Sea showed this was unrealistic, according to Curtis S. Chin, a former US ambassador to the Manila-based Asian Development Bank.
"One cannot separate the economic and the non-economic in today's interconnected world," Chin, now an Asia fellow of the Milken Institute, a non-partisan think-tank, told AFP.
"That's as true in the battle against ISIS (Islamic State group) as in the search for a peaceful resolution to the many territorial disputes with China that haunt development in the South China Sea."
China insists it has sovereign rights to nearly all of the sea, even waters approaching the coasts of its Asian neighbours.
The Philippines, Vietnam, Malaysia, Brunei and Taiwan have overlapping claims to some of the waters, which are home to some of the world's most important shipping trade routes.
China's island building in the Spratlys archipelago, which is close to the Philippines, prompted the US military to recently deploy a missile destroyer and B-52 bomber planes to the area.
China had insisted repeatedly in the lead-up to the summit that the South China Sea dispute was not relevant to the trade talks.
But US National Security Advisor Susan Rice said the dispute would be a "central issue" during Obama's three-day trip to the Philippines starting on Tuesday, and a subsequent visit to Malaysia for another regional summit.
Rice also emphasised Obama would raise the issues of "maritime security" and "freedom of navigation", terms commonly used when referring to the dispute.
The Philippines, which has hauled China before a United Nations tribunal over the row, initially promised to respect that demand.
But in his first press conference as official APEC spokesperson on Friday, Philippine foreign ministry spokesman Charles Jose talked at length about China's "aggressive" actions in the sea.
Jose also said that, while the issue was not on the official agenda, leaders may discuss it at their retreat, one of the summit's key events where the delegates speak less formally.
Obama will also use both legs of his Asian trip to promote the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) mega-trade deal, which was signed last month by 12 APEC nations but excludes China.
On the sidelines of APEC, the leaders of the TPP nations will meet for the first time since the signing.
"TPP is central to our vision of the region's future and our place in it," Rice said.
"(It) is a critical step towards a high-standard free trade area in Asia and the Pacific, and our goal of revitalising the open rules-based economic system that the US has led since World War II."
China has flagged it will push on with its own effort to steer regional economic rules with a planned Free Trade Area of the Asia-Pacific.
"We need to actively work for the establishment of FTAAP," Chinese vice commerce minister Wang Shouwen told a briefing in Beijing.
China sought to champion the FTAAP at last year's APEC summit, which it hosted, and Wang promised a report would be released in Manila on its progress.
APEC members account for 57 percent of the global economy and 40 percent of the world's population, with the diverse grouping including Papua New Guinea, Peru, Japan and Russia.
Russian President Vladimir Putin and Indonesia's Joko Widodo are the only major leaders of APEC nations who have said they will not attend.
 
Spotlight: Better coordination urged for G20 members to boost openness of world economy 
Wu Zhiqiang 
15 November 2015
Xinhua News Agency
 
ANTALYA, Turkey, Nov. 15 (Xinhua) -- There have been renewed calls for the world's 20 major advanced and emerging economies to work for greater openness in the world economy as their leaders start a two-day summit Sunday in this Mediterranean resort.
The task becomes even more imperative within the context of a general economic malaise and perceived slowdown, amid efforts to further open up the world economic system.
MORE COOPERATION NEEDED IN G20 FOR GROWTH
In its latest Economic Outlook, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) cut its forecasts for global economic growth to 2.9 percent for this year and 3.3 percent for 2016.
Also, the OECD pointed to a "dramatic slowdown in global trade growth," which is projected to be just 2 percent this year, down from the 3.4 percent posted in 2014.
A World Trade Organization (WTO) report issued on Nov. 2 said the stockpile of trade-restrictive measures by G20 economies continues to grow, despite their "relative restraint" in introducing new trade restrictions.
"The WTO's system of trade rules helped to prevent a major protectionist response in the wake of the financial crisis -- but the number of trade-restrictive measures that have been introduced remains a cause for concern," said WTO Director-General Roberto Azevedo. "The G20 should show leadership by eliminating existing trade restrictions."
Experts are also calling for more robust cooperation among G20 economies to speed up world economic growth.
"The G20's core mandate is about strong, sustainable and balanced growth, and more and better cooperation is needed than what is being signaled ahead of this meeting," said Tristram Sainsbury, a research fellow in the G20 Studies Center at the Lowy Institute. "The international economic outlook has worsened to the point where the world economy teeters on the edge of global recession."
Before joining the Lowy Institute, Sainsbury was at the Australian Treasury, where he worked on G20 policy and focused mainly on international financial architecture reform, financial regulation reform and G20 growth strategies.
On the much-reported U.S.-led Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) deal, Sainsbury said Washington may eventually find that its commercial interests are better served by opening access to the TPP (and TTIP and TiSA) on equal terms to China and other key emerging markets.
The Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) is a proposed free trade agreement between the European Union and the United States, while the Trade in Services Agreement (TiSA) is being negotiated by 23 WTO members.
In the face of a trading system dominated by global value chains and goods that are "made in the world," Sainsbury said, "a comprehensive agreement that more closely resembles a multilateral trade agreement carries more economic benefits as it lessens the risk of trade diversion."
Ussal Sahbaz, an analyst at the Economic Policy Research Foundation of Turkey, also called for efforts to strengthen the role of the WTO.
"The global economy faces serious problems that need coordinated action," Sahbaz said. "One of them is the fall in the growth of trade, which used to grow much faster than the world economy, before the 2008 (global financial) crisis."
"Now the growth of trade fell below the growth of the world economy. One possible reason is the increasing number of bilateral and regional trade agreements, instead of multilateralism in the global trade regime," he said.
"Another reason is increasing non-tariff barriers to trade. The WTO approved the trade facilitation agreement, but it has not been ratified by enough number of governments yet. Only five G20 countries have ratified the agreement," Sahbaz said. "The G20 has to work toward restoring the growth of global trade to its prior capacity."
"Promoting free trade requires more doing than talking," he said.
CHINA'S EFFORTS TO BRIDGE INFRASTRUCTURE GAP, INEQUALITY
The other two problems hampering world economic recovery are the growing global infrastructure gap and rising inequalities in the world, Sahbaz said.
"It is estimated that the growing global economy will need 15 trillion U.S. dollars of infrastructure investment in the next 15 years. This is twice the current investment levels -- something that the existing public spending is not enough," Sahbaz said.
"The world will need more international financial institutions that engages in the infrastructure investment -- like the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) -- and more private investment," he said.
Sahbaz attributed the widening gap between the rich and the poor, particularly in the advanced and developing countries, partly to technological transformation, which makes erstwhile routine jobs irrelevant and leads to youth unemployment reaching levels that threaten social stability.
"The world has to provide coordinated solutions to the global skills transformation problem," he said.
Some G20 leaders, before heading for the Antalya summit, also pledged efforts to work for a stronger, open global economy.
Development is meaningful only when it is inclusive and sustainable, and to achieve such development requires openness, mutual assistance and win-win cooperation, Chinese President Xi Jinping said in September at the United Nations.
At a press briefing about Xi's attendance at the Antalya summit, Chinese Vice Foreign Minister Li Baodong said that China will work with all member countries to realize the goals of leading a new round of global economic growth, pushing forward the transition of the G20 from a mechanism of emergency response to one of long-term governance, building and maintaining an open economy, and adopting a responsible macroeconomic policy.
The Belt and Road Initiative, which was put forward by Xi and comprises the Silk Road Economic Belt and the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road, and the AIIB, which was also proposed by China, have been hailed as examples of inclusiveness and openness in international economic cooperation.
Sahbaz, the Turkish analyst, highlighted the benefits of the Belt and Road Initiative for world economic cooperation.
"There are now large capital reserves in developing countries like China, India and Turkey. We also have a great amount of know-how and can organize large business ventures. But we have not yet used these resources to integrate large parts of the developing world," said Sahbaz.
"The Belt and Road Initiative aims to mobilize these resources to modernize the vast region of Eurasia," he said.
"Think of the distance between the Pacific and the Balkans. Large parts of that region still needs roads, banking systems, fiber optic cables to join the standards of living in the developed world. In that sense, the Belt and Road Initiative is the natural continuation of the equalizing trend we have seen in the post-WWII era," he added.
TPP shortfalls await Trudeau's attention 
14 November 2015
Vancouver Sun
 
Now that the text of the Trans-Pacific Partnership agreement has been released - all 6,000 pages of it - there are worrisome signs the Pacific Rim deal may not have been accurately depicted by the Harper government.
Concerns are being raised the TPP binds Canada in a way that will hamper innovation, hurt the viability of some sectors and even have a negative impact on consumers.
The Conservatives offered assurances to the Canadian auto parts sector that the TPP would allow better access to Asian markets while protecting the industry from unfair competition. While it does offer new access, it also eliminates tariffs on Japanese vehicles and makes it easier for manufacturers to use offshore parts, typically made in lower-wage jurisdictions.
RIM co-chief executive Jim Balsillie is concerned about intellectual property rights sections of the agreement that would force Canadian innovators to play by inflexible U.S.-designed rules that will cost Canadian firms more money and make it harder for them to compete.
Concerns are also being raised by advocacy groups that the TPP will raise the price of medicines for millions by extending monopolies and price-lowering generic competition.
The Trudeau government isn't saying yet what it intends to do, but it must know it cannot sign off on a deal until these and other issues are addressed and solutions found.
 
Trade agreement will cost American jobs 
14 November 2015
Portland Press Herald
 
The corporate mass media has provided absolutely no coverage of the Trans-Pacific Partnership agreement, the text of which has finally been released.
Why do you think they have failed to provide this critical information to the American public?
The answer is simple: These giant media corporations have a vested interests in the TPP being passed.
The negotiators admit it will cost American workers at least 330,000 jobs.
Here is an example of something that is in it. The United States will instantly drop all of its tariffs so that many of the low-wage Asian countries that large American corporations use as cheap labor can now re-import goods made in Vietnam, Malaysia, Singapore, etc., back into the United States and pay nothing.
For example, Vietnam will not be required to drop any of the tariffs levied on American-made goods until the Trans-Pacific Partnership has been in effect for five years.
Free trade - what an ironic joke!
Everyone who cares about an America that doesn't throw ordinary Americans under the bus so that giant corporations can plunder whatever wealth the middle class has left needs to go to the website tradetreachery.com and find out what a sellout of American sovereignty this terrible trade agreement is.
The majority of Americans - whether they are progressive, conservative or moderate - deserve the ability to make a decent living and raise their families.
Contact Sens. Angus King and Susan Collins as well as Maine U.S. Reps. Chellie Pingree and Bruce Poliquin and tell them in no uncertain terms to vote "no" on the TPP.
If this travesty passes, it will be the final nail in the coffin for what is left of the great American middle class.
George Harlan Old Orchard Beach
Rise in minimum wage would be boon to IRS
The campaign to raise the minimum wage is relentless. Supposedly, 6 percent of the workforce will benefit from the raise. However, when you raise the cost of labor, up goes the cost of goods.
The benefits to the small percentage affected by the so-called "livable" wage increase vanish fast. Inflation rears its economically rational head and cuts into the buying power of all, including the other 94 percent of wage earners. It's an often- repeated story.
So, who really benefits? For the Internal Revenue Service, the raising of the minimum wage by $4 an hour means an automatic deduction out of each paycheck of $1, representing a take of 25 percent of the raise.
Naturally, some but not all of these deductions are returned via income tax returns the following year.
Basically, for the government, the raising of the minimum wage can be viewed as inroads to an interest-free loan amounting to hundreds of millions of dollars.
Robert Denbow Saco
Know suicide's warning signs as holidays approach
I'm glad to have the holidays approaching, but for others these can be challenging times. There may be feelings of overwhelming emotions to be surrounded by so many people at gatherings or the nerve-wracking and financial demands of buying presents that may disappoint. These are just some of the struggles that could occur for certain friends, schoolmates, co-workers and family.
I researched some staggering figures:
n Suicide is the 10th leading cause of death.
n Approximately 80 percent of suicides are committed by men.
n Since the year 2000, suicide rates have increased each year.
n More than 50 percent of suicides are by firearm.
And think of all the attempts that - thankfully - don't end in death.
At this time of year, we should watch for signs of hopelessness, rage, apprehension, recklessness and foreboding. Actions to look for include isolating from friends and family, giving away possessions or excessive drinking or drug use. People may also talk about being a burden to others, having no reason to live or unbearable suffering from a painful loss.
These are just some clues that someone may be contemplating suicide.
Lisa Jessick Old Orchard Beach
Columnist's view on need to pull together appreciated
Thank you to Alan Caron for his Nov. 5 column ("Economically, happy days won't be here again without attitude adjustment"). This piece included these lines:
n "At exactly the moment when we most need to pull together - to create a kind of 'Team America' or 'Team Maine' - we're pulling apart, consumed with partisanship, pessimism, anger and excuses."
n "What (Franklin D.) Roosevelt understood, for himself and the country, was that without a positive attitude and effective teamwork, no great victories can be achieved. Today we could use more Roosevelt and a lot fewer (Donald) Trumps."
Keep up the good work!
Walt Johansson Pemaquid
Knee-replacement patient finds that patience rewards
I waited over 15 years to decide to have total knee replacements. My arthritis got worse, and the medications didn't work as well as they had. I'd been told to wait until I really knew it was time to do something drastic. So I did.
After seeing my surgeon, I went to "Joint Camp" and learned about the procedure and how to prepare myself physically and how to set up my house to make getting around easier. The first knee was replaced Oct. 23, 2014. I was told it could take up to a year for full healing.
After that, every day was different from the one before and I benefited from physical therapy both in-home and in a physical therapy office.
Five months later, I had the second knee replaced. It seemed to go more smoothly than the first. But still, daily exercise and physical therapy were most helpful, and my husband proved an excellent caregiver.
I made progress, regressed and improved again several times for various unrelated reasons. I wasn't sure if things would ever even out so that I could walk easily on both legs.
I recently went to the mall for Christmas shopping. I drove, parked, got out and walked into the mall. I walked for over an hour feeling stable and very comfortable. I could not have done that a year ago.
The available technology and my surgeon's skill are amazing and have greatly improved my life! I can't recommend it highly enough, but you have to be patient - recuperation could take awhile.
 
FAQs ON FTAs; What lies ahead for free trade? 
15 November 2015
The Straits Times
 
Although the conclusion of five years of negotiations on the Trans-Pacific Partnership last month was a considerable milestone, the hard work is far from done.
Each of the 12 countries in the pact will have to go through domestic ratification involving different branches of government.
This process is expected to be smooth in Singapore, where the deal must be approved by the Cabinet. Parliament must then pass legislative changes that may be required.
But observers point out that elements within the United States, Japan and Malaysia will put up varying degrees of resistance.
In the US, where Congress must ratify the TPP, prominent lawmakers have already voiced their dissatisfaction with the deal. Leading candidates for the presidential election next year, such as former secretary of state Hillary Clinton, have also come out against the TPP.
Other free trade initiatives besides the TPP are also afoot. A draft report on the Free Trade Area of the Asia-Pacific will be presented at the coming Apec summit, and the full report will be ready at next year's meetings in Peru.
On Nov 5, US President Barack Obama, who has pushed strongly for the TPP, officially signalled his intent to sign it, kick-starting a 90-day process for Congress to consider if it wants to approve the agreement.
The US, as the world's No. 1 economy, also "sets the timetable effectively" on when the TPP can come into force, says Dr Alan Bollard, executive director of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (Apec) secretariat.
This is because before the TPP can come into effect, enough economies representing at least 85 per cent of the total gross domestic product of the 12 signatories must have ratified it. Without the US, the other nations fall far short of the 85 per cent target.
Similarly, Asia Trade Centre executive director Deborah Elms says "the battle in the US will be tough" .
"Members of Congress do not see many benefits from voting on trade agreements and an election year in 2016 makes taking a tough vote even harder," she adds.
How soon the TPP can be implemented will also affect how fast other countries can join it. South Korea has expressed keen interest, while Indonesia and the Philippines have signalled they are open to such a move.
One glaring omission from the world's biggest trade deal is the world's second-largest economy, China. The reasons behind its exclusion are still uncertain, though it has been suggested that China will have difficulty meeting TPP standards on areas like government procurement. It is also unclear how Beijing views its exclusion. Its Ministry of Commerce said it took an "open-minded attitude" towards the TPP but made no overtures to be a part of it.
Meanwhile, those already in the partnership will have to start taking steps towards complying with the requirements stipulated in the TPP.
Most experts believe Singapore will have only minor adjustments to make compared with a country like Vietnam, which will have to work on its labour standards and relook its state enterprises.
But other free trade initiatives besides the TPP are also afoot. A draft report on the Free Trade Area of the Asia-Pacific will be presented at the coming Apec summit, and the full report will be ready at next year's meetings in Peru.
The study aims to examine the 150 or so trade agreements in the Asia-Pacific region and determine how compatible they are.
"We're pulling all those together to check just whether they are heading in the same direction or whether they conflict. Could there be some problems between them sort of hitting against one another?" says Dr Bollard.
 
Free trade talks expected to take centre stage at Asia-Pacific summit in Manila 
14 November 2015
BBC Monitoring Asia Pacific
 
Text of report in English by Japanese news agency Kyodo
Tokyo, Nov. 14 (Kyodo) - The 21 members of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum will gather in the Philippines with talks on a region-wide free trade initiative set to take centre stage following the recent agreement on the Trans-Pacific Partnership pact.
A series of high-level meetings in Manila, including that of ministers from Monday [16 November], will be their first gatherings since 12 nations, all part of the 21 economies, reached a broad agreement on the TPP last month after years of intensive negotiations.
U.S. President Barack Obama, Chinese President Xi Jinping and Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe along with other world leaders will attend a two-day summit starting from Wednesday.
The conclusion of the TPP deal, which covers 40 percent of the global economy, is expected to spark discussions on a far broader regional free trade pact known as the Free Trade Area of the Asia-Pacific or FTAAP. The 12-nation accord has been considered as a necessary step for the APEC members accounting for about 60 percent of the world's economy to move toward their ultimate goal of establishing the FTAAP.
"We will discuss how we can cooperate in realizing the FTAAP that will be a comprehensive and high-standard deal," Japanese trade minister Motoo Hayashi said Friday at a press conference before he leaves for Manila on the weekend.
The United States, Japan, Canada, Australia, Mexico, Vietnam, Malaysia and five other APEC members agreed in principle on Oct. 5 to eliminate tariffs on nearly all imported products and set rules on international trade, investment and the handling of intellectual property. The TPP also covers environmental conservation and labour protection.
The leaders of the 12 countries, also including Singapore, New Zealand, Peru, Chile and Brunei, will meet on Wednesday on the sidelines of the APEC summit, according to government sources.
They will welcome the agreement and ensure early implementation of the pact at their first meeting after the agreement, the sources said.
Other APEC members such as South Korea, Indonesia and the Philippines - the host of this year's APEC forum meetings - have said that they are interested in joining the TPP.
A major focus will be on what China, not a TPP negotiating member, has to say about the deal at a delicate time when momentum is building for the U.S.-led trade pact and tensions have risen recently between the world's two biggest economies over the sailing of a U.S. warship within a South China Sea area claimed by China.
At last year's APEC summit in Beijing, APEC leaders vowed to carry out "a collective strategic study" to look at the viability of the FTAAP and realize it "as early as possible".
But reflecting U.S. and Japan's concern that China was attempting to make the FTAAP a separate platform to expand its economic influence in the region, they also agreed that the FTAAP should be created on the basis of smaller trade schemes under negotiation such as the TPP. The common recognition provides little reason for any APEC member to downplay the significance of the TPP.
"It will be interesting to see what response China will show," a negotiation source said.
It is not clear whether or how the 21 members will hail the long-awaited conclusion of the TPP in joint statements to be released when ministers and leaders wrap up their respective meetings. The initial draft of the statement for the ministerial meeting did not have any mention of the TPP, according to a source familiar with the matter.
The 21 economies, also including Russia, Thailand, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Papua New Guinea, will examine progress in the collective strategic study that will be completed by the end of 2016.
At the meetings, measures to promote more small firms to tap into overseas markets and establishing a supply chain network resilient to natural disasters will also be on the agenda.
Bolstering women's empowerment and lowering lifetime costs of infrastructure by building quality facilities will also be discussed.
 
​
WTO Delegates to Inject Sh2.1bn Into Kenya's Economy 
by Kennedy Kangethe 
14 November 2015
All Africa
Nairobi, Nov 14, 2015 (Capital FM/All Africa Global Media via COMTEX) -- Delegates to the World Trade Organisation (WTO) 10th Ministerial Conference will inject about Sh2.1 billion ($21 million) into the Kenyan economy when they converge in Nairobi from December 15 to 18 this year.
Economics Director at the Trade Directorate in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs Nelson Ndirangu says the 7,000 delegates are expected to use at least $500 every day until the end of the conference.
"The delegates will be in the country for at least six days spending at least $500, you do the math," Ndirangu told Capital FM Business.
He says the conference will be a big boost to the Kenyan economy as the country will sell its products, and position itself as the best conference destination in the world.
"We are also seeing this as part of conference tourism and we are popularising this country as the best destination to come," he said.
He says preparation is already finalised and is expecting the WTO Secretariat in the country next week to do a final run of inspection.
The 10th Ministerial Conference will be the first one held in the continent since the organisation was established in 1995.
"We hope the conference will agree to conclude the Doha Round of trade talks that have stalled over a divide on major issues, such as agriculture, industrial tariffs and non-tariff barriers, services, and trade remedies," he added.
Kenya won the bid to host the 10th conference scheduled after member countries of the WTO unanimously made the decision following intense lobbying by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Trade led by Cabinet Secretary Amina Mohamed. 
 
WTO: Africa backs India on affordable, lifesaving drugs 
CHRISTABEL LIGAMI, TEA Special Correspondent 
14 November 2015
The East African
 
Africa is rallying behind India in its push to protect a controversial patent policy on medicine, to ensure that poor countries still have access to cheaper generic drugs manufactured by Indian pharmaceutical companies.
India is known as the “pharmacy of the developing world,” as medicines produced by generics companies in the country are among the most affordable in the world.
At the recent India-Africa Business Forum, African leaders agreed to support India’s stand on the full use of the flexibilities provided by the agreement on Trade-Related aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (Trips) — administered by the World Trade Organisation — at the upcoming WTO Ministerial Summit from December 15 to 18 in Nairobi.
US pharmaceutical companies such as Roche, BMS, Bayer and Pfizer, and trade lobby groups have been at the forefront of the push for a review of India’s intellectual property rights (IPR) law so that they comply with international trade norms — a move that could deny poor countries access to cheaper generic drugs manufactured by Indian firms.
Intellectual property rights are granted to inventors, artistes, and other creators regarding the use of their innovations.
Under the Indian Patents Act, if the government considers a drug to be unaffordable for the nation’s general population, it can issue a compulsory licence granting companies permission to manufacture a generic version at a fraction of the cost of the original drug. Furthermore, based on norms set by the WTO, if it is in the public interest, such a licence can be awarded by a government without the consent of the patent owner.
However, the US has been contesting this flexibility in a bid to protect its multinational pharmaceutical companies.
According to a WTO trade expert in Geneva, the IPR clause on flexibility in drug patenting will be a top agenda for the US at the WTO Ministerial Summit in Nairobi.
“The US has introduced ‘Trips-plus’ provisions that more aggressively protect patented drugs, plants, and seeds from public use and in some cases backtrack on the limited gains made in the Doha Declaration,” said the expert.
In the 2001 WTO Doha Round, the Declaration on Trips and Public Health provided a limited amount of flexibility, allowing the domestic manufacturing of generic drugs for public health crises.
The US, he said, prompted by pharmaceutical companies, has utilised international IPR to sue governments of developing countries for manufacturing generic versions of patented drugs.
In many poor countries, where the cost of patented drugs is high, cheap medicines are relied on to treat public health crises such as HIV/Aids, cancer as well as other potentially deadly health problems like diarrhoea.
In March 2012, for instance, India’s patent office allowed Hyderabad-based Natco Pharma to make a generic version of German pharmaceutical company Bayer’s cancer drug Nexavar. Bayer’s Nexavar reportedly costs about $4,500 a month for 120 pills while Natco’s generic version costs about $145 for a month’s dose.
Swiss multinational Novartis owns the cancer drug Glivec and it holds a patent for the drug in many countries including the US. Pfizer, another US drug company, is also involved in patent-related disputes in India.
According to an April 2013 article in the US medical journal Blood, the price of branded Glivec was $92,000 per patient, per year in the US, while in India, the drug was being sold for around $21,171.
“When patents are granted in the country, Indian generic manufacturers will not be able to automatically produce cheaper versions of these medicines, which could have a significant impact on access to affordable medicines, both in India and beyond, as many newer medicines [invented after 1995] are highly likely to be patent-protected,” said Ison Ndirangu, director of economic affairs and international trade in Kenya’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Trade.
This means drugs for diseases like cancer and HIV, whose generic versions are cheaper, will not be accessible to many due to their high cost.
“African leaders agreed to support India’s role in providing high-quality, low-cost generic medicines, which are essential for healthcare around the world,” said Mr Ndirangu.
However, he said, Africa and India agreed to collaborate in the drug manufacturing sector.
“Kenya, for example, is in discussions with India to help us set up drug manufacturing plants so that we can produce the same drugs at a lower cost,” said Mr Ndirangu.
Although Kampala-based pharmaceutical firm CIPLA-Quality Chemicals Ltd, an Indian pharmaceutical company, manufactures antiretroviral and anti-malarial drugs for the East African market, the cost of production is high, which results in lower quantities, which are not enough for regional consumption.
READ: Uganda leads push for permanent waiver on drug patents
Before 2005, India did not grant product patents on medicines. This allowed for the production of low-cost generic versions of medicines that were patented in other countries. Competition among generic producers in India has seen the price of medicines to treat diseases such as HIV, hepatitis and cancer fall by more than 90 per cent.
India has become a key source of essential medicines, such as ARVs, at a low cost and over 96 per cent of all HIV medicines purchased by donors for treatment programmes in developing countries come from India.
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.