HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "Ucrania y Grecia centrarán reunión de Merkel con líderes de FMI, OMC y OCDE; CRISIS UE (Previa)
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO to help settle Canadian trade rows with China, Taiwan
·         HYPERLINK \l "Russia rejects EU request to convene panel to settle import taxes issue
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO Delays Decision in EU-U.S. Aircraft Case to Mid-2016, Citing Complexity of Dispute
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO Agriculture Talks Resume March 20 on Market Access, Subsidies, Stockholding
·         HYPERLINK \l "India opposes move to reduce farm subsidies
·         HYPERLINK \l "Big iron miners ‘self destructing’
·         HYPERLINK \l "Kyrgyzstan notifies WTO on its accession to Eurasian Economic Union
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO - Mauritius to Join Trade in Services Agreement Negotiations
·         HYPERLINK \l "Commerce: l'UE rend public le mandat des négociations sur les services
·         HYPERLINK \l "Unions to make trade pacts an issue in U.S. 2016 campaigns
 
Ucrania y Grecia centrarán reunión de Merkel con líderes de FMI, OMC y OCDE; CRISIS UE (Previa)
 
Berlín, 10 mar (EFE).- Ucrania y Grecia centrarán la reunión que mantendrá mañana en Berlín la canciller alemana, Angela Merkel, con los dirigentes del Fondo Monetario Internacional (FMI), el Banco Mundial, la OCDE, la Organización Mundial de Comercio (OMC) y la Organización Internacional del Trabajo (OIT).

El encuentro, que es una ya cita tradicional en el calendario de Cancillería, busca un contacto directo más fluido de la jefa del Gobierno alemán con los responsables de los principales organismos multilaterales y la coordinación de estrategias.

Está previsto que acudan a Berlín la directora gerente del FMI, la francesa Christine Lagarde; el presidente del Banco Mundial, el estadounidense Jim Yong Kim; el secretario general de la OCDE, el mexicano Ángel Gurría; el director general de la OMC, el brasileño Roberto Azevedo, y el director general de la OIT, el británico Guy Ryder.

Aunque esta reunión no tiene una agenda oficial, los medios alemanes coinciden en destacar que tanto el conflicto en Ucrania -con su derivada de sanciones entre Rusia y la UE- como la crisis griega coparán las conversaciones.

Merkel se ha involucrado muy directamente en ambas cuestiones, mediando entre Moscú y Kiev, por un lado, y liderando la coalición de los austeros en Europa, por otro, pero también otros de los presentes en el encuentro están de una u otra forma implicados en ambas crisis.

El FMI bajo la dirección de Lagarde, que mantiene una buena relación con Merkel pese a algunos altibajos, ha concedido préstamos multimillonarios a Kiev y a Atenas, bajo unas duras condiciones que se encarga asimismo de supervisar.

Tanto Grecia como Ucrania precisan, a juicio de muchas fuentes, nuevas ayudas financieras y con seguridad el FMI volverá a encontrarse en el centro de las negociaciones en ambos casos.

La Organización para la Cooperación y el Desarrollo Económico (OCDE), por su parte, se ha ofrecido a asesorar a Grecia para establecer una nueva agenda de reformas estructurales y ajustes presupuestarios que ha causado cierto malestar entre algunos socios europeos, que han considerado la oferta como una intromisión.

Merkel pondrá previsiblemente también sobre el tapete el asunto de la renovación de los Objetivos de Desarrollo del Milenio, una cuestión en la que se ha implicado personalmente a raíz de la presidencia rotatoria alemana del G7, el grupo de países industrializados compuesto por Estados Unidos, Japón, Alemania, Canadá, Reino Unido, Francia e Italia.

Los objetivos de la primera lista, confeccionada a principios del siglo XXI, debía alcanzarse para este año, y la canciller está promoviendo un debate para fijar un nuevo puñado de metas, en cuya confección estarían sin duda implicadas las organizaciones multilaterales como el Banco Mundial, la OMC y a la OIT.

Además, Berlín lanzó hoy una propuesta para tratar de extender una serie de estándares laborales y medioambientales a lo largo de todas las cadenas de suministro y producción trasnacionales, un tema que afecta directamente a la OIT y la OMC. EFE
 
 
WTO to help settle Canadian trade rows with China, Taiwan 
10 March 2015
Agence France Presse
 
The World Trade Organization agreed Tuesday to create two expert panels to help settle Canadian rows with Taiwan and China over tariffs on steel pipes and cellulose pulp.

In the first case, Taiwan had launched a complaint against Canada over duties on carbon steel welded pipes that Ottawa claims are being dumped on its market.

Canada had blocked Taiwan's initial request for WTO's Dispute Settlement Body to create a panel to rule on the dispute, but with its second request, the panel was automatically set up in accordance with WTO rules.

The WTO, which polices global trade accords in an effort to ensure a level playing field for its member economies, also automatically accepted Canada's second request to create a panel to settle a dispute with China.

Canada maintains that China is breaking WTO rules by imposing punitive tariffs on bleached wood pulp.

Wood pulp, also called dissolving pulp, is typically spun into textile fibres or films.

Last month, Canadian Trade Minister Ed Fast announced the country's first panel request, slamming "China's imposition of discriminatory anti-dumping measures on Canadian dissolving pulp."

He insisted that an investigation by China to determine whether Canada sells the forestry product at slashed prices was flawed, and that the Asian giant's bid to restrict Canadian imports was therefore unwarranted.

Once created, WTO's panels of independent trade and legal experts usually take several months to render their decisions.

They can authorise retaliatory trade measures if they rule in favour of a plaintiff.

 
Russia rejects EU request to convene panel to settle import taxes issue 
RIA Novosti
11 March 2015
Bizekon-Russica Izvestia
 
Russia has rejected the first request made by the European Union (EU) to the World Trade Organization (WTO) calling for the establishment of an arbitration panel to settle the matter of Russian import duties, a source familiar with the situation said this Tuesday.

"A first-time request for the establishment of a panel by the European Union to study its dispute with Russia over tariff treatment of certain agricultural and manufacturing products was rejected by the Russian Federation", the source revealed.

The European Union is accusing Russia of applying a high duty rate on some products, including paper-products, refrigerators and palm oil.

In late February, the European Union requested the establishment of a WTO dispute settlement panel saying that the import duties "continue to seriously hamper EU trade" and "have a negative impact on the economy", according to the source.

The two sides previously held formal WTO consultations over the matter in November, 2014 but the dispute remained unresolved.

Russia expressed regret over the EU's decision to convene a panel, as Moscow was ready to find a solution within the framework of ongoing consultations, the source added.

The second request, which can be filed by the European Union on March 25, cannot be rejected.

Russia joined the WTO in August 2012. Brussels has repeatedly accused Moscow of not meeting the commitments it undertook since becoming a WTO member.

In total, at least four disputes have been initiated by the European Union against Russia, its third largest trading partner, within WTO frameworks, according to the organization's website.

For its part, Russia has initiated two disputes with the WTO against the European Union. The first, filed in late 2013, concerns anti-dumping measures imposed by the European Union on several products imported from Russia, including ammonium nitrate and steel products. The second, initiated in April 2014 is over measures applied by the EU relating to the so-called Third Energy Package.

 
WTO Delays Decision in EU-U.S. Aircraft Case to Mid-2016, Citing Complexity of Dispute
By Bryce Baschuk 
WTO Reporter, March 11, 2015
 
March 10 — The World Trade Organization needs additional time—until mid-2016—to issue a decision in a long-running European Union dispute over U.S. tax subsidies for Boeing Co. aircraft, according to a March 10 notice.
 
The WTO's Dispute Settlement Body (DSB) is investigating whether the U.S. complied with a panel's 2012 recommendation that the U.S. amend its tax incentives to maintain compliance with WTO agreements (57 WTO, 3/26/12).
 
The EU claimed that the U.S. continued to offer billions of dollars in tax subsidies for Boeing to manufacture its aircraft domestically despite the conclusions of the 2012 WTO panel decision.
 
Last year, the panel said it did not expect to complete its work before mid-2015. The scale and complexity of the dispute required the panel to extend its timeline in reviewing the case another year, according to the March 10 notice.
 
Dispute Continues
 
The announcement extends by one year the next milestone in the ongoing WTO investigations of the two members' respective aircraft manufacturing tax regimes.
 
The cases stem from the dissolution of a 1992 bilateral EU-U.S. agreement on trade in large civil aircraft that permitted each party to provide a certain level of support to their domestic aircraft industries.
 
After the U.S. withdrew from the agreement in 2004, it filed and won a WTO dispute in which it claimed that EU member states offered illegal government subsidies to European aircraft consortium, Airbus Group NV. The EU then challenged the U.S. government's subsidies for Boeing.
 
The U.S. subsequently sought a compliance panel to determine whether the EU had failed to comply with the 2011 WTO decision.
 
The EU said it had secured repayment of some $2.3 billion in launch-aid loans and had terminated the loan agreements in question. A decision in that case is not expected until the end of 2015.
 
2015 Inquiry Begins
 
The DSB in February granted a new inquiry into whether the U.S. again violated international trade obligations in 2013 by offering subsidies to Boeing.
 
The EU alleged the U.S. offered $8.7 billion in tax subsidies to encourage Boeing to manufacture its 777X commercial aircraft in Washington state.
 
The U.S. rejected an EU request to incorporate the most recent panel investigation into the pending dispute regarding U.S. compliance with the 2012 decision.
 
The settlement body plans to issue a report within 90 days of the panel's composition.
 
 
WTO Agriculture Talks Resume March 20 on Market Access, Subsidies, Stockholding
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, March 11, 2015
 
March 10 — World Trade Organization members will convene later this month to discuss the status of their agricultural negotiations, according to Geneva trade officials.
 
John Adank, the chairman of the WTO Agriculture Negotiating Committee in Special Session, scheduled two informal meetings to be held on March 20.
 
The meetings are part of an ongoing effort to improve members' policies regarding market access and reduce trade-distorting domestic support in line with the goals of the Doha Development Agenda. Members will also discuss ways to find a permanent solution to the issue of public stockholding for food security purposes.
 
The work of the agricultural negotiating committee is considered a crucial component of the WTO's effort to advance a detailed work program by July 31, with the goal of concluding the Doha round of negotiations. Adank has urged delegations to concentrate on practical possibilities for achieving the July 2015 target.
 
Domestic Support
 
In the first meeting, Adank will brief members on the latest negotiations regarding market access and domestic support policies.
 
Although members have actively engaged on the domestic support issue, sharp disagreements between some developed and developing nations have emerged in recent weeks. Specifically, the U.S., India and China have failed to find consensus on the viability of the December 2008 draft modalities (Rev. 4). The draft modalities are formulas for reducing trade-distorting measures, last revised in 2008.
 
During an informal consultation March 6, China rejected a U.S. proposal for emerging economies to adjust their levels of trade-distorting domestic support in addition to the provisions outlined in Rev. 4 (45 WTO, 3/9/15).
 
Chinese Ambassador Yu Jianhua said his government “would make no contribution toward new disciplines on domestic support,” according to officials at the meeting. Yu said on a per capita basis, Chinese farmers receive a much smaller fraction of agricultural subsidies when compared to the subsidies the U.S. provides to its farmers.
 
Market Access Proposals
 
Adank will likely brief members about a trio of proposals from Paraguay, Argentina and the European Union aimed at achieving agricultural tariff cuts.
 
Paraguay's proposal, which circulated last week in Geneva, suggested that developed countries could apply, in six equal annual installments, a maximum average cut of 54 percent and minimum cut of 20 percent per tariff line (43 WTO, 3/5/15).
 
Under the proposal, developing countries could apply, in 11 equal annual installments, maximum average tariff cuts of 54 percent and a minimum cut of 15 percent per tariff line. Small and vulnerable economies and new WTO members could offer a maximum average cut of 24 percent.
 
Argentina has circulated a proposal to consider offers and requests by individual members instead of a tariff-reduction formula, and the European Union has called for a simplified approach based on average and minimum cuts.
 
Food Stockpiling
 
In a second meeting on March 20, Adank will urge members to find a permanent solution to the issue of public stockholding for food security purposes.
 
The U.S., EU, Brazil, Canada and Australia continue to oppose a proposal from the Group of 33 (G-33) developing countries to categorize price support in the “green box” of non-trade distorting subsidies. Some developed countries believe that such a proposal would sanction trade distortion, in conflict with the terms of the Agreement on Agriculture.
 
Under existing WTO rules, developing countries with stockholding programs for food security purposes must count any difference between the prices paid to farmers and external reference prices (dating from 1986-88) as trade-distorting subsidies. WTO members are prohibited from spending above a certain percentage of the value of their domestic agricultural production (de minimis limits) for these subsidies.
 
Developing members like India are concerned that their public stockholding programs could be subject to WTO challenges because members have not updated the 1986-88 WTO pricing benchmark used to calculate trade-distorting measures related to agricultural subsidies.
 
Disagreement over an interim agreement forged at the 2013 Bali Ministerial led India to oppose the Trade Facilitation Agreement last July (148 WTO, 8/1/14). In December, members agreed to extend indefinitely a so-called “peace clause” on developing countries' stockholding programs and set a Dec. 31, 2015, target to arrive at a permanent solution to the food stockholding issue (230 WTO, 12/1/14).
 
 
India opposes move to reduce farm subsidies 
D. Ravi Kanth 
11 March 2015
Mint
 
Geneva, March 11 -- As tempers fray among key members at the World Trade Organization (WTO) in talks to cut farm subsidies, India has hit out at what it has called the "dangerous suggestion" being advanced by some powerful countries that China and India must reduce the minimum agricultural support they are currently allowed.

India says the disciplines for reducing farm subsidies in the agriculture negotiations cannot be changed just because some members-such as the US and Canada-find it hard to scrap their current trade-distorting domestic farm subsidies.

At a closed-door meeting of a select group of trade envoys held last Friday at the WTO in Geneva, India criticized demands for reduction of so-called "de minimis"-minimal amount of domestic support-from countries that had not given commitments to reduce their own subsidies.

The chair for the so-called Doha agriculture negotiations, John Adank, called the meeting with trade envoys from the US, the European Union, China, India, Brazil, Japan, Canada, Australia, Norway, Switzerland, South Africa, Indonesia, Argentina, Colombia and Mexico to prepare the blueprint for reducing trade-distorting domestic subsidies.

During the meeting, the US and China also crossed swords, accusing each other of distorting global farm prices, particularly in cotton, a western trade envoy said on condition of anonymity.

The US says China, with its one trillion dollar-farm economy, can now provide subsidies to the tune of $170 billion based on the current minimum entitlement of 17%.

In turn, China told the US that it is willing to cap its farm subsidies at the same per capita level that is provided by Washington to its rich farmers-$57,000.

WTO allows de minimis support of 5% of the value of agricultural production (VoP) for developed countries and 10% for developing countries.

The issue here is whether developing countries like India which assist their farm producers through de minimis support programmes must also reduce the level of support from the 10% they are currently allowed.

The 10% limit enables developing countries to provide product-specific support for each agriculture item up to 10% of the VoP as well as non-product specific items to the tune of 10%.

The current Doha Round of trade talks, which began in 2001, are a successor to the Uruguay Round and are aimed at setting the rules of world trade. They have been stalled over the issue of agricultural subsidies among others.

India and China are not required to reduce their de minimis in the Doha Round as per a 2008 agreement.

But the US is now demanding that China and India undertake appropriate commitments. The US has repeatedly argued that China and India, with their rising subsidies, are distorting global farm markets, said a trade envoy familiar with the meeting.

Against this backdrop, India has called for disciplining the bound levels of aggregate measurement of support (AMS) because of its trade-distorting impact, while rejecting calls for reducing de minimis support for developing countries that did not undertake AMS commitments in the previous Uruguay Round-countries like India and China.

"Some members are trying to divert attention from OTDS (overall trade distorting domestic support) concept because with their existing subsidies they will be breaching the new limits" that will come into force with new revised draft modalities for agriculture, India has stated in its non-paper. Such members include the US and Canada.

"Implicit in this argument is a dangerous suggestion-future negotiations on domestic support should focus on cutting de minimis and not inter alia on reducing AMS limits," New Delhi has argued.

India has carried out simulations based on the AMS and de minimis thresholds in the 2008 revised draft modalities in which industrialized countries are required to reduce their de minimis support to 2.5% from 5%.

"The imbalance in the existing AoA (agreement on agriculture) where only some members have access to bound AMS (such as the industrialized countries) allows them much more policy space vis-a-vis other members who have only de minimis," India has pointed out.
 
 
Big iron miners ‘self destructing’ 
The Australian
11 March 2015
theAustralian.com.au
 
AUSTRALIA’S big iron ore miners are on a path towards “self destruction” and could find themselves with a case to answer in front of the WTO.

Lourenco Goncalves, the chief executive of US iron ore miner Cliffs Natural Resources, told the Global Iron Ore and Steel Forecast conference in Perth today the ongoing output growth by the likes of BHP Billiton, Rio Tinto, Fortescue Metals Group and Brazil’s Vale was flawed.

He noted the price plunge over the past 13 months — the result of a surge of iron ore supply from the majors — had wiped around $US50 billion of EBITDA from the world’s biggest iron ore miners. That $US50 billion could have been used to buy and shutdown Australian producers such as Fortescue, he argued, allowing prices to remain higher.

“Because that was not done and the strategy was to drive prices down, Fortescue is still out there. They will have to keep these prices down forever, because even if everybody else in Australia goes broke, it doesn’t means that the assets won’t be bought by someone later and restarted,” Mr Goncalves said.

“The only way to keep these things down is by keeping prices down forever. I respectfully disagree with the strategy.”

Since taking control of Cliffs through a board spill last year, Mr Goncalves has set about exiting Cliffs from the seaborne iron ore business dominated by BHP, Rio and Vale and is instead concentrating on the domestic US market.

Cliffs is trying to sell its Koolyanobbing iron ore mine in Western Australia, and has flagged the closure of the mine in four to five years should it fail to find a buyer.

Mr Goncalves said the apparent strategy of the miners to drive out higher-cost producers in China and other nations could be “a difficult point if Australia had to defend that in the WTO”.

“We are not against fair trade. We are just against unfair trade. We are against muscling out companies, pushing countries out of industries,” he said.

“Imagine if it were Russia trying to drive Japanese businesses out of business. It would not be that cool. In a world that’s flat, you’ve got to do to others only what someone else would do to you.”
 
 
Kyrgyzstan notifies WTO on its accession to Eurasian Economic Union   
11 March 2015
Central Asia News
 
Kyrgyzstan has notified the Regional Trade Agreements Committee of the World Trade Organization on Kyrgyzstan's joining to the Eurasian Economic Union Treaty as of May 29, 2014, the Ministry of Economy of Kyrgyzstan announced.

Kyrgyzstan is a member of the WTO since December 1998.

President Almazbek Atambayev has earlier said that Kyrgyzstan may be a member of the WTO and the Customs Union at the same time with no contradictions.

Russia, Belarus, and Kazakhstan signed the agreement creation of the Eurasian Economic Union in May 2014 in Astana. The treaty came into force starting from January 1, 2015.

Armenia joined the union early this year and Kyrgyzstan plans to become a full member in May.

 
WTO - Mauritius to Join Trade in Services Agreement Negotiations  
10 March 2015
All Africa
 
Mar 10, 2015 (Government of Mauritius/All Africa Global Media via COMTEX) -- Mauritius will join the Trade in Services Agreement (TiSA) Negotiations, in line with the General Agreement of Trade in Services (GATS) of the World Trade Organisation (WTO).

The GATS, an integral part of the WTO, calls upon Member States to progressively liberalise trade in services through successive rounds of negotiations.

Twenty-four countries (comprising Australia, Chile, USA, Japan, and New Zealand), two customs territories, and one economic union - the European Union - have decided to proceed with a plurilateral approach through the negotiation of a Trade in Services Agreement.

On joining the TiSA, Mauritius will offer the same market access conditions to World Trade Organisation Members, as those proposed to the EU in the context of the Economic Partnership Agreement.

GATS

The creation of the GATS was one of the landmark achievements of the Uruguay Round, whose results entered into force in January 1995.

The GATS was inspired by essentially the same objectives as its counterpart in merchandise trade, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), creating a credible and reliable system of international trade rules; ensuring fair and equitable treatment of all participants (principle of non-discrimination); stimulating economic activity through guaranteed policy bindings; and promoting trade and development through progressive liberalisation.

Mauritius has been a WTO member since 1 January 1995 and a member of GATT since 2 September 1970. 
 
 
Commerce: l'UE rend public le mandat des négociations sur les services
11 March 2015
La Tribune
 
La décision a été prise "d'un commun accord" par les ministres des Finances de l'UE mardi à Bruxelles, suite à une proposition de la commissaire en charge du Commerce, Cecilia Malmström.

Voici un nouveau geste en faveur d'une plus grande transparence dans les négociations commerciales à grande échelle. L'Union européenne a rendu public mardi 10 mars le mandat de négociation du vaste accord en préparation sur le commerce des services (ACS ou TISA en anglais),

La décision a été prise "d'un commun accord" par les ministres des Finances de l'UE mardi à Bruxelles, suite à une proposition de la commissaire en charge du Commerce.

Les citoyens, juges

Cecilia Malmström avait déjà contribué à rendre public fin 2014 le mandat de négociation de l'accord de libre-échange en discussion avec les Etats-Unis (Tafta ou TTIP), pour faire taire ceux reprochant aux Européens de négocier des accords sensibles dans le dos des citoyens.

"Les citoyens seront en mesure de voir par eux-mêmes que, dans les négociations sur le TISA, l'UE protège les services publics, conserve le droit de réglementer à tous les niveaux de gouvernement et garantit le maintien des normes les plus élevées", a estimé Cecilia Malmström dans un communiqué.

Les négociations sur le TISA sont menées sous l'égide des Etats-Unis et de l'Australie et rassemblent 24 membres de l'Organisation mondiale du commerce (OMC), représentant 70% du secteur des services.

Elles ont été entamées officiellement en 2013, et depuis 11 cycles de négociations ont eu lieu, mais la contestation est vive: de nombreuses ONG craignent que cet accord débouche sur "une casse des services publics", notamment des systèmes de santé et d'éducation.

Un secteur de 10 millions d'emplois

"Nous regrettons la longueur du délai de cette publication tout autant que la sélection opérée en amont quant au choix des documents diffusés", a réagi l'eurodéputé vert Yves Jadot. "Il ressort en tout cas que les gouvernements européens poursuivent une stratégie d'ouverture débridée des marchés. Quant à la protection des services publics, elle est clairement insuffisante", a-t-il estimé.

La Commission estime au contraire que l'accord est important pour les Européens, les premiers exportateurs de services au monde. Le secteur représente plus de dix millions d'emplois sur le continent et l'accord a pour ambition d'ouvrir les marchés et d'améliorer les règles dans des domaines comme les licences, les services financiers ou le commerce en ligne.
 
Cecilia Malmström avait déjà contribué à rendre public fin 2014 le mandat de négociation de l'accord de libre-échange en discussion avec les Etats-Unis (Tafta ou TTIP), pour faire taire ceux reprochant aux Européens de négocier des accords sensibles dans le dos des citoyens.
 
 
Unions to make trade pacts an issue in U.S. 2016 campaigns 
 
WASHINGTON, March 10 (Reuters) - Unions plan to make lawmakers' support for trade deals and legislation to streamline the passage of trade agreements through Congress an issue in next year's U.S. elections, the head of the country's largest labor federation said on Tuesday.

AFL-CIO President Richard Trumka said unions would keep a tally of how lawmakers voted on upcoming legislation allowing Congress to set negotiating objectives for trade deals in exchange for a yes-or-no vote, without amendments. The labor federation is also keeping an eye on voting on the 12-nation Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) trade pact.

"Every time there's a loss of jobs because of an agreement like that, we will let people know who voted for and who voted against it," Trumka told reporters.

All House of Representatives seats and one-third of the Senate are up for grabs in 2016, when Americans will also elect a new president.

Trumka said the AFL-CIO would include a question on trade in a questionnaire to be sent to presidential candidates.

The Trans-Pacific Partnership would only pass muster with unions if it contained rules against currency manipulation, did not have special protections for foreign investors and went further than the current norms in safeguarding workers' rights, he said.

Union pressure to vote against trade bills is at odds with lobbying from the administration in support of the trade agenda, which officials say will boost opportunities for U.S. producers and workers and lead to stronger worker protections among trading partners.

Nineteen former lawmakers from both parties wrote to Congress on Tuesday urging support for the fast-track bill, including former Senate Majority Leaders Tom Daschle, a Democrat, and Trent Lott, a Republican.

"Uncertainty about economic policy in general is understandable given the hardships faced by Americans during the last decade, but trade agreements in particular have too often taken the blame for what other global forces have wrought," the letter said.

Senate Committee on Finance Chairman Orrin Hatch, a Utah Republican, and the panel's top Democrat, Ron Wyden, said on Tuesday they were still working on details of the fast-track bill. Hatch has said he expects the measure to be introduced in April. (Reporting by Krista Hughes; Additional reporting by Susan Cornwell; Editing by Jonathan Oatis) END


  ________________________________  
Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.