WTO Members Frustrated With ‘Systemic’ Delays of Dispute Settlement Body Reports
Top U.S. trade negotiator says Pacific pact nearly ready
Delhi: U.S. to Pull WTO Case
India wants to keep US chicken legs out
China's yuan breaks into the world's top five as payment currency-SWIFT
 
 
WTO Members Frustrated With ‘Systemic’ Delays of Dispute Settlement Body Reports
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, January 28, 2015
 
Jan. 27 — Several key members of the World Trade Organization complained about the systemic lateness of the Dispute Settlement Body's (DSB) reports in recent meetings in Geneva.
 
In five of the last six WTO disputes, the Appellate Body has not circulated its reports within 90 days as mandated in Article 17.5 of the Dispute Settlement Understanding (DSU).
 
Such delays present financial difficulties for countries awaiting investigations of trade barriers with big impacts on their industries' bottom lines.
 
If the DSB does not address such delays it could erode the transparency and accountability of the WTO's rules-based system, the members said.
 
Lack of Transparency
 
The U.S. said it was particularly concerned that the Appellate Body failed to consult with parties of the recent Argentina trade restrictions case when it became clear that the review would breach the 90-day time limit.
 
“It would also appear that a step has been taken backwards with respect to transparency, as compared with other reports, in that this report does not even mention this issue in its introductory section,” the U.S. said in its remarks at a Jan. 26 Dispute Settlement Body meeting.
 
The U.S. said it would have preferred if the Appellate Body consulted with members and sought an agreement about a time extension rather than issue a form letter notifying the parties that it would not issue the report within the 90-day time-limit.
 
“A situation in which members continue to be informed of and react to circulation of reports in circumstances such as these only further contributes to a lack of transparency and a lack of predictability,” the U.S. said.
 
Others Echo Concern
 
Australia urged greater consultations with parties in the event of a delay and sought to encourage as few departures from normal appellate timeframes as possible. “Adherence to timeframes underpins the predictability of the system and is critical in government and commercial decision-making,” according to its intervention at the Jan. 26 meeting.
 
Japan said it regretted the DSB's lack of consultation about the timing of the report, something that had been common practice prior to 2011. “In this regard, Japan believes that providing opportunity for consultations is important due process, in particular, in the current circumstance under which the Appellate Body is required to deal with [a] high amount of works,” it said in its intervention.
 
“Some might like to believe that since the 90 days we originally set aside for appeals has become increasingly unrealistic, we can simply wave away a strict provision of the DSU,” said Canada in its intervention. “We do not share that view.”
 
Canada noted that “a small group of delegations” has been working on proposals to ameliorate the problem though no solutions have been identified.
 
Taiwan asked members whether it is time to “give some serious thought to how to improve the efficiency of the dispute proceedings, without prejudice to the accuracy and quality of the dispute settlement reports,” according to its intervention.
 
‘Insurmountable Bottleneck.'
 
The issue doesn't surprise WTO Director-General Roberto Azevedo, who bemoaned the “insurmountable bottleneck” of appeals facing the DSB.
 
He noted that the total number of active proceedings being serviced by the WTO Legal Affairs Division, Rules Division, and the Appellate Body Secretariat has roughly doubled since 2012.
 
Azevedo said he expects that nearly a dozen appeals will be filed every year for the next two years, including possible appeals in the two complex aircraft cases between the U.S. and the European Union.
 
Last year, Azevedo offered 15 new positions in the WTO's dispute settlement divisions and has recruited 17 junior attorneys since 2013 for temporary contracts to replace outgoing employees.
 
 
Top U.S. trade negotiator says Pacific pact nearly ready 
 
* U.S. Trade Representative says Congress should pass fast-track 
* Lawmakers quiz Michael Froman on currency manipulation 
* Senate committee chair warns no Pacific pact before fast-track 
 
By Krista Hughes 
 
WASHINGTON, Jan 27 (Reuters) - The top U.S. trade official told lawmakers on Tuesday an ambitious Pacific trade pact could be wrapped up within months as he urged Congress to back the administration's trade agenda. 
 
In testimony to congressional committees, U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman said the administration looked to lawmakers to pass bipartisan legislation allowing a streamlined approval process for trade deals, such as the 12-nation Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP). 
 
TPP chief negotiators are meeting in New York this week and a U.S. negotiator said the talks aimed to close all but the trickiest issues. Some see a mid-March completion date. 
 
"We are not done yet but I feel confident that we are making good progress and we can close out a positive package soon," Froman told the Senate Committee on Finance, adding parties aimed for a deal in a "small number of months." 
 
Still, outstanding issues were "significant." There was no consensus on how long to protect the exclusivity of biologic drugs and gaps on other intellectual property protections, environmental protection rules, investment and state-owned enterprises, he said. 
 
At hearings with the Senate and House committees responsible for trade, both Republicans and Democrats said trade negotiations should seek to stop trading partners from manipulating their currencies. Senator Charles Schumer, a New York Democrat, said he would not support the TPP without action on currencies. 
 
Froman said Treasury had the lead on exchange rates and was pushing the issue one-on-one and in international forums. 
 
The White House's plans to seal a trade agreement covering 40 percent of the world economy and fast-track legislation in 2015 face opposition from some Democrats worried about the impact on jobs at home and some conservative Republicans opposed to giving President Barack Obama more power. 
 
During the House committee hearing, lawmakers brandished cheese and car keys to represent local industries potentially affected by trade deals. Froman said officials were consulting with stakeholders every step of the way. 
 
Republican Orrin Hatch, chairman of the Senate Committee on Finance, said it would be a "grave mistake" to close TPP before securing trade promotion authority (TPA), which allows the White House to submit trade deals to Congress for a yes-or-no vote, without amendments, in exchange for setting negotiating goals. 
 
 
Delhi: U.S. to Pull WTO Case 
By Saurabh Chaturvedi 
28 January 2015
The Wall Street Journal Asia
 
NEW DELHI -- India expects the U.S. to withdraw its complaint at the World Trade Organization against local-purchasing rules in its federal solar program, as the growth of the South Asian nation's solar sector will likely mean more business opportunities for American companies, a senior government official said Tuesday.

A dispute settlement panel at the WTO is due to hear complaints made by the U.S. against India's federal solar program on Feb. 3.

Under India's program, known as Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission, the country aims to raise solar power generation capacity to 100 gigawatts by 2022 from about three gigawatts now.

After coming to power in May, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi's government raised the target under the solar program to 100 gigawatts from 20 gigawatts, as the country aims to boost the use of clean sources of energy and reduce dependence on fossil fuels such as coal to generate electricity. India imports three-quarters of its overall energy needs.

"The program has grown bigger and has created more opportunities for the American companies to take part and build solar projects in India," the official added.

"The U.S. has an option to withdraw the complaint or keep it in cold storage," the government official from India's ministry of new and renewable energy told The Wall Street Journal. "Our position is clear and we would continue to defend it at the WTO." U.S. authorities couldn't be reached to comment.

The U.S. earlier said that India is unfairly restricting access to American suppliers as it moves ahead with the large-scale solar-power program through local-purchasing rules. India says rules are limited to only a small portion of the program and are WTO-compliant.

The news comes as U.S. President Barack Obama concludes a three-day trip to India, during which he said U.S. companies are eager to participate in India's plan to boost the use of renewable energy, including solar.

The official said India in August dropped a plan to impose antidumping tariffs on solar cells imported from four countries, including the U.S. "That in itself was a boost for American companies," he added.
 
 
India wants to keep US chicken legs out 
 
28 January 2015
The Times of India - Mumbai Edition
 
India has challenged a World Trade Organization (WTO) ruling, asking it to lift a ban on the import of poultry from the US, a move aimed at helping check shipment of low-cost chicken legs, which are discarded in America as they are perceived as having higher cholesterol levels. Although a decision on filing an appeal had been taken by the commerce department earlier, the actual plea was delayed due to legal vetting and news about it trickled out only after US president Barack Obama left for Saudi Arabia on Tuesday . India had banned poultry imports several years ago, citing avian influenza, but the WTO accepted the US challenge and termed the restrictions imposed as "unscientific". India is not the only country to have imposed such checks. Even China had levied duties, and was asked to remove them by WTO as they were seen to be unfair. Unlike India, where "tangri kebabs" are a hot favourite, in US, consumers prefer "white meat" and opt for chicken breast.

As a result, there are surplus chicken legs and thighs for American companies to export to countries such as China, Mexico and Russia, where buyers are less fussy . In India, of course, everyone at the dinner table searches for leg piece in curry , which is often elusive. As a result, not only there is a higher demand for leg pieces in India but even costs are lower if they are import ed from the US. Government estimates suggest that despite 100% import duty, leg pieces from US will cost around Rs 100 a kg in the retail market. However, in cities such as Delhi, chicken produced at domestic market sells for at least Rs 160-170 a kg, while drumsticks and leg pieces cost close to Rs 250 a kg. As demand for protein rises with increasing income levels, meat prices are expected to rise further and the domestic poultry industry is citing livelihood concerns to press the government for action. Although the government sees merit in challenging the WTO ruling, it is not averse to other steps to check import of chicken legs.

 
China's yuan breaks into the world's top five as payment currency-SWIFT 
 
HONG KONG, Jan 28 (Reuters) - China's yuan broke into the top five as a world payment currency in November, overtaking the Canadian dollar and the Australian dollar, global transaction services organisation SWIFT said on Wednesday. 
 
After nearly a year firmly positioned at seventh spot, the yuan reached a record high share of 2.17 percent in global payments by value and is in sight of the Japanese yen, which has a share of 2.69 percent. 
 
The U.S. dollar, euro and British pound remain the top three world payment currencies. 
 
"It is a great testimony to the internationalisation of the RMB and confirms its transition from an 'emerging' to a 'business as usual' payment currency," Wim Raymaekers, Head of Banking Markets at SWIFT said in a statement. 
 
The rise of various offshore yuan clearing centres around the world, including eight new agreements signed with the People's Bank of China last year, was an important driver fuelling this growth. 
 
Global yuan payments increased by 20.3 percent in value in December compared to a year earlier, while the growth for payments across all currencies was 14.9 percent for the same period, SWIFT said. 
 
Over the last year, yuan payments grew in value by 102 percent compared to an overall yearly growth for all currencies of 4.4 percent. 
 
China is expected to make another push for the inclusion of the yuan in the International Monetary Fund's in-house currency basket in a review later this year - and this time round its G20 partners may be willing to listen. 
 
The main argument against its inclusion in the Special Drawing Rights, a basket of yen, dollars, pounds and euro used as the IMF's in-house unit of account, is that the yuan is far from freely "usable" or convertible. But that argument has been gradually weakening as yuan offshore trading surges. 
