Headlines

UN summit urged to ‘close gaps’ in trade finance
Addis Ababa hosts key global development summit
U.N. hopes 'tax inspectors without borders' will combat tax dodging
Leaders must put aside 'narrow self-interest' to end poverty says Ban Ki-moon
New Zealand accedes to WTO government procurement pact
Seoul resists: WTO to resume talks on expanding tariff-free digital products
Commerce dept to seek Cabinet OK on WTO trade facilitation pact soon
Cheap U.S. Chicken Scares Indian Poultry Breeders
Greek government faces massive austerity 
16 Asia-Pacific nations short of deal on tariff elimination targets

 

Details:

UN summit urged to ‘close gaps’ in trade finance

14 July 2015

United News of Bangladesh Limited

Dhaka, July 14 (UNB) – HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO) Director-General HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Roberto Azevêdo on Monday said they are now in the run up to the WTO’s Ministerial Conference in Nairobi in December — the first time such a conference has ever been held in Africa.

“Our focus there will be on delivering for Africa, and for developing the least-developed countries around the world. There are some big issues on the table,” he said, while speaking at the opening session of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development in Addis Ababa.

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO DG also said members are working to negotiate new rules on agriculture, industrial goods, and services.

“A new global deal on these issues — along with a package of outcomes to support LDCs — would be a major breakthrough in our efforts to ensure that trade supports development,” said Azevêdo.

Moreover, it would be the biggest contribution the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO could make to global efforts on sustainable development, and to taking forward all of the issues that they are discussing today, he added.

The WTO Director-General outlined the major gaps which exist in the provision of trade finance, particularly in Africa and Asia, and the major impact that this can have on growth and development. He urged development partners to continue working together to help close these gaps.

The session was attended by UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon, the President of the UN General Assembly, Sam Kahamba Kutesa, the President of the World Bank, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Dr Jim Yong Kim, the Prime Minister of Ethiopia, Hailemariam Desalegn, and many other heads of state and government, ministers and leaders of international organisations.

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO head further said, “Trade played a major role in the successful global effort to halve extreme poverty — and it can do a great deal more in the years to come. A range of policy measures are needed to make sure that the poor feel the full benefits of trade.”

He said they have identified trade finance as a key issue here. “Up to 80% of global trade is supported by some sort of financing or credit insurance. But developing countries are still suffering from the consequences of the 2008 crisis.”

The supply of credit has not yet returned to normal levels. And so we are seeing big financing gaps, particularly in Africa and Asia, he said.

“In Asia, the unmet demand for trade finance is estimated at over 1 trillion dollars. As a result, all too often, opportunities for growth and development are missed. Businesses are deprived the fuel they need to grow. And we are prevented from leveraging trade's full power as a source of development,” he said, adding that everyone needs to respond to this problem.

United News Of Bangladesh Ltd. 

Addis Ababa hosts key global development summit

13 July 2015

Deutsche Welle

A conference on how to finance the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"UN's new, ambitious global development agenda is now underway in Addis Ababa. UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon has called for "flexibility and compromise."

The aim of the talks is to do some crucial groundwork for the creation of a fairer, less polluted world. This is the third summit of its kind after talks in Monterrey in 2002 and Doha in 2008.

Specifically, 190 nations hope to agree on how to bankroll 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), which include ending poverty and hunger, combating climate change and achieving gender equality by 2030.

Preparatory talks held in New York failed to yield an agreement on a common summit outcome.

The SDGs, which are due to be formally adopted in October 2015, are estimated to cost between $3.3 trillion and $4.5 trillion (3 - 4 trillion Euros ) annually, according to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"UN Conference on Trade and Development (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"UNCTAD).

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Bank, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"African Development Bank, the Asian Development bank and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"International Monetary Fund signaled on Friday (10.7.2015) that they planned to extend more than $400 billion in financing over the next three years.

But HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Jim Yong Kim, President of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"the World Bank Group said in a statement "we need trillions not billions of dollars to accomplish these goals."

Public money to boost private investement

Owen Bader, a development economist at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Center for Global Development in London, is in Addis Ababa for the summit. He told DW's AfricaLink radio show that "the typical African doesn't need aid, but a job."

Bader said the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Bank's reference to trillions meant that "we have to use public resources to work together with the private sector. In the end, it is the private sector that will create those jobs. We can use public investment to create the right conditions for that investment and that growth and we can use it to protect the most vulnerable people who aren't benefiting immediately."

Host nation Ethiopia

The choice of Ethiopia as summit host highlights the importance of sustainable growth for the continent. 33 out of the world's 49 least developed countries are found in Africa.

Despite concerns over its record on democracy and human rights, Ethiopia - which was gripped by an appalling famine 30 years ago - is seen as something of a model for development having brought millions out of poverty and having invested heavily in infrastructure.

"There has been much more investment in irrigation in roads and transport - all things that enable people to get their product to market and enable markets to function properly. That means that drought no longer need turn into famine. And the Ethiopian government has - with the help of international donors - put in place a safety net scheme which means that when the harvest do fail people don't find themselves starving," said Bader.

But finding the money for the SDGs - which supersede the partially fulfilled MDGs (Millennium Development Goals) is just one problem. "Many donors are questioning who should receive development aid. They tell middle income countries 'you're wealthy, you can raise your own money, let's focus on poor countries," Gail Hurly from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"UN Development Program told the AFP news agency.

Another contentious issue is the creation of an international tax organization within the United Nations to fight tax evasion by multinationals. International tax rules that allow large companies to avoid taxes end up costing developing countries an estimated $100 billion annually. However, rich countries want decisions about international taxation to stay under the auspices of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD and G20 where they control the agenda. This is just one issue where the "flexibility and compromise" called for by the UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon would appear to be in short supply.

Deutsche Welle

U.N. hopes 'tax inspectors without borders' will combat tax dodging

By Katy and Migiro 

13 July 2015

Reuters News

ADDIS ABABA (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Thomson Reuters Foundation) - Backers of a new initiative, dubbed "tax inspectors without borders", say it can help poor countries crackdown on tax dodging and fund their own development, but advocacy groups on Monday were skeptical that it would work.

Nearly $1 trillion in illicit finance, stemming from tax evasion, crime and corruption, is estimated to leave poor countries each year, according to Global Financial Integrity (GFI), a policy research group.

Developing countries must stop these outflows if they are to achieve 17 new and ambitious development goals, experts said on the first day of a four-day financing summit in Ethiopia.

Under the so-called "tax inspectors without borders" initiative, released on Monday, experts from well-functioning states will help officials in poorer countries carry out audits to detect tax dodging, mainly by multinationals.

"For too long, some multinationals have used aggressive tax planning to reduce their tax bills, or avoid paying taxes altogether," said Angel Gurria, secretary-general of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD), which unveiled the initiative together with HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"United Nations Development Programme (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"UNDP).

"This simply cannot go on", Gurria said.

Better tax systems would bolster budgets and give governments more funds to invest in social programs. In many low-income countries, taxes as a percent of GDP are under 15 percent against at least 24 percent in advanced economies, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"International Monetary Fund data show.

Pilots of the tax initiative have succeeded, Gurria said. 

In Colombia, tax revenue from transfer pricing audits increased 10-fold in three years to $33 million after HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD advice, Colombia's Deputy Finance Minister Andres Escobar Arango said.

Mispricing exports and imports is one method some multinationals use to shift their profits to low-tax regimes, and deprive poor countries of money owed them.

Advocacy groups were skeptical that the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD could act as an impartial adviser, given that some of its members are regarded as tax havens.

In the initiative's pilot phase, Britain sent experts managed by the accounting firm PWC, which helps multinationals lower their tax bills, to help with auditing in Rwanda, said Tove Maria Ryding, the European Network on Debt and Development's tax justice policy manager.

"That's a clear conflict of interest," she said.

Charities called for broader reforms to make the global tax rules fairer. 

"It's a small part in the jigsaw," said Alvin Mosioma, executive director of the Tax Justice Network-Africa lobby group.

"So long as we have tax havens across the world that are providing the breeding ground for tax evasion and tax avoidance, we will not be able to have effective capacity for development."

(Reporting By Katy Migiro, Editing by Leslie Gevirtz) 

Released: 2015-7-13T20:41:23.000Z

Thomson Reuters (Markets) LLC

Leaders must put aside 'narrow self-interest' to end poverty says Ban Ki-moon

By Katy Migiro 

13 July 2015

Reuters News

ADDIS ABABA (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Thomson Reuters Foundation) - World leaders must put aside "narrow self-interest" to break a deadlock over how to finance the United Nation's bold new global development agenda, its Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon said on Monday at the opening of a financing conference in Ethiopia.

Some 190 nations hope to agree on how to bankroll 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), which include ending poverty and hunger, combating climate change and achieving gender equality by 2030.

"Let us put aside what divides us and overcome narrow self-interest in favor of working together for the common well-being of humanity," Ban told thousands of delegates gathered for the four day meeting in the Ethiopian capital, Addis Ababa.

In a world where growth is slowing, foreign assistance budgets are shrinking, and scepticism towards aid and multinationals is growing, finding the resources to achieve the ambitious goals will be tough.

The SDGs, expected to be adopted in September, are estimated to cost between $3.3 and $4.5 trillion a year, according to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"U.N. Conference on Trade and Development.

Multilateral development banks, including the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Bank, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"African Development Bank and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Asian Development Bank, as well as the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"International Monetary Fund on Friday signaled plans to extend more than $400 billion in financing over the next three years to help mobilize resources to achieve the SDGs.

"We need trillions, not billions, of dollars to accomplish these goals, and the money will come from many sources: developing countries, private sector investment, donors, and international financial institutions," HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Jim Yong Kim, President of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"the World Bank Group said in a statement.

"By working together, we can help people build better lives with good education, quality health care, clean water, and proper sanitation.

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"U.N. chief said he was disappointed negotiators had been unable to come to an agreement despite lengthy talks in New York over the past month. He said new avenues of financing needed to be explored.

"In a world in which both the global population and resource constraints are growing, development finance needs a reboot," said Ban.

Many advocacy groups are nervous about the strong emphasis on the private sector in funding the SDGs, while acknowledging that aid money alone cannot foot the bill.

The main sticking point in Addis Ababa is a standoff over a push by the G77 developing countries to upgrade a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"U.N. tax body, which they hope would set new global rules to crackdown on tax dodging, mainly by multinationals.

The proposal is fiercely opposed by the rich countries of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD), which drew up the current tax rules.

The Secretary-General highlighted six areas where he hoped to see concrete policy commitments, including free social services for all, more aid for the poorest countries and new mechanisms for funding infrastructure and technology transfer.

(Reporting by Katy Migiro; Editing by Ros Russell) 

Released: 2015-7-13T15:01:47.000Z

Thomson Reuters (Markets) LLC

New Zealand accedes to WTO government procurement pact

[e]John Macdonald 

14 July 2015

Xinhua News Agency

WELLINGTON, July 14 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Xinhua) -- The New Zealand government said Tuesday it has acceded to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization Agreement on Government Procurement (GPA), opening government contracts to international competition.

The GPA, when it took effect next month, would also enable New Zealand businesses to bid for overseas government contracts totaling 1.7 trillion U.S. dollars a year, Economic Development Minister Steven Joyce said in a statement.

New Zealand companies would be able to do business freely across 43 HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization member countries, including the U.S., Canada, Japan and 28 countries of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union.

The GPA covered the purchase of a broad range of goods and services that government agencies bought from the private sector, including construction, and it prohibited member countries from discriminating against businesses from another GPA member country.

"Selling to international governments without having to set up offshore branches or other 'work arounds' is a key area of opportunity for New Zealand exporters," said Joyce.

The accession would have little impact on New Zealand government agencies because they already conducted their procurement in line with the agreement's fundamental principles, Trade Minister Tim Groser said in a statement.

"We already follow the rules, but until now have not had the same opportunity for our New Zealand exporters. Joining up to the GPA will improve all access and reduce costs for exporters," said Groser.

Xinhua News Agency

Seoul resists: WTO to resume talks on expanding tariff-free digital products

14 July 2015

Nikkei Report

TOKYO -- Negotiators will gather in Geneva starting Tuesday to discuss removing import tariffs on 200 or so electronics products under the tutelage of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization, but the prospects of an agreement remain unclear.

Parties to the Information Technology Agreement hope to double the number of items traded tariff-free, but South Korea, which wants LCD panels to be added to the list, has butted heads with other countries.

Since coming into force in 1997, the pact, signed by roughly 80 nations and regions, has not been able to expand the list of tariff-free products despite a drastic change in the information technology sector. The treaty is vague about coverage of products that have rapidly spread, including multifunction copiers and LCD monitors, with some countries and regions imposing tariffs and others not.

Talks to expand the list began in 2012. China initially resisted the move, but agreed to add about 200 items after the Sino-U.S. summit last November.

But the deal did not cover LCD panels and other items produced in large quantities by South Korea, whose objections ultimately scuttled hopes for a deal in 2014.

In the latest round, South Korea apparently plans to withdraw demands on LCD panels and other items and instead focus on panel parts a negotiating source said. But China could resist changing the items already agreed on at the bilateral summit.

Participants had hoped to agree on the new list this summer and move on to discussing specific timetables for tariff removal in the fall. But given that the wishes of South Korea carry significant weight, the "negotiation schedule could be pushed back yet again," according to a source close to the talks.

Nikkei Digital Media Inc. 

Commerce dept to seek Cabinet OK on WTO trade facilitation pact soon

13 July 2015

Cogencis MoneyWire

Cogencis, Monday, Jul 13 By Kirtika Suneja NEW DELHI - The Department of Commerce will soon seek Cabinet approval for trade facilitation proposals India has to submit in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization before the ministerial conference in Nairobi in December, a department official said. "We are preparing a list of items that have to be complied with for trade facilitation and these need to be approved by the Cabinet 

. Only after the

approval, can we submit this notification in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO. We will prepare a

Cabinet note," the official said.

    The trade facilitation agreement has 137 items divided into three

categories--A, B, C--which developing and least developed countries have to

comply with.

    Category A has items that are to be implemented immediately as the

agreement comes into force, while Category B contains provisions that have to

be implemented on a date after a transition period. Category C contains

provisions that have to be implemented with the assistance of other countries.

    India's commitments fall under categories A and B.

    Of the 137 items, 100 are in Category A, which are compliant with the

revised Kyoto Convention for customs rules.

    Simultaneously, the government is also in the process of setting up a

national committee on trade facilitation that will suggest measures on ease of

doing business and removing infrastructural bottlenecks for international 

trade.

    As part of trade facilitation measures, the Central Board of Excise and

Customs has already reduced the number of documents required for export and

import of goods. Similarly, the Directorate General of Foreign Trade has

provided a facility of online filing of various applications by exporters and

importers besides online submission of applications for issue of online

Importer Exporter Code in digital format.

    "More than 30 government departments have to give their inputs on trade

facilitation and the time required to comply with the norms they give," the

official said.

    Once the proposals are submitted to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO, India would have to stick

to its commitments, the official said.  End

Cheap U.S. Chicken Scares Indian Poultry Breeders

By Rajesh Roy 

13 July 2015

Dow Jones Institutional News

Indians could be enjoying an abundance of cheap American chicken legs and wings within a year.

After losing an appeal against the U.S at a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization appellate body last month, Indian authorities are gearing up to start negotiations with their U.S. counterparts to resume the import of poultry products, banned for several years over avian influenza, or bird flu, fears.

The U.S. is one of the world's largest exporters of chicken meat, and lifting the ban will throw open a huge business opportunity for exporters to India.

India's local industry bodies estimate that the value of U.S exports of chicken meat, mainly leg pieces, could exceed $300 million a year once India removes its restrictions. The number would grow substantially in future as India's demand for high-quality protein rises.

Indian poultry farmers and breeders are objecting to the move as they fear their businesses could be hit. In India, chicken legs cost around 250 rupees ($3.9) a kilogram. The same imported American product would cost less than half this price as the U.S. has huge frozen stocks for export, domestic chicken breeders said.

American chicken legs could grab around 15% of India's poultry market, which is worth about 800 billion rupees per year, said Jagbir Singh Dhull, chairman of the Poultry Federation of India's Working Group. Branded food chains like HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"McDonald's and KFC will likely be the main buyers of the imported chicken, he added.

Consumption of the meat in India is still relatively low however. India's per capita chicken consumption is estimated to be around 4 kilograms per person every year compared with the world's average of 15-18 kilograms, according to Mr. Dhull.

"American chicken legs would be sold at dirt cheap prices here," Mr. Dhull said.

India banned imports of various agricultural products from the U.S. in 2007 to prevent outbreaks of bird flu in the country. The U.S. took India to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO dispute settlement body in March 2012. Both the panel appointed by that body and an appellate arm of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO, recently ruled in favor of the U.S., stating that India's measures restricted international trade.

The South Asian nation will inform the dispute-settlement body of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO next week of its intention to resume chicken and egg imports from the U.S, a senior official at India's trade ministry said.

"The maximum timeline which India could get from the U.S to resume imports is 15 months from July. We hope it will start earlier," said the official, who didn't want to be identified. 

(END) Dow Jones Newswires

July 13, 2015 02:19 ET (06:19 GMT)

Dow Jones & Company, Inc. 

Greek government faces massive austerity 

Ben Chu, Leo Cendrowicz, Michael Day 

14 July 2015

Independent Online

Brussels hails dramatic deal but mood in Athens threatens to turn ugly

Greece’s leaders face the challenge of pushing a massive austerity package through their parliament, agreed after 17 hours of negotiations in Brussels, amid angry talk of a German “coup” and the first signs of a popular backlash on the streets of Athens.

Alexis Tsipras, the Greek Prime Minister, tried to cast the result of the often acrimonious talks in the best possible light for his country. “I think the vast majority of the Greek people will support this … because they understand that we have given our best to the bitter end,” he said.

But his insistence that “we will keep fighting to regain our lost sovereignty” reflected widespread accusations that he had capitulated in the face of intimidation by Greece’s eurozone creditors, the other 18 nations whose leaders had spent the previous night battling to persuade him to bow to their demands.

At dawn on Monday, the creditors unveiled an agreement to restart negotiations that will grant Athens a third bailout worth up to €86bn (£61bn) and prevent Greece becoming the first nation to crash out of the single currency.

Although the deal prompted an initial sigh of relief from financial markets around the world, the stringent terms demanded by the German Chancellor, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Angela Merkel, for signing off on it, including a bold attempt to take control of €50bn of Greek sovereign assets, provoked widespread accusations of an attempted “coup” against the Athens government. Others expressed fears that Germany’s threats to expel Greece from the euro unless it capitulated meant Berlin had burnt through a disastrous amount of its political capital across the Continent in one night.

Read more: Greece agrees deal in eleventh-hour talksGreece braces for unrest as Tsipras prepares to push through cutsEverything you need to know about the Greek austerity deal

Meanwhile on Monday night around 800 Greeks, some shouting “This is a coup” in an echo of social media protests, gathered outside parliament in Athens to demonstrate against the new austerity proposals.

The agreement could also still crumble, forcing Greece out of the single currency as early as next week. Negotiations on a new bailout deal will only begin if the Greek parliament passes a series of contentious laws on Wednesday to raise VAT, cut pension spending and liberalise the country’s jobs market. And the country needs at least €7bn in funding to pay sovereign debts due on Monday. This will have to take the form of an emergency short-term loan to Greece from its European partners, since the full bailout deal simply cannot be concluded in time.

The domestic legislation due to be put forward by Athens on Wednesday is expected to face strong resistance from the left wing of Mr Tsipras’s Syriza party as the reforms are the very creditor demands that were overwhelmingly rejected by a national referendum in Greece on 5 July.

Unless that legislation is passed, Greece’s banks could yet find themselves forced into insolvency by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Central Bank by as early as Thursday, putting the country on course for an accidental “Grexit”.

The chances of Mr Tsipras forcing the legislation through the Athens parliament were significantly boosted after the opposition parties said they would back the Brussels agreement. That means the legislation should have majority support from MPs even if a significant number of parliamentarians from his own Syriza party rebel.

Read more: The making of the dramatic deal'Unanimous agreement' reached after marathon summitTwitter denounces bailout agreement using #ThisIsACoup

But there may be another obstacle in the form of the outspoken, far-left house Speaker Zoe Konstantopoulou, who is opposed to further austerity and who had said she will not quit, even if she is asked. The Speaker is not obliged to introduce the bills received from the government to be put to the vote, and some MPs fear she will seek to block the process. She could be voted out from her post, but that will take time. “I think it can be done, but it really is an extraordinary amount of stuff to do,” said the centrist opposition MP Antigone Lyberaki, who will back the new deal.

Another potential stumbling block is the bridge financing that Athens will need to see it through next week even if the negotiations start. It is unclear where the money will come from. France has proposed using the remaining funds from the European Financial Stabilisation Mechanism bailout fund to make the loan – but that ran into fierce opposition from Downing Street, since using the EU-guaranteed pot would leave the UK financially exposed.

If Greek MPs do pass the required legislation, eurozone finance ministers will hold a conference call on Thursday over whether to recommend a third bailout. At that point, other national legislatures will also be asked for their approval, including Germany, which will hold a special parliamentary session before a vote.

Independent Print Ltd.

16 Asia-Pacific nations short of deal on tariff elimination targets

Kyodo

13 July 2015

Kyodo News

KUALA LUMPUR, July 13 -- Trade ministers and officials from sixteen Asia-Pacific countries could not agree on tariff elimination targets for a massive regional free trade framework in the latest round of their talks Monday, clouding hopes for concluding the negotiations by the end of this year.

The 10 members of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Association of Southeast Asian Nations and six other countries including China, Japan and India involved in the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership, or RCEP, were aiming to set the level of ambition on elimination of import tariffs before entering into more details negotiations.

"While recognizing that there is progress in the negotiations, there is a need to provide impetus" to move forward, the ministers said in their post-meeting statement.

"All participating countries are committed" to the goal of reaching a substantial deal by the end of the year while "recognizing the diverse economic development of each party," they said.

As RCEP involves countries with various economic levels, they have been struggling to agree on how much of their imports should be subject to tariff removal.

While such negotiating members as New Zealand have been pushing for aggressive market liberalization, India and others want a more cautious approach toward opening their markets, given the possible negative impact on the domestic industries, negotiation sources have said.

Efforts under RCEP have paralleled with more high-profile free trade talks on the Trans-Pacific Partnership led by the United States. A total of 12 TPP countries are set to hold a ministerial meeting later this month where they hope to reach a broad agreement.

TPP is seen as crucial for the United States to counter China's growing influence in the Asia-Pacific region, while RCEP is one of the key platforms for China to strengthen its trade ties with other nations.

The RCEP involves the ASEAN members -- Brunei, Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Vietnam -- plus Australia, China, India, Japan, South Korea and New Zealand.

They will hold another ministerial meeting in August in Malaysia, preceded by working-level talks in Myanmar, to accelerate negotiations.

Kyodo News

END

 

 

 

cid:image001.png@01CC55E4.A4F90770

 

Josep Bosch, Information Officer

Information and External Relations Division

+41227395681

 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.
