Headlines

Greece's Parliament Passes Austerity Measures Required for Bailout
India: Showing spine at the WTO negotiations
Kazakhstan to subsidize agriculture at 8.5% after joining WTO
U.S. to impose punitive duties on Chinese tires despite China's strong objections
World agrees on framework to generate financing for post-2015 development agenda
China cotton imports drop by over a quarter in June -industry body
Brazilian farmers eye Beijing's chicken feet market
OECD: US and China to drive world economic slowdown
TPP negotiations: US demands Japanese assurance on tariff-free rice import quota
EU-US trade talks enter 10th round

 

Details:

Greece's Parliament Passes Austerity Measures Required for Bailout

By Nektaria Stamouli And Stelios Bouras in Athens and Gabriele Steinhauser in Brussels 

16 July 2015

Dow Jones Top Global Market Stories

Greece's Parliament passed austerity measures needed to secure a fresh bailout, but a rebellion within the ruling Syriza party is testing whether Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras can hold his government together as he seeks to complete the deal.

The measures, which include steep spending cuts and tax increases, were approved early Thursday by 229 lawmakers in the country's 300-seat Parliament, many of them opposition lawmakers. Among the 149 lawmakers in Mr. Tsipras's left-wing Syriza party, 32 voted against the deal—including former finance chief Yanis Varoufakis—and six abstained.

To counter the rebellion within his party, the Greek premier is expected to announce a cabinet shake-up on Thursday, according to government officials. But it remains uncertain how long Mr. Tsipras can continue in office without calling new elections.

The vote "is a serious division in Syriza's parliamentary group," said a government spokesman. "The basic priority of the prime minister and the government is the successful completion of the agreement in the coming period."

The vote came hours after the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Commission proposed a fix to Mr. Tsipras's other immediate challenge: how to pay a €4.2 billion ($4.6 billion) payment due to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Central Bank on Monday. To cover that and Greece's other most pressing bills, the commission called for giving Athens a €7 billion bridge loan from a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union bailout fund.

In Athens, Mr. Tsipras is expected to replace several ministers—including three who voted against the austerity measures—with people more likely to help him implement the measures required as part of the rescue agreement, officials say.

The Greek premier could also expel lawmakers who vote against the government. That would leave them with a choice of resigning their seat, in line with Syriza's code of conduct, or carrying on as independents. The former outcome would allow Mr. Tsipras to replace them, while the latter scenario would weaken his power.

Shortly before the vote, he appealed for unity in support of the austerity measures being put to a vote. Parliamentary approval of the austerity measures was a prerequisite demanded in exchange for as much as €86 billion in bailout loans over the next three years from the eurozone and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"International Monetary Fund.

"I don't believe the measures will benefit the economy, but we are forced to adopt them," Mr. Tsipras told lawmakers.

The premier also referred to comments made by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"IMF chief HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Christine Lagarde, who on Wednesday urged the eurozone to provide Greece with debt relief. "This is a positive outcome and the only hope of getting out of the crisis," he said.

Fresh cracks in Mr. Tsipras's government appeared on Wednesday before the vote, with the resignation of deputy finance minister Nantia Valavani over the bailout, though she last week backed Mr. Tsipras's decision to seek the new rescue agreement.

"It is one thing to face an exceptionally difficult reality and catastrophe with hope and a future of dignity and independence," she said in a letter sent to the Greek premier. "It is another issue to handle a catastrophe that will be completed with whatever national income is left heading abroad for the repayment of debt that cannot be repaid in centuries."

Ahead of the vote, about 13,000 took to the streets to protest against the new bailout, while public sector workers walked off their jobs in a 24-hour strike.

Later on Wednesday, a small group of demonstrators clashed with police, throwing Molotov cocktails. More than 30 protesters were detained, according to police officials.

Nobody knows how long the 40-year-old prime minister can maintain the backing of his own Syriza party, and its right-wing coalition partner Independent Greeks. Completing the bailout agreement is likely to take several weeks. Selling the tough austerity policies attached to it has been Mr. Tsipras's biggest political test at home since he swept to victory in an election in January on an antiausterity ticket.

The rebellion threatens to leave Mr. Tsipras's coalition short of a majority in the Parliament. Some Syriza lawmakers have spoken of "threatening" developments for their party if it reneged on its key electoral promise of opposing austerity. Others said they recognized the urgency of Greece's financial situation as the country faces bankruptcy and a probable exit from the eurozone unless it complete the steps needed to clinch rescue financing.

"There is no other alternative. There is no time for another path to be taken," said Evangelos Apostolou, deputy agriculture minister, before the vote.

Meanwhile, Greece desperately needs some sort of funding by Monday, when the payment to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Central Bank comes due, and to clear some €2 billion in arrears to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"IMF. A default on HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"the ECB would make it much harder to reopen Greek banks, which have been already shut for more than two weeks, soon.

The commission's proposal to tap an EU-wide bailout fund would allow for quick disbursement of cash to Athens. But officials say some EU nations that don't use the euro, which include the U.K., Sweden, Denmark and the Czech Republic, have questioned the fund's use because it is backed by the broader European bloc's budget. They argue their taxpayers shouldn't be on the hook for a Greek loan.

Valdis Dombrovskis, the commission's vice president for euro matters, said that the three-month loan would be repaid from a separate eurozone bailout fund once negotiations for Greece's full bailout program have been completed. Those negotiations are expected to last at least four weeks, meanwhile leaving the government in Athens without much-needed cash.

"Greece faces urgent financing needs," Mr. Dombrovskis said, adding that using the EU-wide bailout fund was "not an easy option."

The use of the EU-wide fund needs approval from all 28 EU member states. To overcome concerns from non-euro governments, the commission and euro governments are exploring ways to ensure those countries would be compensated for any potential losses, Mr. Dombrovskis said.

British treasury chief HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"George Osborne voiced strong criticism to the bloc-backed option at a meeting of finance ministers Tuesday, arguing that the U.K. shouldn't be involved in any eurozone bailout. But a person familiar with the U.K.'s position said the government would be fine with the use of EU-wide funds as long as British taxpayers were protected from any losses. Three European officials said the loans would likely be secured by profits from Greek bonds owned by eurozone central banks.

Write to Nektaria Stamouli at , Stelios Bouras at and Gabriele Steinhauser at 

Dow Jones & Company, Inc.

India: Showing spine at the WTO negotiations

Abhijit Das 

16 July 2015

The Hindu

OPINION With just a few weeks left for the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO) members to finalise the post-Bali work programme under the Doha Round, the season for wrongfully blaming India for the deadlock in multilateral trade negotiations at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO is back. The stand being taken by the developed countries suggests that they are not willing to abide by what had been agreed to earlier in the Doha negotiations. In contrast, they are pressuring India to take onerous commitments that were not even contemplated during the negotiations. They also seem to be preparing grounds for shifting the blame on India for not yielding to these demands. Further, the developed countries have stalled negotiations on a permanent solution to the problem of public stockholding for food security.

This poses triple challenges for the government — securing India’s interests in the multilateral trade negotiations; explaining its negotiating position to its key trade partners, and fighting the perception battle in the media. How the Department of Commerce and other key arms of the government grapple with these challenges will determine whether India will be wrongly blamed, yet again, for a lack of progress in the negotiations.

As decided at the 2013 Bali Ministerial Conference of the WTO, the post-Bali work programme is required to build on the decisions taken at Bali on agriculture, development and least-developed countries’ issues, as well as all other issues under the Doha mandate that are central to concluding the Doha Round. It is also expected to provide for a permanent solution to the problem of public stockholding for food security purposes, an issue that was partially resolved at Bali through the so-called peace clause.

Farm subsidies

Over the past six months, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO members have engaged intensively to address some of the key impediments in a successful completion of the Doha Round. With the objective of showing some concrete outcomes by the Nairobi Ministerial Conference of the WTO, the Director General of the World Trade Organization, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Roberto Azevêdo, has repeatedly exhorted countries to focus on issues that are “doable for all members and not just for some”. This has provided an escape route to the developed countries to ward off demands for cuts in their farm subsidies. This is one of the central issues in the Doha Round, on which significant progress was already made by July 2008. But the developed countries are now using various stratagems to wriggle out of their part of the negotiating deal on agriculture.

It is an open secret that a lowering of ambition on farm subsidies is a thinly veiled attempt at shielding the United States from taking commitments that might require it to make changes to its recent Farm Act. Ironically, a lowering of ambition in farm subsidies is sought to be limited only to the developed countries.

Developments in Geneva suggest that the developed countries are aggressively seeking onerous commitments from India and China that are not part of the negotiating agenda on farm subsidies and were not even contemplated during the entire course of the Doha Round. These relate to curtailing flexibilities for granting subsidies on agriculture inputs and imposing fixed monetary ceilings on certain categories of farm support provided by India and China.

Thus, it would be low ambition for commitments by the developed countries, but extremely high ambition for obligations by India and China. Clearly, at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO, some of the developed countries do not mean what they say, nor do they say what they mean.

So, are the developed countries being merely unrealistic in their expectation that India and China would yield to their unreasonable demands? Perhaps not.

Behind the strategy

Pressuring developing countries, particularly India, to make concessions that go beyond the negotiating mandate is a part of strategy effectively deployed by the developed countries in the course of the Doha Round whereby they have deflected attention from their own repeated failures to do their part for a possible trade deal. Let me illustrate this. From 2005 onwards, the U.S. has successfully diverted attention from its inability to cut cotton subsidies — a crucial element in the negotiating template — and shifted the blame on India for a lack of progress in negotiations.

India has proved to be a soft target in the past for papering over negotiating inaction by the developed countries. The example of sectoral initiatives in tariffs is particularly relevant. Although the negotiating mandate merely contemplated non-mandatory participation in sectoral initiatives for elimination of tariffs, in an unusual twist to the English language, the developed countries sought to interpret “non-mandatory” to imply mandatory participation by Brazil, China and India in the sectoral initiatives. Understandably, India firmly resisted such pressures, and was wrongly blamed for impeding progress in the negotiations.

Coming to the recent developments, the developed countries would surely be aware that the concessions being sought from India are beyond the scope of the current negotiations and not in conformity with the negotiating mandate. However, India is at a risk of being caught between a rock and a hard place.

How India must respond

Agreeing to the commitments sought from it would limit the policy space of the government in respect of certain categories of farm subsidies. This could jeopardise the livelihood of millions of farm households and further exacerbate the agrarian distress. India is fully within its rights to resist pressures for commitments that are beyond the agreed negotiating mandate. However, a resolute stand by India against the unjustified and onerous demands being made on it would provide grounds to the developed countries to blame India, if the post-Bali work programme is not agreed upon by the end of this month, or the Nairobi Ministerial Conference in December 2015 fails to deliver significant results.

This brings us to another crucial question. How should India respond to the onerous demands being made on it? India’s response should have at least four distinct dimensions. First, at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO, India should unequivocally resist requests for concessions that are beyond the negotiating mandate. The government would need to replicate the resolve and firmness shown by it last year during the impasse on trade facilitation and food security issues. However, India could indicate its willingness to show movement within the confines of the mandate, provided the developed countries are willing to reciprocate by cutting their farm subsidies and addressing issues of food security and farm livelihood.

India should also actively galvanise support from other developing countries for ensuring that the Doha Round is not concluded without the developed countries making meaningful cuts in their farm support. It should also seek simplification in the tariff structure of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union, which is extremely complex and impedes farm exports of developing countries.

Second, the Department of Commerce and the Ministry of External Affairs should work closely to clearly articulate India’s negotiating approach to the capital-based officials of its key trade partners. In the past, at crucial stages in the negotiations, considerable misinformation was circulated and an impression created that India was being rigid and difficult in the negotiations. India was also wrongly projected as being isolated. This pattern could be repeated in the coming few weeks. This needs to be forcefully countered.

India should clearly bring out the unreasonable demands being made on it and elucidate how the onus for slow progress in the negotiations actually lies on the developed countries. Further, India should unequivocally convey to the developed countries that it would not acquiesce to demands that go beyond the negotiating modalities, while the developed countries fail to honour their side of the negotiating mandate.

Third, the Department of Commerce should regularly brief the media about key developments in the negotiations for ensuring that the battle of perception is not lost. Otherwise, there is a risk that the government’s perspective might get drowned in the blitzkrieg by commentators sympathetic to the economic interests of the developed countries.

Assuring the farmer

Fourth, the government should assure the stakeholders, particularly the farming community, that it would not bend under unfair demands and pressures of the developed countries. In the absence of such an assurance, the farmers may feel apprehensive about continuity in government support schemes for agriculture.

It is important that the government works out a detailed strategy for each of these four dimensions. Failure to act decisively and firmly on any of these aspects could result in devastating consequences for the country.

During the tea party in Alice in Wonderland, the March Hare and Hatter advise Alice that she should say what she means and mean what she says. If the developed countries had followed this sagacious advice, the Doha Round would not have been in the negotiating equivalent of a rabbit hole for more than a decade. Wisdom lies in concluding the Doha Round by matching the intent of various HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO ministerial declarations and the content of modalities texts with a balanced final outcome. Any further attempt at shielding the U.S. from taking cuts in farm subsidies as required in the Doha negotiating modalities texts on the one hand, but expecting India to take onerous commitments in respect of its farm subsidies that go beyond the existing negotiating mandate on the other, can only erode the credibility of the rule-based multilateral trading system of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO.

(Abhijit Das is Head, Centre for WTO Studies, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Indian Institute of Foreign Trade, New Delhi. The views expressed are personal.)

Pressuring developing countries to make concessions that go beyond the negotiating mandate is part of a strategy effectively deployed by the developed countries in the course of the Doha Round whereby they have deflected attention from their own repeated failures...

With just weeks left for HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO members to finalise the post-Bali work programme under the Doha Round, India must be ready with a robust strategy to counter being wrongly blamed for lack of progress in the negotiations

Kasturi & Sons Ltd

Kazakhstan to subsidize agriculture at 8.5% after joining WTO

15 July 2015

The Times of Central Asia

ASTANA (TCA) - Kazakhstan has ensured the right for subsidizing the country's agro-industrial sector at a level of 8.5 percent after joining the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO), Novosti-Kazakhstan news agency (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"http://newskaz.ru) reported citing HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Kazakhstan's Agriculture Ministry.

Kazakhstan will become a full member of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO in December 2015. "During its negotiations on accession to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO Kazakhstan has ensured the right for state support of the agricultural sector in the form of direct subsidies at a level of 8.5 percent of the gross agricultural product," the ministry told the news agency.spsp spKazakh Agriculture Minister Asylzhan Mamytbekov earlier said that Russia and Ukraine have this limit within the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO at 5 percent.sp spThe Agriculture Ministry also said that in line with Kazakhstan's obligations before the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO, the country has to lower the import duties for such import items as rice, mutton, horsemeat, olive oil, and chocolate.spsp spThe ministry pointed out that state subsidies for the agro-industrial sector was the main issue that concerned Kazakh agricultural producers with regard to Kazakhstan's accession to the WTO.spsp spAt the same time, the ministry emphasized that the accession to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO brings about new challenges for Kazakh agricultural producers, such as increased opportunities for importers to Kazakhstan and toughening competition in the domestic market.sp sp"Domestic agricultural producers should therefore work on increasing the competitiveness of their products, using all the possibilities provided by membership of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO," the ministry said.

U.S. to impose punitive duties on Chinese tires despite China's strong objections

15 July 2015

Xinhua's China Economic Information Service

WASHINGTON, July 14 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Xinhua) -- The United States will impose punitive duties on certain passenger vehicle and light truck tires imported from China, a U.S. trade authority ruled Tuesday, despite China's repeated strong objections. A U.S. industry is "materially injured" by imports of these Chinese tires that "the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"U.S. Department of Commerce has determined are subsidized and sold in the United States at less than fair value," the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"U.S. International Trade Commission (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"USITC) said in a final ruling. The Commerce Department announced last month it had determined that these Chinese tires had been sold in the United States at dumping margins ranging from 14.35 percent to 87.99 percent. The department also said producers and exporters of these Chinese products received countervailable subsidies ranging from 20.73 percent to 100.77 percent.

As a result of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"USITC's affirmative determinations, the Commerce Department will issue antidumping and countervailing duty orders on imports of these products from China, the trade panel said. In 2014, imports of passenger vehicle and light truck tires from China were worth about 2.3 billion U.S. dollars, according to the Commerce Department. The department launched the anti-dumping and anti-subsidy investigation into Chinese tires last July, at the request of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"United Steelworkers, a U.S. labor union. It was quite unusual that this case was brought by U.S. workers rather than the companies competing with Chinese firms, experts said. "None of the tire firms have joined the petition seeking trade relief; the sole petitioner is the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"United Steelworkers union," Tyler Moran and Gary Clyde Hufbauer, trade experts at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Peterson Institute for International Economics, wrote in a recent article. "The case for injury is weaker now than it was in 2009, when market disruption was claimed. Moreover, U.S. producers are stronger today than they were in 2012, when the 'market disruption' safeguard measures expired," they argued, noting that U.S. consumers will suffer if the punitive duties are imposed. Hufbauer estimated that the total cost to American consumers from higher prices resulting from safeguard tariffs on Chinese tires was around 1.1 billion dollars in 2011. The U.S. invoked a China-specific safeguard to impose punitive duties on imports of Chinese passenger and light truck tires between 2009 and 2012. "As always, the Commissioners on the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"USITC face political pressure to make an affirmative injury finding. In this case, the economic facts argue otherwise," the experts concluded. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Chinese Ministry of Commerce has voiced strong opposition to Washington for its unfair and discriminative methods used in the trade remedy investigation, which breached the rules of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO) and U.S. domestic laws. China has also repeatedly urged the U.S. to strictly comply with international trade rules, prudently use trade remedy measures, and adopt responsible attitudes and actions to maintain a free, open and just international trade environment. Enditem

China Economic Information Service of Xinhua News Agency

World agrees on framework to generate financing for post-2015 development agenda

XuLinGui WangXiangJiang 

16 July 2015

Xinhua News Agency

ADDIS ABABA, July 15 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Xinhua) -- Representatives of the 193 member states of the United Nations gathering in Ethiopian capital Addis Ababa for a four-day meeting on Wednesday agreed on a framework featuring a series of bold measures to generate trillions of dollars needed by the world, particularly the Least Developed Countries (LDCs), to achieve sustainable development goals for the next 15 years.

The Addis Ababa Action Agenda, an outcome document of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development, contains more than 100 concrete measures. It addresses all sources of finance, and covers cooperation on a range of issues including technology, science, innovation, trade and capacity building.

Even as the developed countries re-committed to invest 0.7 percent of their gross national income, a far cry from today's average of 0.29 percent, for foreign aid as the Official Development Assistance (ODA) with 0.15 to 0.2 percent allocated to the LDCs, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"UN says domestic resource mobilization is central to the agenda. 

The ODA from members of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD reached 135.2 billion U.S. dollars in 2014 but experts and officials have said the amount is far from enough for developing countries achieve sustainable development. Tax revenue and the private sector represent the two key areas to tap into for development funding.

In the Addis Ababa outcome document, countries agreed to an array of measures aimed at widening the revenue base, improving tax collection, and combatting tax evasion and illicit financial flows. Countries also reaffirmed their commitment to official development assistance, particularly for the least developed countries, and pledged to increase South-South cooperation.

In taxation, countries agreed to consider taxing harmful substances to deter consumption and to increase domestic resources. They agreed that taxes on tobacco reduce consumption and could represent an untapped revenue stream for many countries.

In infrastructure, countries agreed to establish a Global Infrastructure Forum to identify and address infrastructure gaps, highlight opportunities for investment and cooperation, and work to ensure that projects are environmentally, socially and economically sustainable.

Governments also aim to operationalize the technology bank for the low-income countries by 2017, according to the documents.

Countries also agreed to establish a Technology Facilitation Mechanism at the Sustainable Development Summit in September to boost collaboration among governments, civil society, private sector, the scientific community, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"United Nations entities and other stakeholders to support the sustainable development goals.

UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon said, "This agreement is a critical step forward in building a sustainable future for all. It provides a global framework for financing sustainable development. " He added, "The results here in Addis Ababa give us the foundation of a revitalized global partnership for sustainable development that will leave no one behind." 

Countries also stressed the importance of nationally owned sustainable development strategies, supported by integrated national financing frameworks.

"We reiterate that each country has primary responsibility for its own economic and social development and that the role of national policies and development strategies cannot be overemphasized," the agreement states.

Xinhua News Agency

China cotton imports drop by over a quarter in June -industry body

15 July 2015

Reuters News

* China cotton imports at 161,800 T in June

* Beijing trying to boost consumption of local fibre

* International prices relatively expensive -trade (Adds comment, detail)

By Dominique Patton

BEIJING, July 15 (Reuters) - Chinese cotton imports dropped nearly 26 percent in June from the year before as relatively high international prices and a lack of quotas for shipments curbed appetite for overseas purchases.

The world's top consumer of the fibre imported 161,800 tonnes in June, meaning the total for the first six months of the year plunged 33 percent from the same period in 2014 to 933,900 tonnes.

Beijing has been trying to boost consumption of locally-grown cotton, with traders saying it has only issued 894,000 tonnes of import quotas this year - the minimum required under HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO commitments.

They added that most of those quotas, used by the government to protect its cotton farmers, had already been used up.

Overseas cotton is also relatively expensive, traders said.

"The price differential between domestic and international prices kept narrowing; even for mills with quota availability, imported cotton didn't look so attractive anymore," said Switzerland-based trading firm Reinhart in its weekly market report.

Chinese prices are under pressure from significant leftover commercial stocks as well as sales of state reserve cotton, which kicked off last week, adding supply to the market.

Zhengzhou futures also fell sharply following last week's stock market rout, and have hardly picked up, despite government measures to calm investors.

At the same time, purchasing by India's government-backed HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Cotton Corporation of India (CCI) has propped up the prices of Indian fibre, while U.S. cotton has mostly been sold out.

"As long as CCI's activity holds the global price relatively firm, I don't think import activity in China will happen in a very aggressive manner," said a trade source who declined to be identified.

(Reporting by Dominique Patton; Editing by Joseph Radford) 

Brazilian farmers eye Beijing's chicken feet market

16 July 2015

Cape Times

CHINA'S ban on poultry imports from the US, where flocks have been ravaged by bird flu, could give more Brazilian farmers a foot in the door of the biggest import market, literally.

It is chickens' feet the Chinese are especially keen on - a popular side dish they will pay as much for as the breast. A delegation from China's quarantine office in Beijing left Brazil earlier this month after a 10-day mission to inspect potential new meat suppliers in four states, the Brazilian Trade and Investment Promotion Agency said.

Brazil already supplies about half of China's broiler-meat imports. Export approval for seven extra packing plants could push chicken-meat sales to China to $800 million (R10 billion) from $518m last year, the trade group, known as Apex, said. For US farmers, that could cut into their most lucrative overseas market for chicken feet.

"There is no country in the world that consumes as much chicken feet as China, or that pays the prices China does," Reni Eduardo Girardi, an industrial manager at CVale, said. The agribusiness co-operative would ship 15 340 tons of chicken meat to China this year, accounting for a quarter of its chicken-meat exports, Girardi said.

Brazilian companies Sao Salvador Alimentos, BRF, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Cooperativa Agroindustrial Copagril and JBS also stand to benefit from greater access to the Chinese poultry-meat market.

Feeding more mouths in Asia would help cement Brazil's place as the largest supplier of food and agricultural products after the US, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD) and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"UN's Food and Agricultural Organisation (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"FAO) said this month.

Agricultural output has more than doubled since 1990 in the South American country and livestock production has almost trebled, thanks to productivity gains.

"Brazil is poised to become the foremost supplier in meeting additional global demand, mostly originating from Asia," the groups said in their 148-page HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD-FAO Agricultural Outlook 2015-2024 report, which featured Brazil. The nation is predicted to be the top beef and poultry exporter by 2024, with export shares of 20 percent and 31 percent, respectively.

That is a threat to US exports, already hurt by more than 220 detections of highly pathogenic avian influenza since December 19. The deadly virus, which has affected 48 million birds, was last reported on June 17, according to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"US Department of Agriculture (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"USDA).

China bought more than $170m of chicken feet from the US last year, making it the biggest overseas market for the product, according to a February report by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"USDA staff. Sales were halted when poultry and poultry products were banned by China in January.

That helped push the import price in China for chicken feet to an average of $1 600 a ton in the first quarter, a 10 percent increase from a year earlier, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Rabobank International said in a report in May. – Bloomberg. Independent Online

OECD: US and China to drive world economic slowdown

16 July 2015

Arab News

Camille Accad

The world economy has been on a path of deceleration in the past 12 months, but at the country level, economies have experienced a variety of trends. Growth in developed countries has been sluggish, despite the US labor market showing some signs of recovery and the euro zone economy stabilizing. In emerging Asia, China has been on a gradual slowdown while India is in recovery following years of lackluster growth. The rest of emerging Asia did not experience a clear trend in growth either, but from the major economies, only South Korea and Hong Kong witnessed a notable decline in economic growth. As a whole, emerging Asia continued to grow at a much faster pace than developed markets.

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD) publishes on a monthly basis the composite leading indicators (CLI) for a number of countries, primarily HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD members, as well as a selection of non-HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD countries such as China, India and Indonesia. The CLI aims at providing early signals of changes in economic trends, between six and nine months in advance. The CLI’s most important characteristic includes its ability to predict turning points in business cycles, in other words the pace of economic activity relative to its long-term potential. Key indicators used in the CLI include orders and inventory changes, financial market indicators and business confidence surveys.

Earlier releases of the CLI have correctly predicted most countries’ economic performances, best depicted by the gross domestic product (GDP). China and India’s diverging trends were captured clearly in the CLI six to nine months in advance, as well as the deceleration in South Korea and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"G-7 economies. The US and the euro zone account for the bulk of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"G-7, and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD’s indicator showed six to nine months in advance that US output would stabilize and the euro zone economy would stop decelerating. The CLI figures have changed since then.

According to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD, developed economies will maintain their sluggish run and slow further, mainly due to a slowdown in the US. The leading indicators show that, after a few more months of stability, the US economy will cool down. However, euro zone output is expected to pick up again. The euro zone economy is already growing at a steady pace, and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Central Bank’s unprecedented monetary stimulus should maintain the bloc’s recovery.

In Asia, China’s economic activity is expected to continue softening further in the next three quarters. The combination of declining property prices over the last year and a sharp slowdown in industrial output and investment activity coupled with the numerous policy easing measures is consistent with the soft declaration expected. The CLI also shows the Indian economy maintaining its acceleration. Recent activity in investments — a key element of the economy that was missing and dragging growth downward in the last few years — suggests that HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD’s projections will likely materialize in the next two to three quarters. In the other two emerging Asian economies assessed by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD, South Korea is expected to recover following more than one year of slowdown while Indonesia will soon begin to cool down.

The key highlight of the CLI data is the upcoming change in the business cycles in the euro zone and the US. The resurgence of the Indian economy and the ongoing Chinese slowdown are in line with consensus. If these projections are accurate, then, in the case of the US, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Federal Reserve may have to postpone its rate hike to next year. Similarly, the slowdown in China, if materialized, will probably lead to further monetary easing. However, inflation is an important factor that may affect these monetary policy projections. With inflation expected to rebound in the second half of the year, due to oil price base effect and its increase in value in 2015, monetary policy actions will continue to be difficult to predict.

— The report prepared by Camille Accad, economist at Asiya Investments Company.

Saudi Research & Publishing Company

TPP negotiations: US demands Japanese assurance on tariff-free rice import quota

16 July 2015

Nikkei Report

TOKYO -- The U.S. wants assurance from Japan that the Asian country will fully satisfy its tariff-free import quota for rice in the envisioned Trans-Pacific Partnership, according to sources familiar with the trade negotiations.

The request for the government assurance has emerged as a fresh sticking point in the TPP talks, with Japan stating that it is not obligated to make such a commitment.

The U.S. presented the demand when the two nations held meetings last Thursday and Friday in Tokyo, the sources said. Japan objected, leaving a divide on the issue as well as on the level of the import quota.

"Japan says it can only accept about 50,000 tons. The U.S. says no kidding, it's 175,000 tons. It's about how to find a landing spot," said Japanese Economic and Fiscal Policy Minister Akira Amari, who represents Japan in the talks. "We are struggling to minimize damage on market prices and production of rice," he said Tuesday during a program by the public broadcaster NHK.

The issue of the government assurance is likely to come under a spotlight when Amari meets with U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman at ministerial-level talks at the end of the month.

The U.S. is a major rice exporter, equaling Thailand, even under the existing minimum access quota system for tariff-free imports. The country is concerned that simply setting up a quota does not necessarily boost actual exports -- Japanese consumers generally prefer domestic rice, and the weak yen has made U.S. rice less affordable.

With rice consumption falling, guaranteeing a large import quota could increase the burden on Japanese farmers.

But some say that U.S. rice has limited potential to expand its market share in Japan under free competition with Japanese rice.

"The impact may be smaller if we drastically increase the import quota with no guarantee, rather than guaranteeing to import 50,000 tons," said a Japanese government source.

(Nikkei) Nikkei Digital Media Inc. 

EU-US trade talks enter 10th round

16 July 2015

The Nation

Deutsche Presse-Agentur

Brussels

Negotiations on a mammoth free trade deal between the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union and the United States have entered into their 10th round, amid dwindling hopes of reaching agreement by the original end-of-year target date.

The Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) would create the world's largest free-trade zone and could help boost the EU economy. But negotiations have been bogged down by concerns that the deal would weaken standards and could allow corporations to challenge national laws that hamper their business interests. This week's talks in Brussels are due to cover all pillars of the agreement: market access, regulatory cooperation and trade rules, according to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Commission. The EU's executive is negotiating the deal with Washington.

"We're beginning to get into more difficult aspects of the negotiations," an EU source said last week on condition of anonymity. But this week's negotiation round will not touch on the controversial Investor-State Dispute Settlement clause, which spells out how to handle disputes between companies and member states, according to an EU source.

EU Trade Commissioner Cecilia Malmstrom has promised to revise the ISDS mechanism. EU lawmakers called last week for the establishment of a new justice system, run by publicly appointed judges and subject to scrutiny and transparency rules.

"We are reflecting about how to move away from the system," the EU source said on condition of anonymity, adding that negotiators hoped to have a new proposal on investor arbitration ready in the coming months.

Other sensitive aspects of TTIP include public procurement and aspects of agricultural trade, the source added. He said that the negotiations are now set to run longer than originally expected.

"To be absolutely clear, we are not going to conclude these negotiations by the end of the year," the source said last week, noting, "We still have a lot of work to do."

Nation News Network Co., Ltd.

END 

 

 

 

cid:image001.png@01CC55E4.A4F90770

 

Josep Bosch, Information Officer

Information and External Relations Division

+41227395681

 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.
