Ukraine takes Russia to WTO over railway equipment trade
Ukraine files lawsuit against Russian to WTO over export of railroad cars, switches 
DG Azevêdo: Nairobi ministerial will be a milestone for the future of the WTO
Global Demand Growth for Oil May Fall by a Third in 2016
Anti-dumping on import of select products from China
India tops in trade facilitation in South-Asian sub-region
Korean won high performer among major currencies
TPP: Tokyo to patch holes in patent protection
Beijing looks west to keep TPP in check
Guy de Jonquieres: TPP underpins US 'pivot' but is really no big deal
EU Requires That Starbucks, Fiat Pay Back Millions in Unpaid Taxes 
Argentina exports to fall more than region
 

Ukraine takes Russia to WTO over railway equipment trade
21 October 2015
Reuters News
By Tom Miles
GENEVA, Oct 21 (Reuters) - Ukraine has launched its first trade dispute against Russia at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization with a complaint about restrictions on Ukrainian-made railway equipment, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO said on Wednesday.
"Ukraine claims that since late 2013, the conformity assessment certificates for railway products imported from Ukraine into Russia have been suspended without any explanation and new applications have been rejected," the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO said in a statement.
Ukraine alleged that the restrictions broke several HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO rules and amounted to an effective ban on imports of the products into Russia, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO statement said.
Locomotives, rolling stock and other railway equipment were Ukraine's most valuable export to Russia in 2011, accounting for $3.2 billion out of a total of $19.8 billion of export sales to Russia in that year.
But the value fell by one-sixth in 2012, a further one-third in 2013, and then another two-thirds in 2014, when railway exports to Russia were worth just $601 million, according to data from HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" the International Trade Centre, a U.N.-WTO joint agency.
Russia remains by far the biggest customer, followed by Kazakhstan and Belarus, whose purchases from Ukraine have also plummeted. Kazakhstan and Belarus are Russia's fellow members of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Eurasian Economic Union trading bloc, but neither is a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO member, so Ukraine cannot sue them at the Geneva trade body.
Trade friction between Russia and Ukraine, as well as the Kiev government's allies in Washington and Brussels, has worsened since the ouster of former Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych and Russia's annexation of Crimea.
The case is the sixth to be brought against Russia since it joined the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO three years ago. Details will be posted on the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's website in the next few days.
Under HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO rules, Russia has 60 days to settle the dispute. After that, Ukraine could ask the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO to adjudicate. 
Thomson Reuters (Markets) LLC
Ukraine files lawsuit against Russian to WTO over export of railroad cars, switches 
21 October 2015
Interfax: Ukrainian General Newswire
KYIV. Oct 21 (Interfax-Ukraine) - Ukraine has lodged a lawsuit against Russia with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) over restrictions on the export of cars and railroad switches, Deputy Minister of Economic Development and Trade Natalia Nikolska has said.
"Today Ukraine has filed the first lawsuit against Russia to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO which is related to the restrictions that were imposed on Ukrainian railroad cars and switches," she told reporters at a briefing at the Cabinet of Ministers in Kyiv on Wednesday.
Nikolska said this is the first of the lawsuits being prepared against Russia on the dispute. She said that Russia has groundlessly imposed restrictions on Ukrainian wagon exports since 2013, annulling the relevant certificates. The restrictions applied to Kriukov Car Building Works, Dnipropetrovsk switches plant, Azovzahalmash, and Kharkiv machine building plant FED.
According to her, Ukraine has repeatedly tried to settle the dispute in HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO committees, but without success. As a result, Ukraine had to resort to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO dispute settlement procedure.
Nikolska said that Ukraine expected to resolve this dispute with Russia through consultations within 30 days.
According to Nikolska, as a result of the restrictions exports of goods group 86 from Ukraine decreased from $1.7 billion in 2013 to $51 million in the first seven months of 2015.
Interfax Information Services, B.V. 
DG Azevêdo: Nairobi ministerial will be a milestone for the future of the WTO
21 October 2015
African Press Organization
Attending a meeting of trade ministers from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States in Brussels today (21 October), WTO Director-General HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevêdo outlined the significance of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO’s forthcoming ministerial conference in Nairobi in December. He described the state of play in negotiations, the difficulties in advancing the core Doha Development Agenda (DDA) issues, and some of the potential negotiated outcomes which might be achieved in Nairobi.
These outcomes include steps on export competition in agriculture. DG Azevêdo said this would be the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO’s most significant negotiated outcome on agriculture to date, which has long been the top priority for developing countries. In addition, he underlined the importance of development and least developed countries (LDC) issues, which should be at the heart of any agreement in Nairobi. The Director-General also pointed to the future.
He said:
“Nairobi is the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO’s first ministerial conference to be held in Africa since the organization was created in Marrakesh two decades ago. This underlines the importance of delivering outcomes for development. But it will also be a milestone in terms of the future of the organization. What we deliver in Nairobi and the path that we follow after Nairobi will be crucial in determining the future role of this organization as a forum for trade negotiations.
“Whatever we deliver in Nairobi, clearly it would not be viable, or credible, to announce it as a satisfactory conclusion of the DDA. So how do we take forward the outstanding issues after Nairobi? There is a clear divergence among the membership on this point. It seems to me that all members agree that the DDA core issues must remain on the negotiating agenda, such as agriculture, market access, and services. I think there is consensus on that. However there is no agreement on how these negotiations should take place: whether under the present Doha framework, or whether under some new architecture.
“But this is not the only question we have to answer concerning our post-Nairobi work. In fact, we all know that negotiations on a wide range of issues are already taking place outside the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO.
“I want the system to be operational and capable of helping to deliver growth and development for all of you. So we need to find a way of dealing with the divergent opinions you may have about the future. We have started a discussion on these issues in Geneva. All members will determine how to take this forward.
“A huge amount is at stake in the coming weeks – in terms of the potential Nairobi deliverables, and in terms of what success, or failure, would mean for the future of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO. I urge you all to recognize what is at stake. I hope you will engage very closely in all of this work in the coming weeks. I will be here to help you. And I assure you that the process will continue to be open, transparent and inclusive at every stage.”
There was a good exchange of views at the meeting, and the Director-General pledged to bring the views of the ACP back to all HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members in Geneva.
The meeting was hosted by ACP Secretary-General, Ambassador Patrick Gomes and chaired by Joshua Setipa, Lesotho’s Minister of Trade and Industry. The Director-General was also joined on the panel by Cabinet Secretary Amina Mohamed of Kenya, who will chair the 10th Ministerial Conference, and Ambassador Marion Williams as the Coordinator of the ACP Group at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO.
Distributed by APO (African Press Organization) on behalf of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO).
African Press Organization
Global Demand Growth for Oil May Fall by a Third in 2016
By Georgi Kantchev and Margarita Papchenkova
21 October 2015
The Wall Street Journal Online
After hitting a five-year high in 2015, the global growth in demand for oil is expected to fall by about a third next year, adding further strain to an already HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" oversupplied crude market.
A 40% decline in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" price of oil since last year has boosted demand, encouraging motorists, consumers and companies to top up. But the economic slowdown in China and elsewhere in Asia could sap that demand, according to analysts and big energy watchdogs.
Just how far that growth in demand will fall is unclear.
“We're seeing pretty solid demand growth this year, but the big question is what will happen next year," said Rob Haworth, senior investment strategist at U.S. Bank Wealth Management, which oversees $126 billion.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Sergey Frank, chief executive of Russia's largest shipping company, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Sovcomflot, said its net profit has more than tripled this year as cheaper crude keeps fuel costs low and demand high for the oil products that he ships around the world.
Mr. Frank is preparing for the worst as he plans his shipping routes for next year.
“Today there is favorable wind, but tomorrow there could be headwind on the market," he said.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" International Energy Agency, an energy watchdog, forecasts HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" global oil demand growth falling from 1.8 million barrels a day this year to 1.2 million next year.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries, the 12-nation oil cartel, expects HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" demand growth to fall to 1.25 million barrels a day, and some analysts see demand dropping even lower.
Falling global demand growth comes amid a continued glut of crude that has driven prices to less than $50 a barrel, from $100 a barrel just over a year ago. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" Booming U.S. output has slowed this year, but other major producers, from Saudi Arabia to Russia, have continued to pump crude at a fast pace in a bid to defend, and win, market share.
On Wednesday, Brent crude, the global oil price gauge, shed 1.8%, or 86 cents, to $47.85 a barrel.
Strong demand for crude this year comes as cheap oil boosts sales of gas-guzzling SUVs in the U.S. and countries like China use the lower prices as an opportunity to fill up their strategic oil reserves.
Prices of gasoline have fallen by around a third in the U.S. from last year.
Transport demand has accounted for 80% of oil demand growth in the past two decades, according to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Barclays PLC.
“Oil is a consumer product—when it's cheap, people buy more of it and drive further," HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Tony Hayward, former chief executive of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" BP PLC and chairman of oil producer HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Genel Energy PLC, told The Wall Street Journal. “That's true in China, that's true in Europe, that's true in the U.S."
To be sure, not everybody sees a falloff.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" U.S. Energy Information Administration pegs demand growth in 2016 at 1.41 million barrels a day, up from 1.31 million this year.
But for most analysts, demand growth is expected to fall sharply, with worries about the Chinese economy fuelling that weak outlook.
On Monday, China reported that its HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" economy grew by 6.9% in the third quarter, its slowest pace since 2009. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" International Monetary Fund sees Chinese GDP growth slowing further to 6.3% next year.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF also cut its global economic growth forecast to 3.1% from 3.3%, its weakest expansion since the financial crisis.
Economic growth typically has a strong correlation with oil demand.
“China's decline in GDP [growth] suggests that the main global oil demand growth engine is not going to be the solution to the oversupplied oil market," said Dominick Chirichella, an analyst at Energy Market Analysis.
How deep the decline in demand growth will be is adding an element of uncertainty into the analysis of the oil market.
There is a difference of 210,000 barrels a day between where the IEA and the EIA energy watchdogs see average oil demand growth next year, while Swiss bank HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UBS says it will finish even lower, at 1.1 million barrels a day—some 300,000 barrels a day lower than EIA's estimate.
Such small variations in the forecasts matter a lot to the investors and analysts trying to work out when the oversupply in this market will end.
“We are walking a very fine line, where a slight difference in assumptions is capable of moving the oil market into undersupply as early as mid-2016 or as late as…early 2017," said Pascal Menges, manager of the Lombard Odier Energy Fund.
Dow Jones & Company, Inc. 
Anti-dumping on import of select products from China
21 October 2015
Press Trust of India
New Delhi, Oct 21 (PTI) Government today slapped anti-dumping duties on import of front axle beam and steering knuckles used in heavy and medium commercial vehicles as also three other products from China for five years.
The duties have been imposed pursuant to recommendations of the Directorate General of Anti-dumping and Allied Duties, the Finance Ministry said in a statement, adding, the levies have come into effect from today.
"Definitive anti-dumping duty has been levied on imports of 'Front Axle Beam and Steering Knuckles meant for heavy and medium commercial vehicles'...originating in, or exported from, the Peoples' Republic of China for a period of five years," the statement said.
Front axle beam is a safety critical item and carries the load of a vehicle and also keeps the steering in place.
Steering knuckle is a very critical component controlling the steering of the vehicle.
The revenue department has also imposed the import restrictive duty on shipments of 'plain medium density fibre board of thickness 6 mm' from China, Malaysia, Thailand and Sri Lanka.
It is widely used for partitions, modular furnitures, and cabinets.
Anti-dumping duty has also been imposed on industrial compound 'Hexamine originating in, or exported from China and UAE for a period of five years.
Definitive anti-dumping duty has also been levied on imports of 'All Fully Drawn or Fully Oriented Yarn/Spin Drawn Yarn/Flat Yarn of Polyester (non-textured and non-POY)'from China and Thailand for a period of five years.
Countries initiate anti-dumping probes to check if domestic industry has been hurt because of a surge in below-cost imports. As a counter-measure, they impose duties under the multilateral WTO regime.  Press Trust Of India Limited
India tops in trade facilitation in South-Asian sub-region
21 October 2015
Press Trust of India
New Delhi, Oct 21 (PTI) India is top trade facilitation performer in South Asian sub-region while Singapore and Korea lead East Asia in moving goods effectively, a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN report said.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP), together with all four other HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN regional commissions, has launched the first global report on implementation of measures to simplify import, export and transit procedures.
The inaugural Global Report of the Trade Facilitation and Paperless Trade Implementation Survey provides data for 119 countries and serves as a useful basis for benchmarking and monitoring trade facilitation performance.
Within the Asia-Pacific region, the report shows "Singapore and the Republic of Korea leading East Asia in moving goods effectively.
"India tops the South Asian sub region, with Russia and Turkey leading in Europe and Central Asia. The top trade facilitation performer among these economies is the Netherlands," a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN release said.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN Under-Secretary-General and Executive Secretary of ESCAP Shamshad Akhtar said these 'next generation' trade facilitation measures have great potential to reduce costs and boost trade, increasing the Asia-Pacific region’s export potential by more than USD 250 billion annually.
"This can only be achieved, however, through more effective cooperation between countries at the regional and global levels," Akhtar said.
The report outlines the extent to which key measures of the recent HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO Facilitation Agreement are currently being implemented, showing that a significant number of developing economies, particularly in East Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean, have already acted on many of the commitments associated with the arrangement.
For most countries, however, much still remains to be done. An integrated step-by-step approach is suggested, starting with building up institutional arrangements and inter-agency cooperation.
"Overall, the report finds that most economies have already taken concrete steps towards streamlining trade procedures," the release said.
According to the new report, efficient movement of goods is key to maintaining trade competitiveness, and enabling effective engagement of firms, in particular small and medium enterprises, with regional and global production networks.
The global average implementation rate of the ambitious set of trade facilitation measures considered in the report is about 53 per cent. Developed economies average more than 75 per cent implementation, while Pacific Island developing economies barely reach 26 per cent. PTI NKD MR
Press Trust Of India Limited
Korean won high performer among major currencies
21 October 2015
Korea Times
South Korea's won has logged the sixth-highest gain among 38 major currencies over the past five years, data by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Bank for International Settlements (BIS) showed Wednesday, undermining the competitiveness of the country's exports.
In terms of the real effective exchange rate (REER), the South Korean won has only underperformed five other currencies -- the Chinese yuan, the Icelandic krona, the U.S. dollar, the British pound and the Swiss franc, according to the data.
The BIS has been checking the REER of different countries every month by setting 2010 as its base year. That year the base was set at 100, with a rise meaning an appreciation of the national currency.
REER, the weighted average of a country's currency relative to a basket of other major currencies, serves as a measure of the effect that foreign exchange fluctuations have on a country's exports. A reading above 100 means the country's exchange rate is overvalued, while numbers hovering below the mark shows it is undervalued.
The BIS checked foreign exchange rates of currencies belonging to the 34-member HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and so-called BRICs countries made up of Brazil, Russia, India and China.
In the September report, the REER of the Korean won stood at 108.33, the highest reached since 107.89 in March 2014.
Numbers for China reached 130.94, while the dollar and the pound rose to 114.05 and 117.13, respectively, mainly due to solid growth posted by these countries.
The krona, fuelled by high inflation that caused Reykjavik to mark up its interest rates twice this year, has been rising steadily against both the euro and the U.S. greenback, while the Swiss currency has moved up in the midst of the weakening euro.
"The reason for the won's rise is because the country trades heavily with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union, the United States and Japan that have all engaged in quantitative easing," said Hong Seok-chan, a senior research fellow with the Daishin Economic Research Institute.
He pointed out that such developments will lead to higher prices for locally made goods abroad.
In contrast to South Korea, the REER of Brazil fell to 64.18, while the number for Turkey stood at 77.09.
The BIS' latest findings also showed the value of currencies of resource rich countries, such as Canada, Australia and Norway, all backtracked due to weak demand.
On future prospects for the Korean won, local observers predicted the average exchange rate will reach 1,175 won to the dollar in the fourth quarter and hover around 1,200 won to the dollar in 2016. (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Yonhap). Korea Times
TPP: Tokyo to patch holes in patent protection
22 October 2015
Nikkei Report
TOKYO -- The Japanese government is moving to amend patent laws following the recent Trans-Pacific Partnership agreement so that patent holders can reserve rights for a full two decades.
Current rules hold that a patent is good for 20 years after the initial filing date, but the actual protection period typically is shorter because the approval process takes roughly 18 months. In addition to extending patent protections to compensate for the time lost to red tape, the government plans to create a new damages framework for trademark violations.
The TPP trade pact calls for extending patent protections if the application examination takes an unreasonably long time. Though the 12 participating nations largely preserve patent rights for 20 years after the filing date, approval can take upward of five years in some countries, effectively shrinking the protection period.
For example, it takes an average of at least four years to process an application in Vietnam. But the country plans to extend patent rights if the approval takes more than five years. For Japanese companies, securing adequate patent and trademark protections in emerging countries represents a boon for global production and sales.
The Japanese government likely will submit proposals to amend patent and trademark laws in next year's ordinary session of the Diet.
Nikkei Digital Media Inc.
Beijing looks west to keep TPP in check
21 October 2015
Nikkei Report
KATSUJI NAKAZAWA, Nikkei senior staff writer
BEIJING -- After suffering a serious setback in its bid to effectively divvy up the Pacific, China is shifting the focus of its foreign policy. Beijing is now aiming to become the major Eurasian power by creating a sprawling economic zone linking East and West by land and sea.
China wants to establish a "new Silk Road economic zone" to serve as a counterbalance to the Trans-Pacific Partnership, a free trade pact that brings together a dozen Pacific Rim nations.
Beijing's desire to control a significant portion of the Pacific became clear in June 2013, when President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xi Jinping made his first trip to the U.S. after taking office. "The Pacific Ocean has enough space for both China and the U.S.," Xi said at the start of talks with President Barack Obama in California.
Deviating from China's traditional diplomatic tactic of concealing its goals, Xi pressed the U.S. to recognize China's real strength, proposing "a new type of great power relationship."
Now, a Chinese scholar specializing in international affairs sees a number of "keywords" that will determine China's future approach toward the U.S.: the TPP, the new Silk Road initiative, aircraft carriers and Dongfeng, or DF, ballistic missiles. The expert said China's destiny will be decided by geopolitical factors in the Pacific to its east, the new Silk Road to its west, and the South China Sea -- a region Chinese ballistic missiles are now capable of reaching.
As economic and security developments go, the Japanese government's decision in 2013 to participate in the TPP talks was a big one.
Comments from one Chinese trade bureaucrat at the time sum up Beijing's sense of alarm and outrage: "The U.S. and Japan think they can dictate how the vast economic benefits of the Pacific are shared, but any discussions that ignore China, the biggest trading partner of both countries, will be invalid."
China was clearly feeling the heat over the TPP. It even secretly explored the idea of joining the negotiations, though it eventually abandoned the idea.
Xi then began to speak of the "vastness of the Pacific," though the goal of sharing the ocean with the U.S. had come up years earlier.
When HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Timothy Keating, then commander of the U.S. Pacific Command, visited China in 2007, senior Chinese military officers proposed that the two nations jointly manage the Pacific. They suggested that if China were to obtain an aircraft carrier, Hawaii would be a logical demarcation line. Keating disclosed the Chinese proposal at a congressional hearing.
China went on to acquire that aircraft carrier, as well as two types of advanced ballistic missiles: the DF-21D, dubbed a "carrier killer," and the DF-26, said to have a range of over 5,000km. That is enough to reach anywhere in the South China Sea region -- and even U.S. military bases on the Pacific island of Guam.
When Xi and Obama held a joint news conference after talks in Beijing in November 2014, the Chinese leader struck a familiar note: "The Pacific Ocean is broad enough to accommodate the development of both China and the U.S."
Half a year later, in May 2015, U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry made a hastily arranged visit to China amid rising tensions over Beijing's land reclamation around disputed reefs in the South China Sea. Xi again referred to the vastness of the Pacific.
But Xi's latest trip to the U.S. saw a marked change in his rhetoric. In a joint news conference with Obama at the White House on Sept. 25, he made no mention of the Pacific's size. An official Chinese document listing what was "achieved" at the summit does not touch on the ocean-sharing idea, either.
China's state-run HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xinhua News Agency did report that Xi referred to the vast Pacific during an informal three-hour dinner with Obama on Sept. 24, but he did not bring it up again.
What happened? The Sept. 24 dinner offers some clues.
The Thucydides trap
The dinner was held at Blair House, the official state guest house across the street from the White House. Only a small number of people attended.
Chinese media reports suggested that Xi and Obama exchanged harsh words over divisive issues, notably China's land reclamation and cyber espionage. Xi used the Chinese term fenqi, which means a difference of opinion, as many as three times. In Chinese diplomatic jargon, the word indicates a sharp disagreement.
Xi even urged Obama to take steps to improve America's public opinion of China, lest it fuel confrontation.
Then, in what could be taken as a game-changing warning, Obama told Xi that he disagrees with the "Thucydides trap" theory, which posits that a dominant power is almost certain to clash with an emerging one, as Athens and Sparta did in ancient Greece.
"Judging from the outcome of the summit, China has softened its defiance toward the U.S., at least officially," one China expert said. "Xi has taken a step forward in the past few years, but he has now adopted a more realistic tactic of making himself appear to be taking half a step back. China does not want to risk riling the U.S. seriously."
Xi also stressed that the "One Belt, One Road" plan -- another way of referring to the new Silk Road zone -- and the China-led HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank are both "open" and "transparent." With this, Xi signalled China's foreign policy priorities for the time being.
All this suggests China wants to protect, at any cost, what it claims to be its sovereignty over a wide swath of the South China Sea. A clash in the Pacific would make this more difficult.
Fortunately for Xi, the desire to avoid open conflict is mutual.
In 2014, China participated for the first time in the Rim of the Pacific, or Rimpac, exercises -- the world's largest multinational military exercises, hosted by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" U.S. Navy off Hawaii. During their recent summit, Xi and Obama agreed that China would take part in the biennial drills again in 2016.
The two leaders also agreed to cooperate on reconstructing war-torn Afghanistan.
Waiting game
Even before the latest Xi-Obama summit, China was already moving forward with its new Silk Road vision.
In September, China won a high-speed railway deal in Indonesia, beating out Japan by offering Jakarta incredibly favourable terms. China was determined to win because it sees Indonesia as a key part of the Silk Road's maritime portion.
Xi began a five-day visit to the U.K. on Oct. 19. London's surprise announcement earlier this year that it would participate in the AIIB triggered a host of other European states to follow suit.
Despite successes on these fronts, Xi is unlikely to simply forget about the Pacific. The "half a step back" is just an attempt to buy time.
China currently owns only one aircraft carrier, the Liaoning, which was built by the former Soviet Union and upgraded by China. But a home-grown carrier is reportedly under construction in Dalian and could be completed soon. Eventually, a Chinese carrier task force is likely to advance into the Pacific. And the U.S. military will not be able to easily deploy its own carriers near Chinese waters, due to the DF-21D threat.
Xi must be thinking that, sooner or later, conditions will be ripe for establishing a military presence in the Pacific.
The Silk Road zone is clearly China's way of countering the TPP. Even so, its success depends largely on the state of the Chinese economy. Beijing faces the challenge of not only strengthening its regional influence but also putting its own economic house in order.
Nikkei Digital Media Inc. 
Guy de Jonquieres: TPP underpins US 'pivot' but is really no big deal
21 October 2015
Nikkei Report
After almost five years of talks, marked by several false starts and repeated missed deadlines, negotiators have finally clinched a deal on the Trans-Pacific Partnership, a free trade deal linking the U.S., Japan and 10 other Asia-Pacific countries -- but conspicuously excluding China.
In a sense, the negotiations were doomed to succeed. Failure would have been a humiliating setback for the U.S. It would have robbed America's "pivot to Asia" of its most important component, seriously undermining Washington's efforts to strengthen ties with friendly countries in the region and reinforce its strategic presence in the face of China's rise. The geopolitical as well as economic consequences would have been incalculable.
Supporters have hailed the TPP as an ambitious and innovative "21st century" economic agreement, embracing countries accounting for 40% of the world's gross domestic product. As well as lowering trade and investment barriers and promoting deeper economic integration between its members, they say it will lay down basic rules and principles by which the rest of the world will need to play in the future.
Oversold?
But how far will the deal live up to those lofty claims? Any answer must be qualified by two provisos. First, the TPP is not yet a done deal. It must still be ratified by its members' national legislatures, most crucially the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" U.S. Congress. And that may not prove easy.
Although the U.S. has been the prime mover behind the TPP, there is also fierce political and popular opposition to the deal in the country. Critics have assailed the plan as a furtive sellout to big business and an infringement on national sovereignty and democratic rights. At the same time, some U.S. companies have expressed disappointment with the deal, saying it does not go far enough.
Complicating things further, TPP ratification risks becoming a political football in the runup to next year's U.S. presidential election. Already, Hillary Clinton, the front-runner for the Democratic nomination, has found it expedient to come out against the agreement -- even though she strongly supported it while serving as President Barack Obama's secretary of state.
Second, the voluminous texts of the deal, setting out its highly complex but all-important details, have yet to be published. Even when they are, time will be needed to analyze them and work out exactly what they are likely to mean in practice. Nonetheless, some preliminary conclusions can be reached based on what has already leaked out from the closely guarded negotiations.
In economic terms, the TPP's most important feature is to provide a back door to a free trade agreement between the U.S. and Japan, which together account for some 80% of TPP members' combined GDP, and to embed Japan more deeply into a network of FTAs with other Asian economies. That could help sharpen Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Shinzo Abe's "three arrows" reform program, which has been at risk of looking a little pointless. In addition, Vietnam looks set to do well from the TPP.
Beyond that, the trade liberalization on offer looks unlikely to be spectacular: Indeed, Pascal Lamy, former head of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization, says it will be "modest." That is partly because opening up highly protected markets such as agriculture appears, unsurprisingly, to have been a struggle, while even Vietnam's gains in the textiles trade have been limited by protectionist constraints insisted on by the U.S. industry.
Furthermore, six TPP members already have FTAs with the U.S. -- and still more have such arrangements with each other -- limiting the scope for further liberalization. In addition, as with all trade deals, liberalization will be phased in only gradually. When it is complete, trade between TPP members is likely to be somewhat freer, but far from totally free.
Special interests
What of the TPP's new rules? These are its most vaunted, but also politically most contentious, feature. How far they will free up trade -- or are even intended to -- is uncertain: Some seem equally aimed at appeasing U.S. business and other special-interest lobbies whose support will be needed to win congressional approval. One conspicuous example is mechanisms that will entitle companies to challenge government policies before arbitration panels -- a provision critics say will enable businesses to ride roughshod over national courts.
In fairness, such mechanisms are a common feature of the bilateral investment agreements the U.S. has concluded with many other countries. It is argued, not unreasonably, that they encourage foreign investors to provide capital to countries with primitive and unreliable legal systems. But why the U.S. thinks they are needed in countries with well-established commercial courts, such as Australia and Japan, is far from clear.
Another controversial U.S. demand, pressed hard by pharmaceutical companies and some other industries, was for an extension of the duration of patents. Since patents by definition involve the granting of government-approved monopolies to producers, it is hard to see how such a measure would promote the more open competition that trade liberalization seeks to achieve. Though protests, led by Australia, seem to have beaten back some of the U.S. demands, it is unclear how many have made it into the deal.
Whether the TPP will set the rules by which the rest of the world plays, as its supporters hope, is questionable. For that to happen, they would need to be embraced, at a minimum, by the two other big trade powers, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union and China. But talks on the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, an ambitious project to sweep away regulatory barriers between the U.S. and the EU, are making heavy weather; in some areas the gaps between Brussels and Washington are actually widening.
China's position is even less clear, as are Washington's intentions toward it. U.S. officials have hinted at various times that they view the TPP as a counterweight to China's power and a means of containing it; at others, they have suggested the U.S. would be open to China joining the grouping eventually, but that the country was not yet able to meet the entry requirements -- something Beijing itself has conceded. At still other times, the U.S. has seemed to regard the TPP as a useful boost to China's planned economic reforms.
China, for its part, initially dismissed the TPP as part of a "lock-out" strategy, but later expressed cautious, though unfulfilled, interest in being associated with it. Meanwhile, its early wariness has given way to a more relaxed wait-and-see attitude. One reason may be that Beijing feels less concerned by the TPP because it now has options of its own for expanding its influence in the region, such as "One Belt, One Road," its Eurasian connectivity initiative, and the Beijing-based HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank.
From the outset, the U.S. has viewed the TPP as much a geopolitical as an economic and commercial initiative -- a signalling device intended to demonstrate that it remains committed to Asia. Provided the deal is ratified, it will go some way to meeting that objective by giving substance to the pivot.
What the TPP alone cannot do, however, is resolve nagging questions about the future of relations between Washington and Beijing, and whether the U.S. has a clear and coherent strategy for tackling them. Indeed, U.S. shifts of position over the exact purpose of the TPP and how China relates to it have intensified those questions. Until they are clarified, doubts about U.S. intentions toward Asia seem likely to persist.
Guy de Jonquieres is a senior fellow at the European Centre for International Political Economy, a Brussels-based think tank, and formerly a journalist with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Financial Times.
Nikkei Digital Media Inc. 
EU Requires That Starbucks, Fiat Pay Back Millions in Unpaid Taxes 
By Tom Fairless
Dow Jones and Company
21 October 2015
BRUSSELS--The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union said it would require HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Starbucks Corp. and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Fiat Chrysler Automobiles to pay tens of millions of euros in back taxes after ruling that tax deals they negotiated with two European governments were illegal, in an unprecedented decision by regulators that risks blowing open thousands of corporate tax structures across Europe.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Commission, the EU's executive arm, said Wednesday that tax deals granted to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Starbucks in the Netherlands and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Fiat in Luxembourg amounted to illegal state subsidies that must be repaid.
The investigations are technically aimed at the governments, which have been ordered to recover the unpaid taxes.
The sums to be reclaimed are modest--amounting to between EUR20 million ($22.6 million) and EUR30 million for each company. And Wednesday's decisions are widely expected to be appealed at the EU's courts in Luxembourg, a process that can take years.
But experts said the probes have already created a chill in corporate board rooms across the continent. Hundreds, possibly thousands, of companies have used Luxembourg's holding-company rules to reduce their tax burden from the country's official 29% rate to almost nothing, according to documents disclosed last year by the Washington-based HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" International Consortium of Investigative Journalists.
"Any company that has a favourable tax agreement with Luxembourg in the past should seek advice and review it," Heather Self, a partner at London-based law firm HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Pinsent Masons LLP, said. "They may wish to consider a compromise now rather than wait to be on the receiving end of a full EU investigation."
The EU's move could also have repercussions for investment and deals in Europe, as investors fret about higher future taxes and uncertain past liabilities, experts said.
"I definitely think it will dampen investment in Europe [because] uncertainty is the biggest enemy of deals," said HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Robert Willens, a corporate tax adviser in New York and former managing director at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Lehman Brothers. "It will certainly affect valuations. If taxes are higher going forward that will affect the value of the potential merger partner."
"There will be some cases where funds are making acquisitions and need to bring money out [of Europe] in a tax efficient way that are being called into question," said HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Neal Todd, a corporate tax partner with London-based law firm HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Berwin Leighton Paisner.
The biggest pending deal is an initial agreement between Belgium-based HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" AB InBev to buy London-based HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" SABMiller PLC for GBP68 billion ($105 billion). The two companies have tentatively agreed to a deal but are working out details. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" AB InBev is based in Leuven, Belgium, and EU regulators are separately probing a Belgian tax discount that has benefited HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" AB InBev and a number of other Belgian-based multinationals.
The two brewers are "so focused on synergies and business benefits that they're probably willing to take that risk," Mr. Willens said. But "in other cases where the desire to do a deal is not so intense, [the EU's decisions] would have an effect," he said.
At a news conference Wednesday, EU antitrust chief Margrethe Vestager said she may open more probes if she suspects that EU rules are being violated. She said the tax deals for HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Fiat and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Starbucks "shifted profits from one company to another in the same group, with no valid economic justification."
"Our decisions today show that artificial and complex methods endorsed by tax rulings cannot mask the actual profits of a company, which must be properly and fully taxed," Ms. Vestager said.
EU regulators are working on three similar investigations involving HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Apple Inc. in Ireland and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Amazon.com Inc. in Luxembourg, as well as the Belgian tax discount involving HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" AB InBev. It isn't yet clear when those cases will be decided. All companies have denied receiving special treatment, and the governments have denied giving it.
EU officials admitted that they couldn't pursue hundreds of similar investigations. But they said they hoped Wednesday's decisions would lay down principles for the tax deals that are acceptable, which national governments would be expected to implement.
In HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Starbucks' case, the EU said the company's Dutch coffee-roasting unit paid a "highly inflated price" to a Swiss unit for green coffee beans, as well as a "very substantial royalty" to another HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Starbucks entity in the U.K., Alki, that didn't reflect the value of know-how. Alki, which has since been dissolved by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Starbucks, wasn't liable to pay corporate tax in the U.K. or the Netherlands, Ms. Vestager said.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Starbucks hit back strongly at the decision, saying it planned to launch an appeal "since we followed the Dutch and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD rules available to anyone," a reference to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, a Paris-based international organization that produces corporate tax guidelines.
The coffee chain said it was concerned there were "significant errors" in the decision. A spokesman said the company complies with all international laws and guidelines, and "has paid an average global effective tax rate of roughly 33%, well above the 18.5% average rate paid by other large U.S. companies."
In a follow-up statement, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Starbucks argued that the EU had wrongly claimed that independent companies roasting coffee for HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Starbucks don't pay equivalent royalties to its own roasting plant in Amsterdam. "A wholly independently owned company pays HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Starbucks a royalty in order to roast HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Starbucks coffee beans," the company said. "This is one of the reasons why HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Starbucks plans to appeal today's decision."
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Dutch Finance Ministry said it was "surprised" by the commission's decision and would analyse it carefully before deciding on further steps. The ministry said it was "convinced that actual international standards are applied."
In HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Fiat's case, the EU said a tax deal for the company's Luxembourg-based financing company had used "an extremely complex and artificial methodology to calculate taxable profits, which cannot be justified by economic reality." Its taxable profits in Luxembourg "would have been 20 times higher if the calculations had been done at market conditions," Ms. Vestager said.
In a statement published Tuesday, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Fiat said it hadn't received any state aid, and that any back-tax payments would be "immaterial" to the company's reported results.
Luxembourg's government said it disagreed with the EU's decision "and reserves all its rights." It said the commission hadn't established "in any way" that HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Fiat had received selective advantages.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Starbucks case may be particularly worrisome for multinationals because the Dutch tax-ruling process is "long-established and very well-respected internationally," said Ms. Self atHYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Pinsent Masons.
The tax probes are a high priority for the commission and have been repeatedly widened in recent months, as regulators requested hundreds of tax agreements from all 28 EU countries.
EU policy makers are eager to close loopholes in the fragmented tax system that allow international groups to sidestep billions of euros in tax at a time of tough national austerity. But governments have been hampered by a requirement that they all agree on any changes to the EU's tax laws.
The EU's investigations neatly avoid that issue by using the commission's extensive powers to enforce the bloc's state-aid rules, which prohibit selective government subsidies for some companies and not others.
At issue are tax rulings, which are used to confirm the size of companies' future tax bills, to give company directors certainty as to their future obligations. Regulators suspect that some tax rulings might have granted certain companies an advantage over others, which would be illegal under EU law.
"With the noose tightening around aggressive international tax structures, many large [multinational companies] may find the tax cost of doing business increasing," said Lee Curthoys, a corporate tax expert at Radius Worldwide, a consultancy.
Still, the scrutiny of complex tax structures may help level the playing field for start-ups and smaller firms that cannot afford to engage in such arrangements, Mr. Curthoys said.
One fallout from Wednesday's rulings, experts said, may be to bolster interest in financial centres in the Far East, the Middle East or the Caribbean, away from the watchful gaze of EU regulators.
Another likely group of beneficiaries will be the tax advisers who helped structure the current generation of tax deals, and may now be called on to adjust or unpick them.
Dow Jones & Company, Inc.


Argentina exports to fall more than region
21 October 2015
Buenos Aires Herald
ECLAC says sales abroad will drop 17 percent compared to 14 percent for LatAm
The value of Latin America's exports will continue to decline through 2015 by 14 percent, with Argentina faring slightly worse with a reduction of 17 percent, according to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), which also indicated that the value of imports to Argentina are set to fall by a smaller 10 percent.
ECLAC figures showed that the 2013-2015 period featured the worst regional export performance in the last eight decades, as 2015 marks the third consecutive year that export values fall in the Latin American and Caribbean region, and the second consecutive year that they fall for Argentina.
“The region is at a crossroads: either it continues along the current path restricted by the global context, or it commits to a more active international insertion that favours industrial policy, diversification, trade facilitation and interregional integration,” said ECLAC's Executive Secretary Alicia Bárcena. She highlighted that the sharp drop in commodity prices and lower international demand for the products that the region exports, have affected its overseas shipments. In 2014 and 2013, for example, they declined three percent and -0.4 percent, respectively.
According to the United Nations organization, it is likely that regional exports will fall again in 2016, because the outlook for a rebound in prices over the next year is not likely. ECLAC highlighted that the recession that has affected the global economy since 2008-2009, prevented trade from recovering dynamism.
The report outlined various factors that have hindered the regional economy — excess liquidity, the fall of aggregate demand, China's deceleration, a drop in capital flows towards the region, and an increase in financial instruments that go beyond the real economy.
Mercosur declines
The report highlighted that the largest decline in intra-regional trade was in South America. In the first half of 2015, trade within the Mercosur trading bloc contracted by 23 percent. Trade between Argentina and Brazil (the two largest countries in Mercosur) fell by 17 percent in the first half of 2015, with reciprocal purchases of industrial manufactured goods (mainly consumer durables, intermediate goods and capital goods) falling by more than 25 percent.
This was in contrast to the Central American region, which slightly increased its intra-regional trade during the same period.
ECLAC predicts that the value of intra-regional exports will drop by 21 percent in 2015, an estimated seven percentage points more than shipments to the rest of the world. This will mark the second consecutive year that shipments in the region and outside the region decline. The UN organization said that this was due to the lack of dynamism in the regional economies, and because they received less for their exports regionally than outside of the continent.
The ECLAC's Executive Secretary said that due to the regional economic situation, there was more pressure for countries to implement economic austerity measures.
Trouble in the region
ECLAC has previously warned about growing problems in Latin America, with a report this year saying that poverty reduction has stalled across the continent, barely budging since 2012, as economic growth has slowed down too following a decade of strong economic growth which led to a rising middle class.
Twenty-eight percent of the region's population, or 167 million people, were mired in poverty in 2014. The figure remained stable between 2012 and 2013, when it affected 28.1 percent of the population. Destitution, meanwhile, rose to 11.7 percent in 2013 from 11.3 percent in 2012, which supposes an increase of three million people, raising the total to 69 million.
“It seems countries were unable to sufficiently take advantage of the recovery from the international financial crisis to strengthen social protection policies that reduce vulnerability from economic cycles,” said Alicia Barcena at the time. “Now, in a scenario with a possible reduction of available fiscal resources, more work is needed to strengthen these policies.”
Multiple international organisms have warned this year about the fiscal effects of reduced commodity prices, which will give states less resources to fight poverty and destitution, as demand from China slows down.
The change in the global scenario will also mean reduced economic activity, which could make it harder to create jobs.
