HEADLINES: 
·         WTO: Istanbul meet next month to seal fate of deliverables 
·         India likely to ratify WTO trade pact by November 
·         Despite Slump, China's Xi Jinping Pledges Economic Reforms 
·         ADB revises down regional growth as China and India slow
·         China-U.S. cooperation – a need of the times
·         Xi's Tech Battle in Seattle 
·         Key keen to press Obama on TPP at UN talks 
·         TPP is the best hope for growth amid free trade slowdown
·         GCC investors strengthen economic links with Asia 
·         United States : Global partnerships to tackle inequality and implement new sustainable development agenda 
·         Who Wants a Third World War? 
 
WTO: Istanbul meet next month to seal fate of deliverables 
Mint, D Ravi Kanth, 22 September 2015, New Delhi -- An informal meeting of the trade ministers of India, China, Brazil, the US, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union (EU), Japan and Australia on 5 October in Istanbul, Turkey, will decide the fate of a package of "deliverables" for the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization's (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) 10th ministerial conference in Nairobi, and may end up scuttling New Delhi's demands for "comprehensive" and "credible" outcomes for poor farmers. The US has launched a sustained campaign for a small "package" of outcomes for the Nairobi meeting, which fails to take on board specific demands raised by India and a majority of countries on agriculture and other areas. Developing countries, on their part, have expressed concern over efforts to bring the curtains down on the Doha negotiations at the Nairobi meeting, beginning on 15 December. The developed countries, however, seem determined to dismantle the special and differential treatment flexibilities and less-than-full reciprocity for undertaking commitments between the developed and developing countries, said an African trade envoy, who asked not to be identified.
The fierce standoff between those seeking a small package such as the US and Japan, and those demanding a comprehensive package with credible outcomes like India, China, Brazil, Argentina, Uganda, Rwanda, Indonesia, Lesotho, Venezuela, Pakistan and Cuba came into the open at an informal heads of delegation meeting last Thursday. At that meeting, US trade envoy Michael Punke said: "We have a good possibility of achieving a package of meaningful outcomes for Nairobi and the DDA (Doha Development Agenda), centred around the export competition pillar of agriculture, meaningful steps forward on issues important to LDC (least developed countries) members, and potentially some advances in transparency in several areas." The US' package calls for outcomes on export subsidies for farm products, some "meaningful" steps for the poorest countries, and improvements for better "transparency" in HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO rules.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's director general HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevedo has also echoed the US' package by suggesting that there is support for "LDCs and development outcomes, outcomes on export competition in agriculture, and a number of provisions to improve transparency in several issues". But India and a large majority of countries have dismissed the small package on the ground that it has given the short shrift to all their major demands in the Doha negotiations. Washington's package, for example, doesn't include a special safeguard mechanism demanded by India and other developing countries for protecting their resource-poor farmers from unforeseen surges of heavily subsidized imports. The US' list also excludes India's demand for a permanent solution for public stockholding programmes for food security. The US is also not prepared to reduce its domestic farm subsidies below $14.5 billion as set out in the 2008 revised draft modalities. Washington now wants voluntary contributions from all countries to reduce their market price support and input subsidies even though the developing countries are exempted from such commitments. Without naming countries, India said: "It seems to us that the attempt therefore is to selectively pick out the elements on which they have some comfort and package them for an outcome at MC-10 (10th ministerial conference)." "They also seem to have initiated a narrative to set the terms for a post-Nairobi scenario of negotiations in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO," India said. "A selective package plus a post-Nairobi agenda which would ironically cover the core issues of the DDA seems to be the emerging discourse among such members," India's trade envoy Anjali Prasad cautioned. "Such a discourse is a matter of deep concern and disappointment to my delegation," Prasad added. New Delhi has demanded "a comprehensive and balanced outcome in all the three core negotiating areas, namely, agriculture, non-agricultural market access and services, as well as internally on all three pillars (domestic support, market access and export competition) of agriculture", for the Nairobi meeting. India said DDA negotiations must continue till members reach outcomes to correct "inequities" in the global trading system. Many countries joined India in demanding credible and comprehensive outcomes of all the unresolved issues in the DDA, based on existing mandates. For the first time, Switzerland, an industrialized country, categorically opposed a small package of issues centred on export subsidies while ignoring the "parallelism" that was agreed to in the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration of 2005. The US, at a closed-door meeting, suggested that the Doha negotiations is a patient who has already died and all that is left is for a doctor to declare the death, implying that the Nairobi meeting must draw the line for the closure of DDA negotiations, according to people familiar with the meeting. But India, China and Brazil said the Doha negotiations will continue until there is resolution of all issues.
Published by HT Syndication with permission from MINT.
 
India likely to ratify WTO trade pact by November 
The Economic Times, 22 September 2015, By Kirtika Suneja, NEW DELHI: India is likely to ratify an agreement on trade facilitation so that it can negotiate from a position of strength when taking up issues such as food subsidies at the next HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization ministerial meeting in December. The government has started simplifying trade-related processes and classifying them as per HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO norms as it plans to ratify the Trade Facilitation Agreement by November.
India had earlier refused to sign the global protocol to speed up world trade until its demands related to public stockholding for food security purposes were met. Subsequently, it was agreed that HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members would not challenge such programmes of developing countries until a permanent solution is adopted.
Recent measures by India such as the reduction in the number of documents required for export and import of goods and the facility of online filing of applications by exporters and importers are likely to make it to Category A of the agreement, which are provisions that can be complied with immediately and have to be implemented as soon as the accord comes into force. Similarly, online submission of applications for issue of online Importer Exporter Code in digital format, too, could be a Category A item. “We are readying the draft and are compliant with most of the provisions of the agreement.
These commitments can’t be taken lightly once notified,” a commerce department official. The agreement has 13 articles with more than 130 provisions for countries to comply with. 
 
Despite Slump, China's Xi Jinping Pledges Economic Reforms 
Charles Hutzler. Dow Jones Top Global Market Stories, 22 September 2015 06:11, BEIJING—Chinese President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xi Jinping defended his government's economic stewardship and said that China's slowing growth and market fluctuations won't deter needed reforms. In his first interview with foreign media since Chinese stocks skidded this summer, Mr. Xi told The Wall Street Journal that this summer's HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" government intervention to arrest the plunge was necessary to "defuse systemic risks." The rescue was akin to acts taken by governments in "some mature foreign markets," the president said in written responses to questions submitted by the Journal ahead of his first official state visit to the U.S. On the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" slowdown that has appeared sharper than both global markets and Beijing expected, Mr. Xi urged foreign investors to take the long view and compared the world's second-largest economy to a vessel in rough seas.
"Any ship, however large, may occasionally get unstable sailing on the high sea," he said. Mr. Xi, who starts his HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" visit in Seattle on Tuesday , played down differences that have unsteadied relations with the U.S., including cybersecurity and China's island-building in the South China Sea, saying China isn't militarily adventurous and wants to work with Washington to address world challenges. Added to the agenda in recent weeks for Mr. Xi's summit with President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Barack Obama are concerns about China's wobbly economy—and whether that's dented the leadership's appetite for economic liberalization. So far, with China's manufacturing-driven growth model flagging, the shift to consumer spending and services that the government is trying to engineer hasn't picked up the slack. Mr. Xi sought to dispel any concern that China is faltering in its transition toward more sustainable growth: "Like an arrow shot that cannot be brought back, we will forge ahead against all odds to meet our goals of reform." On another move that surprised global markets—a nearly 2% devaluation of China's currency that fueled concerns about capital flight—Mr. Xi said the reduction in foreign reserves that followed is normal "and there's no need to overreact to it."
The lead-up to summits between the U.S. and China have become fraught in recent years, as have overall relations, as Beijing, particularly under Mr. Xi, has vigorously sought to use the country's economic, military and diplomatic clout to further its increasingly global interests. Calls are rising for the Obama administration to develop better strategies to neutralize a more assertive China. Still, Messrs. Xi and Obama have used their past summits to project a workmanlike relationship in public, despite friction in their behind-the-scenes discussions. In the interview, Mr. Xi cited cooperation on pressing global issues, from agreements to reduce emissions linked to climate change and common efforts in negotiating limits to Iran's nuclear program; rather than supplanting the U.S., he said, China wants to work with Washington on improving global order, he said. "I don't believe any country is capable of rearranging the architecture of global governance toward itself," he said. He later added: "Facts have shown that the interests of China and the U.S. are increasingly intertwined." On issues of contention, however, Mr. Xi appeared conciliatory without giving much ground. He said his government treats all businesses fairly and brushed aside complaints by foreign business organizations that regulations are being used to hobble foreign firms, particularly U.S. technology companies, and favor Chinese competitors. Mr. Xi said reclamation and other construction work in the disputed South China Sea that has alarmed neighbors and the U.S. would serve freedom of navigation—a key U.S. concern—though he didn't say how. He also signaled that there would be no let-up in restrictions on the Internet that have blocked several foreign media sites, including the Journal's English and Chinese editions. He also backed a proposed law that foreign non-profit groups say would limit their ability to work with social activists. Mr. Xi tried to counter allegations about the cybertheft of trade secrets to benefit Chinese companies—a problem the Obama administration is considering using sanctions to deter—and welcomed greater engagement. "The Chinese government does not engage in theft of commercial secrets in any form, nor does it encourage or support Chinese companies to engage in such practices in any way," Mr. Xi said. "We are ready to strengthen cooperation with the U.S. side on this issue." Mr. Xi seldom engages with the international media. For the written interview, the Journal submitted a dozen questions to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" China's Ministry of Foreign Affairs for Mr. Xi. While the ministry acknowledged that officials pulled together facts and research for the answers, it said Mr. Xi revised and reviewed them. The answers at times glint with the rhetorical flair that has differentiated President Xi from his immediate predecessors and made him popular among many Chinese. His policies having met resistance from vested interests, he vows "to crack hard nuts and ford dangerous rapids" in pursuit of reforms that would rely more on market-based solutions. Overall, though, he made it clear that the government will maintain firm regulatory hold as it allows markets broader sway in allocating resources. "That means we need to make good use of both the invisible hand and the visible hand," he said. His current trip to America—his first formal visit since taking office nearly three years ago—showcases China's wider sway in the world as visits by previous Chinese leaders didn't. In Seattle, Mr. Xi will see top executives of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Apple Inc., HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Microsoft Corp., HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Boeing Co. and other U.S. business giants on Tuesday and Wednesday. Mr. Xi will address U.N. sessions over the weekend, presiding at a panel on empowering women. In between are his discussions at the White House and with members of Congress—the optics of which, Chinese and U.S. officials say, are important for his image back home. Troubling to some governments has been the rapidly improving capabilities of China's military at a time when Beijing is more forcefully asserting its maritime claims. Chinese naval vessels recently sailed into U.S. waters in the Bering Sea, the first time the Pentagon had seen Chinese naval vessels there, just as President Obama was visiting Alaska. Mr. Xi said China needs a military commensurate –with its "vast territorial land, sea and airspace and very long borders." The Chinese military, he said, has benefited the world, contributing more peacekeepers to U.N. missions than other permanent Security Council members and taking part in the removal of chemical weapons from Syria. "In strengthening our defense and military building, we are not going after some kind of military adventure. It never crosses our mind," he said. "China has no military base in Asia and stations no troops outside its borders." Even as the Chinese navy operates farther from home shores, Mr. Xi has also worked to improve communications with the U.S. military. The two sides have reached several agreements, one on rules of behavior when naval surface vessels meet at sea. A similar pact on air encounters is under discussion. Mr. Xi said he's looking for more areas of convergence and to lessen the chances for conflict. "The Asia-Pacific should be a cooperative ground for enhanced China-U.S. coordination and collaboration rather than their Coliseum for supremacy," Mr. Xi said. Mr. Xi offered to extend cooperation to the infrastructure development bank that Beijing founded, joined by U.S. allies like Britain and Germany despite initial objections from Washington. Mr. Xi welcomed the U.S. to become a member. While saying repeatedly that China remains open to foreigners and foreign businesses, he also said that the Internet must be carefully regulated to "safeguard the country's sovereignty, security and development interests." Under Mr. Xi, arrests and prosecutions of people for spreading what authorities consider rumors have had the effect of subduing social media. "Freedom and order must be upheld side by side in both cyberspace and the physical world. Freedom is the purpose of order, and order the guarantee of freedom," he said. Though he didn't directly address the block on foreign news sites, he said foreign companies must "do nothing to undermine China's national interests and interests of consumers."
Still, Mr. Xi said nations must remain open and willing to learn from other civilizations. One of Mr. Xi's catchiest slogans has been the "Chinese dream"—the effort to restore China to what many Chinese see as the position of global primacy the Middle Kingdom held for centuries before being eclipsed by the West. The country then slipped into a century of foreign aggression, civil war and social and political upheaval.
"To understand today's China, one needs to fully appreciate the Chinese nation's deep suffering since modern times and the profound impact of such suffering on the Chinese minds," he said. He added: "Every country and every nation has a dream, and dream brings hope." 
 
ADB revises down regional growth as China and India slow
Business News, Tuesday, 22 September 2015 , HONG KONG: Weaker growth in China this year is expected to cause a slowdown in the rest of Asia, the Asian Development Bank said on Tuesday as it became the latest major body to revise down its forecasts for the world’s number two economy. It also warned central banks to prepare for an expected Federal Reserve interest rate rise, with many nations already seeing huge capital outflows as dealers look for better, safer US investments. The report comes as markets are swiped by extreme volatility driven by fears over the Chinese economy - and its leaders’ management of it - after last month’s surprise devaluation of its yuan currency. “The combination of a moderating prospect in China and India, together with delayed recovery of advanced countries, weighed on our forecast for the region as a whole,” said ADB chief economist Shang-Jin Wei, who presented the report at the Foreign Correspondents’ Club in Hong Kong. In an update to its flagship Asian Development Outlook released in March, the Bank said growth in the region would hit 5.8% this year and 6% in 2016. March’s forecast was for 6.3% for both years. Inflation in the developing Asia region was forecast to ease further, partly due to lower global commodity prices. Wei said the overall outlook for the region was “still positive” but had been impacted by capital flow reversals and weakened commodity prices for exporters, partly related to the China slowdown. “Developing Asia is expected to continue to be the largest contributing region to global growth despite the moderation,” he added. However, it tipped China - the main driver of global economic growth - to expand 6.8% this year, instead of the 7.2% previously estimated, following a stream of weak indicators including on trade, inflation, investment and consumer spending. The ADB predicted growth rate would be the slowest since 1990, a year after the Tiananmen Square crackdown that led to global sanctions against Beijing. It is also below China’s official target for the year of “about” 7%. It added that South-East Asia was bearing the brunt of China’s slowdown, with growth in the region this year put at 4.4%, before bouncing back to 4.9% in 2016. Jurgen Conrad, head of the ADB’s economic unit, told reporters in Beijing that the revision was “mainly due to the delayed recovery in industrial countries reducing export demand”.
Last week, the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) cut its 2015 growth forecast for China by 0.1 percentage points to 6.7%. Forecasts for India were also lowered to 7.4% from 7.8%, weighed by the slow pace of reform by the new government and weak external demand, the report said. The ADB urged regional central banks to move now on monetary policy to prepare for a US rate hike, which Fed chief Janet Yellen has said will come before the end of the year. “To counter the impacts of a US rate rise, monetary policy authorities in developing Asia will need to find a balance between stabilising the financial sector and stimulating domestic demand,” the report warned. A tightening of US monetary policy would likely see flight of much-needed capital from developing nations as traders move into the United States in search of better returns. This would in turn put pressure on central banks to lift rates themselves in a bid to protect their currencies, at a time when they are struggling to kick-start tepid growth at home.
World markets were rocked after the Fed on Thursday held off announcing a rise, with Yellen citing the threats to the US economy caused by China’s economy as a key reason for the decision. - AFP
China-U.S. cooperation – a need of the times
By Wang Yiwei (HYPERLINK "http://www.xinhuanet.com/english2010/" Xinhua) 13:20, September 22, 2015
BEIJING, Sept. 22 -- The biggest changes occurring in Sino-U.S. relations have come since China's reform and opening up to the outside world. The United States has returned to Asia with the Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement (TPP) and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) to develop high-standard trade and investment, while China is moving in all directions in Asia and Europe with its land and maritime Silkroad initiatives to expand international cooperation for greater productive capacity.
As President Xi Jinping's visit to the United States is approaching, politicians, business people and media have all had their say. Some American media frequently criticize China by raking over the history in recent few years. Some American politicians have either threatened to boycott President Xi's visit or urged their government to cancel it. Some "China experts" warn bilateral relations have reached a "critical point" and even in terminal decline.
Is that really possible? People familiar with the situation understand this is nothing but a decline in American self-confidence. What is more, the comparative U.S. advantage on China is also declining. A typical example is that the U.S. constantly warns that Chinese hackers attack and steal its commercial secrets. With President Xi in office, the U.S. fears China is "setting up a new store" challenging the U.S.-led international order.
Actually the post-war international order in Europe and Far East has continuously been challenged by the U.S. revising the Marshall Plan in 1948 and signing the Treaty of Peace with Japan in 1951. It made a separate peace with Japan to transfer the administrative rights of the Chinese-owned Diaoyu Islands to Japan.
The United Nations' decline in authority is also inseparable from the challenges from the United States. Nowadays, the TPP+TTIP=EBC (everyone but China) is another attempt to isolate us.
In contrast, China, together with other developing countries, are working to a just and more reasonable and inclusive international order. This new international order, which keeps pace with the times and ensures sustainable development, promotes the core interests of the United States, too. It's laughable the way China always gets drag into the U.S. political debate in a presidential year in disregard of this fact.
History has repeatedly proved that China-U.S. jointly building an appropriate international order is the choice of history, the choice of the times, and the choice of the future.
China was an ally of the United States during World War II, and one of the creators of the initial post-war international order as well as a defender and beneficiary. As permanent members of the United Nations Security Council, China and the United States in recent times have cooperated well in dealing with the world's hot issues involving the Iranian nuclear issue and the Korean Peninsula nuclear issue, so there is no reason not to continue cooperating.
Nowadays, China is a major participant in development of the current international order. The number of international organizations it has joined and the treaties it has approved exceed those of the U.S. Almost all international affairs need the cooperation between two countries – from global climate change negotiations to the United Nations development agenda.
In the future, China also needs to work with the United States to promote reforms as part of a new international order. It is impossible for China to dominate this process and replace American global hegemony.
Since the reform and opening up, China has integrated into the U.S.-led international system. Today, however, this faces big challenges with the global-level trade and investment organizations, including WTO, declining in attractiveness. Regional cooperation and bilateral BIT and FTAs become the development trend.
China has also moved from the low-end to the middle-end and even high-end industrial chain. In this case, looking for new comparative advantages, it has put forward the "Belt and Road" Initiatives and the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) which are useful supplements to the existing international order instead of a challenge.
Analyzing from the four aspects – scale, nature, function and channel – the "Belt and Road" Initiatives and the AIIB as well as the Shanghai Cooperation Organization Development Bank and the BRICS New Development Bank – all emphasize regional cooperation, regional prosperity and stability, reduction of terrorism, violence and other hot issues, which all meet American interests. Investments from American individuals, companies and governments are also welcome in them all.
Generally speaking, the world's two largest economies play an important role in the future trend of world order. During his U.S. visit, President Xi Jinping will explain the "Belt and Road" Initiatives to the international community and to the broad spectrum of American society. He will seek to promote decisive progress in bilateral investment treaty negotiations, and network and climate change cooperation. None of these challenge the U.S., but rather safeguard the common interests of the two countries.
Wang Yiwei is professor and director of the Institute of International Affairs of Renmin University of China.
 
Xi's Tech Battle in Seattle 
The Wall Street Journal, 22 September 2015 -- Meetings with U.S. business leaders are usually a feel-good exercise for foreign politicians visiting America. But when Chinese President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xi Jinping sits down with tech CEOs in Seattle Tuesday, he is likely to hear some pointed complaints. China's increasing resort to protectionism has turned the U.S. business lobby, once Beijing's ally in Washington, into a critic.
Tech firms face especially tough treatment in China because Beijing fears the Internet's capacity to fan social unrest and facilitate spying. A national-security law passed in July mandates that all information systems must be "secure and controllable." Foreign firms were asked last month to sign a pledge using the same language. The exact meaning of that phrase is not clear, but it likely means providing "back doors" in software to allow government monitoring. It also means that if they comply, U.S. tech leaders risk compromising customer data, transferring proprietary technology to their Chinese competitors and suffering reputational damage by helping the regime's censorship and social-control apparatus.
That's not all. In January the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" China Banking Regulatory Commission revealed draft regulations that would force vendors of bank software to turn over their source code and use Chinese encryption technology. U.S. officials labeled the requirements "anticompetitive trade barriers" and asked that they be shelved. Beijing did so in April but last month resumed work on the regulations, which seem to be a model for other software. This fits a broader pattern, from automobiles to pharmaceuticals, in which Beijing uses nontariff barriers to condition market access on the transfer of technology. This violates the terms of China's accession to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization. And it is particularly galling because Chinese hackers are simultaneously stealing firms' intellectual property. Last month 19 U.S. business groups asked President Obama to urge Beijing not to use the national-security law to block foreign competition.
Beijing is unlikely to back off completely because the national-security law is motivated in part by the Communist Party's desire for control, but Washington can use leverage to curb the worst abuses. The China-U.S. bilateral investment treaty now in the works is supposed to open service industries to greater competition. It needs an enforcement mechanism to block forced technology transfers.
President Obama is considering financial sanctions on Chinese firms that have benefited from stolen technology. Those are unlikely to be announced while Mr. Xi is a guest. But they would be a useful warning to Beijing's mercantilist ministries. Intellectual property is increasingly the core asset of modern companies, and Beijing's efforts to steal or extort it pose a threat to global trade that the U.S. can't ignore.
 
Key keen to press Obama on TPP at UN talks 
Claire Trevett, The New Zealand Herald, 22 September 2015 -- Prime Minister John Key is to attend US President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Barack Obama’s summit on countering HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Islamic State in New York but said it will be the Trans Pacific Partnership he raises if he meets HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Obama one-on-one.
President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Obama has called the summit to coincide with the leaders’ week of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN General Assembly, during which leaders of about 160 countries are expected to be in New York — including the Pope and Russian President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Vladimir Putin, who is attending for the first time in a decade.
President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Obama’s summit on the sidelines will be attended by leaders of up to 60 countries which form a coalition involved in Iraq and Syria, including New Zealand which sent training troops to Taji in May. In his speech to the General Assembly last year, President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Obama called on all leaders to report back this year on measures they had taken to stop the spread of extremism, both domestically and internationally.
Mr Key said it was important to attend the summit. “Isil is a serious and growing threat to global peace and security and it is important world leaders continue to engage on the appropriate measures to tackle Isil and violent extremism more widely.” He did not expect to boost New Zealand’s own involvement, however.
He expected to talk with President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Obama but that was likely to be a chat at the summit or a social function rather than a formal meeting. His top priority for that talk would be the Trans Pacific Partnership after the countries involved fell short of an agreement at talks in Maui. “Bluntly, we want to just try and progress where we’re going. I think we are getting fairly close. He’s pretty instrumental in it all so that would be the main thing to talk about, I guess.” The General Assembly will coincide with talks by officials and trade ministers in Atlanta to break through the remaining TPP sticking points around dairy, automobiles, patents and intellectual property. Mr Key said there had been discussion since then. “I’m not quite so confident as to say I think a deal will be concluded at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN or in the next week or two, but I think quite a bit of progress could be made.” While progress had been made in some sectors, there was not yet enough progress for New Zealand’s liking in dairy. “We are a long way away from saying we are at the best place we can be for dairy. “I still remain confident that in the end we’ll settle in hopefully the right place for dairy or at least it will be the best we can do.” Mr Key last attended the leaders’ week in 2013 and this is his first time since New Zealand was elected to the Security Council. He said it would also provide a chance for talks with his international counterparts on the priorities for the Security Council and calls for its reform, which New Zealand backs. Russia is chairing the Security Council until the end of September. President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Obama also hosted an anti-extremism summit in February, the week before Mr Key announced details of New Zealand’s deployment to train Iraqi forces in Iraq. That was attended by New Zealand’s Attorney-General and minister of the spy agencies, Chris Finlayson.
 
TPP is the best hope for growth amid free trade slowdown
The U.S. needs to make a deal with Japan, Canada and Mexico. By Editorial Washington Post, September 21, 2015 — Few subjects arouse more political passion than globalization. Yet as the debate rolls on, the phenomenon may be coming to an end. The seemingly limitless expansion of international trade that began in the 1980s has slowed and may never recover its former momentum. Fresh data from the World Trade Organization and other economic forecasts show that the world is on course for its third consecutive year in which growth in global trade will be lower than overall economic growth, which is itself anemic, according to the Wall Street Journal. The last such three-year streak ended in 1985. In the quarter-century before the 2008 crash, by contrast, trade grew an average of 6 percent a year. Since the recovery began in 2010, the average trade growth rate has been stuck at 3 percent per year. These are sobering data for those of us who see globalization as a net plus, in both the U.S. and the rest of world. To be sure, increasing competition from other countries has caused large dislocations in U.S. industry. But the job losses and other costs have been offset by lower consumer prices and the rise of new, more efficient businesses. Meanwhile, economic growth made possible by trade has lifted hundreds of millions of people out of what was once desperate poverty in Asia, Africa and Latin America. The question now is what, if anything, can be done to sustain and consolidate free trade so that it can continue to improve life for people around the world. The past three decades of rapid trade growth were probably always anomalous, because they reflected the linking of a huge, previously closed nation — China — to the world market. That low-hanging fruit has been plucked; China’s exports are shrinking and it is in the midst of a difficult shift to growth driven more by consumption than investment. Future trade expansion, therefore, will depend more and more on the ability of leaders to maintain and modernize the institutional arrangements that support free trade. Governments have mostly resisted protectionism despite the economic anxiety that persists half a decade after the Great Recession. Nevertheless, the main effort to update and strengthen global free trade, the U.S.-led Trans-Pacific Partnership, is very much a work in progress, and opponents of globalization are fighting it as a last-ditch battle. Though President Obama has won congressional authorization to negotiate a TPP deal for expedited approval, the U.S. and its 11 negotiating partners are having a hard time getting to yes. The latest sticking point, to be discussed this week in San Francisco, is Mexico and Canada’s worry that the TPP will cede to Japan some of the access to the U.S. auto market that they gained under the North American Free Trade Agreement. The Obama administration must reach a compromise that the U.S. and these three close friends can live with, lest the world’s best opportunity for sustaining free trade slip away.
FROM AN EDITORIAL IN THE WASHINGTON POST
 
GCC investors strengthen economic links with Asia 
Arab News, 22 September 2015, KUWAIT CITY: Asia is the leading destination of foreign direct investment (FDI) across the globe, accounting for more than 35 percent of the world’s total FDI inflows.
According to the United Nations’ World Investment Report in 2015, global FDI inflows declined by 16 percent YoY in 2014, to $1.23 trillion, amid frail global economic growth, policy uncertainty and high geopolitical risk. Developed countries witnessed the strongest decline across regions in 2014. Foreign investment into the US fell by 60 percent, and, in the case of Europe, by 11 percent. The notable drop in US inflows in 2014 was due to a single-large divestment by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Vodafone (UK), selling a large stake at Verizon (US). In Europe, high sovereign risks and lack of reforms hindered foreign investors from investing there. Meanwhile, FDI into developing Asia kept rising, reaching a record-high of $465 billion worth of FDI in 2014. China overtook the US as the world’s largest recipient of foreign capital and Hong Kong and Singapore were among the top five FDI destinations in the world.
According to a report prepared by Mahmoud Galal, economist at Asiya Investments Company, Asia tends to attract a sizable amount of FDI due to its favorable demographics, cheap labor force and improvements in infrastructures. Foreign companies usually establish regional headquarters and manufacturing facilities in countries that provide business-friendly policies. The region’s ability to enforce contract efficiency, allow high foreign recruitment and enjoy political stability also attracted these companies. These factors helped foreign companies expand their market channels, access new technology, and reduce costs. At the same time, FDI, which has been proven to be less affected by economic crises than other forms of investments, provides the country with job opportunities.
In spite of the economic slowdown, several governments in Asia implemented a series of comprehensive economic and policy reforms. These efforts to promote the transition to a free market economy have boosted FDI inflows in Asia. Enhanced regional connectivity promoting the movement of goods, services, information and human capital has also strengthened foreign investment inflows into the region. Moreover, China recently established the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB), an organization with the aim of consolidating and accelerating investments in Asia. All GCC countries, with the exception of Bahrain are founding members of the bank.
Gulf investors strengthened their economic ties with the East in recent years, expanding in both oil and nonoil sectors. The Saudi private investment firm "Ajlan and Brothers" invested in a total of 20 factories worth $632 million in the textile sector in China and Dubai-based "Abraaj Group" stated that it planned to invest almost $400 million in Southeast Asia and Indian companies in 2015. Trade links have always been very strong between the two regions, spurred by the surge in Asian oil demand, but the relationship now has improved further. The rise of Gulf’s FDI in Asia provides a long-term sustainability component to the relationship between the two regions. 
 
United States : Global partnerships to tackle inequality and implement new sustainable development agenda 
Cihan News Agency (CNA), 21 September 2015 -- The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) achieved significant progress over the past 15 years, but persistent gaps in official development assistance and an insufficient access to markets, affordable medicines and new technologies have highlighted the need for a rejuvenation of the global partnership for development, according to a new report launched today by United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. The Taking Stock of the Global Partnership for Development report of the United Nations MDG Gap Task Force monitors the recent achievements and challenges in the implementation of the Millennium Development Goal 8, while looking ahead towards the new sustainable development agenda that will be adopted by world leaders at the Sustainable Development Summit this month (25-27 September), and which will include the launch of a new set of Sustainable Development Goals. Transitioning from the Millennium Development Goals to the Sustainable Development Goals presents a once-in-a-generation opportunity to advance prosperity, secure the planet's sustainability for future generations , said Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon in the preface to the report. Achieving the SDGs will require an even stronger global partnership, complemented by multi stakeholder partnerships to mobilize and share knowledge, expertise, technology and financial resources .
Key report findings reveal official development assistance flows have increased remarkably by 66 per cent from 2000 to 2014. In merchandise exports, developing countries access to developed-country markets has improved from 30.5 to 43.8 per cent over the same period.Debt burdens have been reduced in most highly indebted poor countries. Mobile phone penetration in developing countries is estimated to reach 92 per cent at the end of 2015, compared to less than 10 per cent in 2000. Nevertheless, the Report also finds that major gaps persist in development aid flows to the least developed countries and in eliminating trade barriers for developing countries. Additionally, many people cannot access essential medicines and the Internet at affordable prices.
Market access for developing countries expanded
Developing countries received duty-free treatment on only 65 per cent of their exports to developed countries in 2000, but on 79 per cent in 2014 (excluding arms). Duty-free imports from least developed countries increased from 70 per cent to 84 per cent of their trade over the same period. South-South trade has become an important source of trade expansion. But, the merchandise exports of least developed countries accounted for only 1.17 per cent of world trade in 2013. According to the Report, there is the need for developed countries to eliminate more barriers to trade, while the remaining Doha Round issues need to be tackled.
Debt relief progressed in 36 out of 39 eligible countries
Debt relief has reduced financial pressures in 36 out of 39 highly indebted poor countries, and only three countries Eritrea, Somalia and Sudan have yet to start the debt-relief process. The overall ratio of external debt to gross domestic product (GDP) of developing countries has declined over the past decade, but it has been increasing in some countries in recent years. However, a number of developing countries, particularly small States, continue to face some of the highest debt-to-GDP ratios in the world, and their underlying economic problems warrant further attention. An urgent need remains for the international community to assist countries to enhance their policies towards debt-crisis prevention and to facilitate resolution of crises.
Access to affordable essential medicines still limited
The availability of essential medicines is still low in developing countries. According to the data on medicine availability and prices, collected in 26 surveys from 2007 to 2014 in a sample of low- and middle-income countries, generic medicines were available on average in 58.1 per cent of public sector facilities and in 66.6 per cent of private sector facilities. Nevertheless, there have been efforts to increase treatment access, in particular for some diseases such as HIV, tuberculosis and malaria, largely owing to a massive influx of national and international funding, such as from the Global Fund.
Mobile phone signals reach 95 per cent of the world s population
The Task Force estimates that the number of mobile-cellular subscriptions in the world is estimated to grow to just over 7 billion by the end-2015 and more than 95 per cent of the world s population will be covered by a mobile-cellular signal. Forty-three per cent of the world s population uses the Internet today. The growth of Internet users is robust in developing countries, but only 32 per 100 inhabitants are estimated to be using the Internet, as compared with 80 per cent of people in developed countries in 2014. Access to information and communication technologies (ICTs) can be an important enabler of broader development objectives such as e-governance services so that greater efforts must be undertaken, especially in the economies that most need ICTs but which are least able to access them.
Background
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" United Nations MDG Gap Task Force is an inter-agency initiative that includes more than 30 organizations with specialised competence in the five core domains of the global partnership for development: official development assistance (ODA), market access (trade), debt sustainability, access to affordable essential medicines and access to new technologies. 
 
Who Wants a Third World War? 
Sputnik News Service
21 September 2015 19:11, 
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" US President Barack Obama (C) reviews an honour guard with Chinese President Xi Jinping in the Great Hall of the People in Beijing on November 12, 2014
Chinese President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xi Jinping surfs the USA in his first state visit almost simultaneously as HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Pope Francis. It will be fascinating to observe how the hyperpower's decision centers will react to this double exposure to dialectical materialism — with Chinese characteristics — and the in thesis "under reconstruction" Catholic Church. In a historic speech in Havana, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Pope Francis — who broke the get-together between US President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Barack Obama and Raul Castro — insisted he wants to deepen the relationship between Washington and Havana. He asked for Obama and Raul to give it all they've got as an example to the world, "a world that needs reconciliation amidst this Third World War." "Third World War" was never part of the original redaction of the Pope's speech. Francis added it on his flight from Rome to Havana. A pre-Socratic cynic would volunteer that Francis may now be in synch with "Apocalypse Now" Pentagon factions — for whom the Third World War is already on, and the crucial threats are Russia and China, with ISIS/ISIL/HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Daesh as a distant third. It's more like Francis may be aligned with Russian President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Vladimir Putin, who's going no holds barred to frame a genuine peace process in Syria. The real prime "threat" to the Middle East, Europe and even Eurasia is a jihadi blowback originating in "Syraq". Not for the Pentagon, of course, whose analysts are now obsessed with contingency plans for a war against…Russia. The latest leak on the obsession comes via a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" notorious neo-con operative, Michele Flournoy, former undersecretary of Defense for policy and co-founder of yet another proverbially hawkish think tank, the Center for a New American Security.
It's all about a Russian "potential aggression" against HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" NATO, or "hypothetic" Russian aggression against the Baltics. The plans include possible Pentagon/NATO moves as well as Pentagon-only moves. The assumption is always an inevitable "Russian aggression." So now we have a military "pivot to Russia" to complement the by now notorious "pivot to Asia" — which Beijing has interpreted for what it is: a strategic containment policy — running from military encirclement (South China Sea, Indian Ocean, Western Pacific) to trade exclusion (the Trans-Pacific Partnership, TPP), plus the usual threat of sanctions. Now compare the Pentagon pivoting — the China chapter — HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" with what IT America wants; business, a lot of business, which implies, obviously, no sanctions. And then there's what the Masters of the Universe really crave; some form of coercion that would lead Beijing to open its coveted financial market to the mega-speculative financial casino of the US Big Bank system. That is not happening — as the White House has absolutely no leverage on the matter.
What Xi is up against
The first few days of Xi's agenda in the US include a visit to a new HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Boeing assembly line in a Seattle suburb; a dinner with Bill Gates; and the two-day US-China Internet Industry Forum. From that, it's easy to identify Beijing's priorities. With Obama, Xi will have to discuss notorious flashpoints; Taiwan; the South China Sea; cyber-security; and negotiations towards a possible adoption of a bilateral trade treaty. As if the pivot-obsessed gang was not enough, Xi will be under a lot of pressure in the US on the human rights and cyber-security fronts. Yet there's no evidence most of the hyperpower's decision making circles really know what he's up against in China. In roughly three years in power, Xi's number one task has been to unleash a monster anti-graft campaign. That encompasses military and civilian spheres. The extremely feared HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Central Commission for Discipline Inspection is Xi's weapon of choice. And no one escapes the Commission's tentacles. Not even former security superstar Zhou Yongkang and former top presidential aide Ling Jihua.
So Xi is simultaneously cleaning up the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) and the People's Liberation Army (PLA). One can barely imagine the resistance factor — to the point that Chinese insiders stress Xi has made extremely powerful enemies across the board; retired political heavyweights; top military officers; influential government officials; state-owned enterprise (SOE) honchos; an array of "princelings" — the children of historic revolutionaries; and last but not least a dodgy flotsam and jetsam that laundered their fortunes in Macau casinos and luxury Hong Kong malls. Special Xi scalps include the so-called Shanxi gang — which totally controlled the politico-economic environment in this province abundant in coal — and the so-called petroleum gang, which controlled all things oil in China. Premier HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Li Keqiang, at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Economic Forum in Dalian, has been forced to stress the clean up is a question of "structural adjustment", and does not affect China's economy. The facts are stark; China may have deregulated a lot. But capital, energy, raw materials and land still respond largely to the central government's priorities. No US lobbying will change that. This also means that if you are a perfectly placed and well connected — the supremacy of guanxi — Chinese official, you're the King of Business. These functionaries, essentially, are at the root of so many "distortions" in the Chinese economy. And that's what Xi is essentially trying to change. The massive tweaking of the Chinese model includes less reliance on exports of manufactured products; a much more rigorous planning in terms of spending on infrastructure; and redirecting investment on industrial capacity. Wishful thinking about HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" China crashing is nonsense. Those days of the Cultural Revolution are long gone. China is slowly but surely shifting towards a spectacular new paradigm of integrating the whole of Eurasia into a booming industrial renaissance. Every change in China points towards this transition.
The transition also means a shift away from the massive export linkage to the US and EU and a more balanced economy across Eurasia, while keeping trade/commerce as much as possible with the West.
Does this feel like a state/civilization that craves a Third World War? 
 
END


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.