At WTO talks, India to oppose bid at dilution
India’s headline GDP growth disguises problems below the surface
BRICS bank set to issue first loans in April, says first president
India should not be allowed to hold the world to ransom at the climate talks
EU-Ukraine FTA to apply in 2016 but consultations to continue
AGRICULTURE: EU Commission cautious over Mercosur meat and sugar talks
Malaysia: Gaining access to US procurement market
China: New Maritime Silk Road to boost ties with Africa
Slow-burn, devastating impact of tobacco plain packs
Argentina's new president may turn tide on economic woes
 
At WTO talks, India to oppose bid at dilution
Arun S
3 December 2015
The Hindu
NEW DELHI.- At Nairobi meet, New Delhi will resist efforts to create divisions among developing nations At the coming Nairobi ministerial meeting of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation (WTO), India is likely to oppose efforts by rich countries to dilute the ‘development’ dimension of the Doha Round negotiations, which are aimed at reaching an agreement to liberalise global trade.
New Delhi is also expected to resist attempts by the developed world to create divisions among the developing countries (including the least developed countries), official and trade sources privy to the development told The Hindu . They said attempts were being made by some developed countries to categorise nations such as India (now ‘developing’) as ‘emerging economies’ by making “unsubstantiated” allegations that such ‘emerging economies’ were cornering the benefits meant for developing countries.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO meeting will be held at the Kenyan capital during December 15-18.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO does not define ‘developing’ or ‘developed’ countries. Members can apply the principle of ‘self-election’ and themselves decide if they are to be labelled as ‘developing’ countries.
Other members can question any member about its decision to label itself as ‘developing’ with an aim to take advantage of provisions available to developing countries. However, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO recognises the least developed countries as designated by the United Nations.
Significantly, there are attempts by the rich countries to “redefine developmental aspects” of the Doha Development Agenda negotiations at the Nairobi meeting by modifying the existing agenda and including, what they call, “more relevant” issues currently challenging global trade, the sources said.
They said the recent Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) agreement — spearheaded by the U.S. and including 11 other pacific countries — has emboldened the West to attempt to link HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO trade rules to topics not covered under the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO norms — but included in the TPP — as part of the final Nairobi declaration.
Kasturi & Sons Ltd
India’s headline GDP growth disguises problems below the surface
David Pilling
2 December 2015
Financial Times (FT.Com)
So it is official. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" India is the only Bric left standing. Brazil, which shrank 4.5 per cent year on year in the third quarter, seems destined for its worst recession since the 1930s. Russia’s oil-dependent economy is in the grip of fierce contraction and South Africa has only just managed to avoid outright recession. Even the mighty China, after years of stimulus and over-reliance on ozone-destroying heavy industry, is growing at its slowest pace in 25 years.
That leaves India alone among the once-vaunted Brics nations putting up a decent show. Official data this week show that its HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" economy grew 7.4 per cent in the third quarter from a year earlier, accelerating from 7 per cent in the previous three months. The performance, driven by fixed capital investment and industrial production, was more impressive still given that output from farming, which employs about half India’s workforce, is limping along HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" at 2.2 per cent. On the face of it, there is much growth to be had simply by shifting some of those farm labourers into more productive sectors. In short, the world’s third-largest economy in purchasing power parity terms can now legitimately lay claim to be the global economy’s most impressive outperformer.
Indeed, much is going right for India. Even before HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" Narendra Modi swept to power last year in a blaze of optimism, its economic fundamentals were im­proving. Low oil prices are a boon: they have helped repair a current account position that once put the country among the most vulnerable to US Federal Reserve-induced capital outflows. Its growth is less dependent on exports than that of many developing economies, with 70 per cent of gross domestic product driven by consumption.
In HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" Raghuram Rajan, its central bank governor, it has a figure akin to Paul Volcker, the former Fed chairman, in his determination to control inflation, a phenomenon that is particularly damaging to the hundreds of millions of India’s poor. Steady improvement on that front means India now has the room to lower interest rates: they have already come down 1.25 percentage points this year.
Nor can the “Modi effect” be discounted. Although some of the shine of the prime minister’s election victory has been wiped off by subsequent defeats — most recently in the state of Bihar — India has a greater sense of purpose than it did in the final lacklustre years of Manmohan Singh’s administration. Mr Modi has ramped up spending on infrastructure and taken credible steps to deal with the legacy of rampant corruption in the auction of government assets from coal to telecoms spectrum.
It would be wrong, however, to take continued outperformance for granted. That is what countries such as Brazil and Russia did — and look where they are now. India has many problems bubbling beneath the surface, from bad debts in the banking system to a worrying reluctance of entrepreneurs to invest in their own, seemingly successful, economy. Most of the rise in investment has been government-led.
There are at least three reasons not to count India’s chickens just yet. First is the slow pace of reform. Despite all his vim and vigour, Mr Modi has found it hard to push his agenda through Delhi’s political process. Because of a hostile upper house, almost nothing of import was passed in the last parliamentary session. Optimists say the wily prime minister will get the better of the system yet. One hope is that he will spark competition between states implementing, say, the most attractive land reform as they vie for investment. Many hope that one more push will result in the enactment of a much-delayed goods and services tax. Reform of restrictive labour laws, which will hobble Mr Modi’s ambition to make India a manufacturing hub, has not even been discussed.
Nor is it clear whether the GDP numbers can be taken at face value. A rebasing exercise means that the 7.4 per cent headline figure is almost certainly flattering. The outwardly robust performance is HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" hard to square with other data such as weak corporate earnings, slow motorcycle sales and subdued loan growth.
Finally, even if we believe the numbers, headline GDP growth is not everything. Of course, poor countries need to grow fast if they are to tackle poverty. Yet, unless they lay the foundations for development — not only through appropriate reforms but also through investments in health and education — that growth can quickly peter out. India lags behind its peers in measures of health, literacy and its record on improving the position of women. None of this bodes well for a country where, courtesy of a youthful population, almost one in five of all global jobs must be created in the next several decades.
For the moment, India is a standout. But as the fading fortunes of its fellow Brics demonstrate, that is no guarantee of future success.
The Financial Times Limited 

BRICS bank set to issue first loans in April, says first president

3 December 2015
Cape Times
THE $50 billion (R721bn) HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" New Development Bank (NDB) - or HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Brics bank - should issue its first loans by April, its first president, Kundapur Kamath said. One loan would be issued for each of the five countries that make up the Brics forum - Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa - which established the bank.
Kamath also raised the possibility that the NDB might not seek a triple-A rating on capital markets because this would require it to hold large reserves rather than lending more money for development.
Kamath, who was appointed in May, was speaking on Tuesday at the Department of International Relations and Co-operation during a visit to South Africa to consult bankers and officials about establishing the bank. The NDB was created to fill gaps left by existing international financial institutions and development banks, such as the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Bank and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" International Monetary Fund.
These banks seek triple-A ratings by adopting conservative lending policies and so can lend at lower interest rates. Less conservative policies would drive up interest rates.
But Kamath said the main problem for developing and emerging economies was not interest rates but currency exchange rate fluctuations.
The NDB aimed to overcome these by issuing loans in the currencies of each of the Brics member countries, rather than in US dollars or euros. Some diplomats expressed scepticism about the strategy, suggesting that the volatile rand, for instance, would impose unacceptable risks to other Brics currencies.
But Kamath said the rand was only volatile relative to external currencies such as the US dollar. It was not volatile relative to the Russian rouble for example. And borrowing in the currencies of other Brics countries should help stabilise the rand. Kamath also said, contrary to speculation, that South African banker Lesley Maasdorp, who is one of the vice-presidents of the NDB, would not head the bank's regional office in South Africa, the African Regional Centre.
Critics
Instead, it would be headed by a Chinese national. The African Regional Centre would be set up within months, he said. Kamath said some critics had asked why the world needed yet another development bank.
He said it had been calculated that there was a global demand for $1 trillion of infrastructure so the $100bn capital, which the NDB would eventually rise to would only provide one-tenth of that.
Kamath said the critical difference between the NDB and existing development banks would be speed. First of all the bank was being set up in record time. He had only take up his position in July and the bank would start recruiting staff this month.
In the meantime, it would second officials to process the first loans. The NDB would also aim to be fast in disbursing loans, without undue delays for appraising loan applications or imposing conditions.
Kamath said the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" SA Reserve Bank, private South African bankers and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" JSE, had all assured him that local capital markets were deep enough to sustain the NDB and that there was no danger of it crowding out other borrowers.
The same was true of the other two Brics economies he had assessed so far, China and India. Kamath said membership would be opened to other countries soon. - ANA
Independent Online
India should not be allowed to hold the world to ransom at the climate talks
Clive Hamilton, Professor of Public Ethics, Centre For Applied Philosophy & Public Ethics (CAPPE), Charles Sturt University
2 December 2015
The Conversation
No one is going to allow the Paris climate talks to collapse. The memory of Copenhagen is still raw, and US President Barack Obama has invested enormous political capital in a successful outcome.
This situation hands great bargaining power (or rather, blackmailing power) to India. On the final day of the conference, whatever India insists on will be acceded to.
And India, although talking up its renewables investments, is taking a confrontational approach aimed at watering down the final Paris agreement. As the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" New York Times put it, Indian Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Narendra Modi can “make or break Obama’s climate legacy”.
India is refusing to endorse what would be the centrepiece of a Paris agreement: five-yearly reviews of emissions reduction commitments, which are essential to giving the post-Kyoto “pledge-and-review” system teeth – or at least more effective gums.
Part of the answer to India’s intransigence is money – it wants more funding for new energy investment and compensation for loss and damage – but at its core, the refusal to cooperate arises from a nationalist chip on the shoulder left over from colonialism.
But it has to be asked: why is the world community allowing India to hold it to ransom? The simple answer is that it is commonly accepted that when the chair brings down the gavel on the final agreement, there must be consensus.
This answer is not a good one. The expectation of consensus among major powers is inherited from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN Security Council and the early practice of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN climate conferences to ensure that developing countries felt included.
But consensus is not needed to make a Paris agreement legally binding. In fact, “legally binding” is a fiction and its constant deployment here at the talks is something of a puzzle. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" Kyoto Protocol was legally binding under international law, but that did not stop the United States and Australia from refusing to ratify it, and Canada from ratifying then repudiating it. Nothing happened.
Climate law is among the weakest elements of international law. Bolivia HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" refused to endorse the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" Cancun agreement, declaring it too weak, and a footnote records its dissent. Even some of the strongest international law, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" UN Refugee Convention, is flouted with impunity (think Australia and asylum-seekers).
International law is most effective when there are material losses from opting out, such as the loss of most-favoured nation status for countries that do not join the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" World Trade Organization. That kind of mechanism is the only way to give a climate agreement real bite.
So whatever the words on paper say, anything that comes out of Paris will reflect voluntary commitments, and compliance mechanisms – inventories, reporting and reviews – will also be voluntary. But the strength of those voluntary commitments is vital. “Consensus-minus-one” on a stronger agreement is surely preferable to a weaker agreement with full consensus. So let India dissent, and have its dissent recorded in a footnote to the Paris agreement.
If that is India’s sovereign decision, so be it; but it should be made clear that it will be opting out of all the elements of the agreement, including financial flows. A few years out in the cold (so to speak), while the rest of the world gets on with it, is likely to persuade the emerging giant to adopt a less intransigent position.
Disclosure
Clive Hamilton is a Member of the Climate Change Authority. The views expressed here are his personal ones and do not reflect those of the Authority.
The Conversation Media Group Limited
EU-Ukraine FTA to apply in 2016 but consultations to continue
2 December 2015
Bulletin Quotidien Europe
Brussels, 01/12/2015 (Agence Europe) - The key message to be delivered through the joint operational conclusions adopted by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU, Russia and Ukraine, at a trilateral ministerial meeting in Brussels on Tuesday 1 December, is that the free trade agreement (FTA) between the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU and Ukraine will enter into force on 1 January 2016, and that the Russian concerns about the impact of this agreement on the Russian economy will be addressed as part of the agreement's flexibility and in further trilateral consultations.
“Some concerns of the Russian Federation can be addressed in the context of the existing flexibilities available in the deep and comprehensive free trade area. For some other concerns, solutions can be available in the context of the bilateral or trilateral or plurilateral cooperation frameworks”, the conclusions state. The conclusions were adopted by European Commissioner for Trade Cecilia Malmström, Russia's Minister for Economic Development Alexey Ulyukayev, and Ukraine's Minister for Foreign Affairs Pavlo Klimkin.
Any “practical solutions” for taking account of Russia's wish-list “have to respect the relevant HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO provisions”, the conclusions state. The participants identified a “number of potential practical solutions” and are ready to continue talks at ministerial and expert levels, they add.
The trilateral EU-Ukraine FTA consultations are part of the Minsk peace agreement of 12 February relating to the conflict between Ukraine and the pro-Russian rebels in eastern Ukraine. 
Agence Europe SA

AGRICULTURE: EU Commission cautious over Mercosur meat and sugar talks
2 December 2015
Bulletin Quotidien Europe
Brussels, 01/12/2015 (Agence Europe) - The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Commission said on Monday 30 November, during discussions in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Parliament's agriculture committee on free-trade negotiations between the EU and Mercosur (Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay - Venezuela is not involved in the talks), that the EU would look very closely at the meat and sugar sectors, in which these countries are very competitive.
The Commission representative said, too, that the Commission would seek a Council mandate to negotiate free-trade agreements with other competitive countries, such as Australia, New Zealand, Mexico and Chile. These negotiations could very well take place concurrently with those on the transatlantic trade and investment partnership (TTIP) and those with Mercosur. “My commissioner, Phil Hogan, has emphasised the need to take account of sensitive issues in these negotiations. A balance will have to be found”, he said.
The think tank Farm Europe noted on Tuesday 1 December that the election of a liberal president in Argentina could pave the way for resumption of EU-Mercosur talks (see EUROPE 11440). Farm Europe feels that the EU is trying to push Mercosur to up its offer from 87 to 90% tariff coverage. Joao Pacheco of Farm Europe points out that, just as in TTIP negotiations, the vulnerable sectors are the beef sectors and ethanol. “The added difficulty will be sugar, as Brazil is a very competitive and large producer”, he says. For Mercosur, the fragile sectors are wine in Brazil, dairy in Brazil and Argentina, olive oil in Argentina, processed products (from pasta to chocolate) in both countries. “So the EU sector should expect more opening but not complete free trade in its sensitive sectors”, according to Pacheco, who suggests that this will mean probably lower quotas on sensitive products than in TTIP. 
Agence Europe SA
Malaysia: Gaining access to US procurement market
3 December 2015
Business Times
KUALA LUMPUR: THE trillion dollar HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" US government procurement market will be accessible to Malaysian suppliers once the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) Agreement takes effect in mid-2018.
Malaysia's chief negotiator Datuk J. Jayasiri explained it would marka plus point for the suppliers who can now be as competitive as the others.
"With this, suppliers of goods, including textiles and footwear, can now supply to the lucrative market," he said.
Malaysian suppliers were unable to gain access to the US procurement market in the past because there was no bilateral free trade agreement with the US and also because Malaysia is not in the GP (government procurement) agreement in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation (WTO).
Government procurement, which involves purchases of goods and services, is recognised as a huge opportunity in boosting international trade.
The recently-concluded TPP Agreement will be presented to the Parliament for debate late next month.
The TPP grouping members, apart from Malaysia and the US, are Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, Japan, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore and Vietnam.
The private sector, particularly those in the textiles, garment and footwear, have been pushing for a free trade agreement with the US for preferential market access as tariffs are high.
From the TPP text, which has been released into the public domain, the government procurement here will also be opened to competition to TPP countries at different thresholds over varied transition periods, depending on whether they involve goods and services or construction services.
In the case of construction services, International Trade and Industry Minister Datuk Seri Mustapa Mohamed explained during a public briefing on Tuesday that by the 20th year, Malaysia would still be allowed to operate contracts below SDR14 million (RM70 million).
(SDR refers to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" International Monetary Fund's Special Drawing Rights).
Malaysia and two other countries in the TPP grouping have been accorded transitional period with higher initial thresholds for goods and services before the common threshold are applied.
The minister was confident that the competitiveness of the Bumiputeras would remain due to the transition period flexibility which the negotiators secured for Malaysia.
The GP chapter is a first for Malaysia as it has not been negotiated in the previous FTAs.
Meanwhile Malaysia will gain market access for its main exports, namely electrical and electronic products, rubber products, palm oil, transport equipment and wood products (including plywood) to TPP markets.
New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad
China: New Maritime Silk Road to boost ties with Africa
Frannie A. Leautier Michael Schaefer and Wei Shen
3 December 2015
China Daily
China has always regarded Africa as a place of opportunity rather than a source of problems. It has courted African governments as political allies since the foundation of the People's Republic. Unlike the West whose aid was centred on technical and financial assistance, China uses a different approach.
China has been eager to use infrastructure projects to facilitate connectivity between the landlocked countries and coastal areas in Africa, with the aim of fostering the same kind of local and regional economic development that China has seen since the 1980s. And now that its economic growth has slowed, China needs to seek new overseas markets and consumers. With its foreign exchange reserves of $3.65 trillion, China has led the establishment of a number of financial institutions such as the Silk Road Fund, the BRICS New Development Bank and the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank to finance these infrastructure projects.
China's focus on the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road for infrastructure development is also a response to its severe overcapacity in the construction and manufacturing sectors. According to the State Council, China's Cabinet, Africa is already China's second-largest overseas construction site. Under the new Maritime Silk Road project, China will leverage its comparative advantage in construction and material surplus, and allow more State-owned enterprises to go global.
One of China's major interests is to expand its trade with Africa and consolidate its position as one of Africa's strategic trading partners. In 2009, China overtook the United States as Africa's largest trading partner, and the China-Africa trade volume reached a record $200 billion in 2013.
With its domestic market shrinking because of demographic trends and the ever-maturing Western markets, China is keen to tap into Africa's burgeoning consumer markets. According to McKinsey, Africa will account for one-fifth of the global population by 2025, more Africans will emerge out of poverty and almost "two-thirds of the estimated 303 million African households will have discretionary income". The connectivity by road, rail, waterways and air, as well as digital links will also accelerate industrial efficiency and productivity. They will also identify new market opportunities for China's rising brands such as Haier and Huawei in Africa.
But what will make the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road initiative a success in Africa?
First, the most important precondition for the success of the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road is mutual confidence. Though China's involvement in Africa has benefited from the historical goodwill, it has been subject to growing scrutiny in recent years both in the region and globally. So China has to build mutual confidence with African countries.
Second, Chinese companies need to be better prepared when investing abroad. China's strategy of "going global" has received mixed reception from African partners. This is especially true for large-scale SOEs, which often face difficulties in adjusting to the different political, cultural, financial and legal frameworks in Africa.
Third, since the new Maritime Silk Road is still a project in the making, transparency and coordination between China and African countries are vital.
Fourth, as China also has strategic interests in several African countries, careful coordination will be needed to reduce misunderstandings and internal rivalry in Africa. To ensure effective coordination and transparency it is important to establish a multi-national coordinating body including stakeholders from all participating countries. This approach will help create the necessary degree of transparency and trust which will be essential in engaging with China in the framework of the new Maritime Silk Road.
Fifth, people-to-people exchanges between China and Africa should be strengthened. Historical legacies and goodwill based on experience will gradually fade away. And as the exchange of students is more of a one-way traffic from Africa to China now, Chinese policymakers should encourage more young Chinese people to study in African countries, in order to better understand Africa, its history, languages, religions and societies.
Frannie A. Léautier is chairperson and co-founding partner of Mkoba Private Equity Fund & former vice-president of the World Bank, Michael Schaefer is chairman of the board of BMW Foundation & former German ambassador to China, and Wei Shen is a professor of international business and director of Confucius Institute at Lancaster University & Jean Monnet chair of EU-China relations.
China Daily Information Company
Slow-burn, devastating impact of tobacco plain packs
Simon Chapman, Professor of Public Health, University of Sydney
3 December 2015
The Conversation
Anti-smoking momentum among young people is starving the tobacco industry of new smokers
It is three years since Australia fully implemented its historic tobacco HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" plain packaging law. From December 1, 2012, all tobacco products have been required to be sold in the mandated standardised packs, which, with their large disturbing graphic health warnings, are anything but “plain”.
Ever since, there have been frenzied efforts by the tobacco industry and its ideological baggage carriers to discredit the policy as a failure.
The obvious subtext of this effort has been to megaphone a message to other governments that they should not contemplate introducing plain packaging because it has “failed”: smoking, it is claimed, has not fallen any faster in Australia after plain packaging that it was already falling before. All that has occurred, they argue, is that illicit trade has increased.
The supreme irony here is of course that if such criticism was correct, then to paraphrase Hamlet’s mother Gertrude, “The tobacco industry doth protest too much, methinks.” Why would the industry and its astro-turfed bloggers waste so much money and effort denigrating a policy which was having little or no impact?
Why take the Australian government to the High Court (and fail six to one) to try and block the law? Why invest in supporting minnow tobacco-growing states such as the Dominican Republic, Honduras and Cuba in their efforts to have the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization rule against plain packaging?
Why not just ignore an ineffective policy instead of making it only too obvious to all by such actions that it is in fact a grave threat to your industry?
Two key assumptions have underscored efforts to discredit the impact of plain packaging. First, critics assume the impacts of the law should have been evident immediately as it was implemented: as one colleague put it recently “within ten seconds of the law passing”.
Second, they assume (but never actually state) that the impact of plain packaging on smoking by children (the principal target) and adults was supposedly going to be greater than anything we have previously observed in the entire history of tobacco control.
In 1999, the late Tony McMichael, professor of epidemiology at the Australian National University, published a classic paper called HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" Prisoners of the Proximate where he wrote about the need to understand the determinants of population health in terms that extend beyond proximate single risk factors and influences.
In tobacco control, both proximal (discrete, recent and quick-acting) and distal (on-going, slow-burn) effects of policies and campaigns can occur. Price rises (and falls through discounting) can have both immediate and lasting effects, jolting smokers into sometimes unplanned quitting and also slowly percolating an unease about the costs of smoking that translate into quitting down the track.
Tobacco advertising bans are a good example of a policy that has such slow-burn effects across many years. Few if any quit smoking in direct response to tobacco advertising bans. They work instead by causing the next generations of kids to grow up in an environment devoid of massive promotional campaigns depicting smoking in positive ways.
I have often heard smokers say “plain packaging won’t make me quit smoking”. This is akin to the myopic self-awareness of those who swear “advertising (for any product) never influences me” while noting that it only influences the more impressionable.
Plain packs were unlikely to act suddenly in the way tax rises do, although the unavoidably huge graphic health warnings may well have acted like straws that broke the Camel’s back of worry about smoking. Their impact was far more likely to be of the slow-burn sort, where the constant reminder that tobacco, unique among all products, is the only consumer good treated this way by the law. It is exceptionally dangerous, with a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" recent estimate that two in every three long-term smokers will die from tobacco use.
In 1994 I wrote a now highly cited HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" paper in the British Medical Journal which talked about the impossibility of “unravelling gossamer with boxing gloves” when it came to being certain about precisely why smokers quit. I took a day in the life of a smoker who quit, and pointed to the myriad of influences both distal and proximal that coalesce to finally stimulate a smoker to quit.
While a smoker might nominate a particular policy, conversation with a doctor or anti-smoking campaign as being “the reason” they quit, much of what went on before provides the broad shoulders of concern that carry the final attribution. There are synergies between all these factors and the demand to separate them all is like the demand to unscramble an omelette.
So what has happened to smoking in Australia since plain packs?
Data released this month from a national schools HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" survey involving more than 23,000 high school children found smoking rates were the lowest ever recorded since the studies first commenced in 1984. This momentum is starving the tobacco industry of new smokers, which is one important reason why all tobacco companies are now busily acquiring e-cigarette brands.
Proportion of 12- to 15-year-olds who smoke, 1984 to 2014
Trends in proportion of current (smoked in past seven days) and committed smokers (smoked on three or more of the past seven days) among 12 to 15-year old students, Australia, 1984-2014. National Drug Strategy report 2014.
With adults, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" National Accounts data just released show that for the 11 quarter-year periods since March 2013, consumption of tobacco products in aggregate fell an unprecedented 20.8%, while the previous 11 quarters it fell 15.7% and in the 11 before that, only 2.2%.
The latest available data on adult smoking prevalence we have is from 2013 and shows just 12.8% of Australians over 14 smoked on a daily basis. This is the lowest on record and again, the biggest percentage falls experienced since the surveys commenced (see graph).
Reductions in daily smoking among Australians aged over 14, 1991 to 2013 
Meanwhile, the tobacco industry plods along funding HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" heavily lambasted studies which purport to show none of this is happening.
The argument that plain packaging would cause illicit trade to boom was made with monotonous regularity by Big Tobacco between April 2010 when plain packaging was announced and its December 2012 implementation. When the industry lost its case in the High Court, the argument was quietly dropped.
Today, the industry explains illicit trade entirely by the heinous government tobacco tax rises cloaked in a sanctimonious rhetoric of speaking up for poor smokers and corporate citizen concern about tax avoidance bleeding Treasury. In all this it fails to mention that it has long used tax rises as air cover to quietly raise its own profit margins.
As I wrote recently in HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" The Conversation:
From August 2011 to February 2013, while excise duty rose 24¢ for a pack of 25, the tobacco companies’ portion of the cigarette price (which excludes excise and GST), jumped A$1.75 to A$7.10. While excise had risen 2.8% over the period, the average net price had risen 27%. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Philip Morris’ budget brand Choice 25s rose A$1.80 in this period, with only 41¢ of this being from excise and GST.
Ireland, the United Kingdom and France have already passed laws to introduce plain packs. Norway and Canada will soon, and New Zealand, Chile, Turkey, South Africa and Brazil have also made high-level noises about joining in too. The world has a lot to thank Rudd and Gillard governments (and particularly Health Minister Nicola Roxon) for taking this initiative, and the subsequent Coalition government for continuing to support it strongly as it continues to come under attack from those it has and will continue to hurt.
The Conversation Media Group Limited
Argentina's new president may turn tide on economic woes
Chicago Tribune
739 words
3 December 2015
Dec. 03--The drama never ends for Argentina, land of failed expectations and the setting for a great Broadway musical. Next week, a new leading man steps into the role of president with a chance to fix the broken economy and set a positive example for South American democracy.
Mauricio Macri is an outsider, which in Argentina means he isn't a Peronist, the dominant political force for ages ("Evita" was the celebrated Eva Peron). If Macri turns out to be the least theatrical political figure ever, that would be perfect because Argentina needs sensible, stable leadership.
Getting to dull may take time, though, because the country needs a complete economic overhaul.
Under the current president, Cristina Fernandez, Argentina has become an international financial pariah. The country defaulted on debt last year in a long-running feud with hedge funds -- remarkably, that was the eighth default in Argentina's history.
Fernandez refused to settle. That's left the country to squeak by in isolation, using protectionism and capital controls in a quixotic battle with globalism. The economy is stagnant, foreign currency reserves are dwindling and the inflation rate is around 30 percent. Last week, American Airlines said it stopped accepting pesos for ticket sales because it was tired of collecting revenue it couldn't convert to dollars.
At times Argentina has embraced trade and economic openness, only to slip back into bad habits thanks to populist Peronistas like Fernandez. Macri, a conservative, wants to re-establish free market principles, but there are a lot of details he didn't fully explain before his November victory because they will require some short-term pain, and he wanted to win the election.
Everything Macri is talking about makes sense. He says he will lift the capital controls that have wrecked the peso's credibility. Like other backwaters it shouldn't resemble, Argentina has a thriving black market because the government insists the peso is worth a lot more than its actual value. Freeing the currency would devalue it, a first step toward making Argentina more competitive.
The next big step would be to negotiate a settlement with the hedge funds that bought up Argentina's debt after its previous default in 2002 and demand repayment. Fernandez got political mileage from attacking the "vultures," but Macri seems to understand Argentina can't get unstuck when it's essentially shut out of international capital markets. He sounds like he wants to do a deal.
Macri's got a tremendous balancing act to pull off: He'll need to cut spending and reduce taxes without destroying the country's big social safety net, while walking the country through a devaluation. He could use a good friend, and it looks like Macri is hoping to find one in Washington. Relations have been at an ebb since the 2002 default. Argentina slowly moved out of the U.S. orbit, sidling up to China, Cuba and another outlier, Venezuela -- part of an embrace of leftist politics some call the "pink tide" of South American socialism.
Macri, we're glad to report, sees no economic or political benefit in playing Argentina against the West. He wants Venezuela suspended from the continent's Mercosur trading bloc for being undemocratic. He also plans to undo an appalling agreement with Iran to co-investigate the 1994 bombing of a Jewish cultural center in Buenos Aires that killed 85. The crime is unsolved but suspicions always focused on Hezbollah, the militant group backed by Iran. Iran has denied involvement, but its inclusion in the investigation is an insult.
Argentina has incredible potential as a vibrant, resource-rich country but too often it fails to fulfill its promise. Brazil, by the way, next door and also struggling economically, has the same problem. Macri won't get much help from the Peronists, who are still powerful, but if he can kick down the biggest barriers to investment, that will re-establish trust internationally. Money will come rushing to Argentina. If that happens, expect much of South America to benefit from a new tide of prosperity. More openness should follow, giving Argentina and many of its neighbors the chance to sing a happier tune.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Chicago Tribune
END
 
Josep Bosch, Information Officer
Information and External Relations Division
+41227395681
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.