U.S. sets final dumping margins on Chinese tires 
Business Leaders React With Dismay to Defeat of Trade Bill 
Barack Obama trade agenda faces world of doubt
Sino-US relations: Divorce is not an option 
Obama reaps whirlwind of past trade vows 
US trade plan dealt major blow 
Leading Africa's infrastructure drive for economic development 
China on FTA spree to rev up economy 
US agency intends to regulate emissions by airliners 
Talks to begin on a Pan-African free trade zone
«L'industrie des crevettes exploite des enfants» 



U.S. sets final dumping margins on Chinese tires 

2015-06-13 07:32 | Xinhua 

The U.S. Commerce Department on Friday set final dumping margins on imported passenger vehicle and light truck tires from China, signaling that it may impose punitive duties on those products.

The department made its affirmative final determination that these Chinese tires had been sold in the United States at dumping margins ranging from 14.35 percent to 87.99 percent.

The department also determined that producers and exporters of these Chinese products received countervailable subsidies ranging from 20.73 percent to 100.77 percent.

Punitive duties would be imposed after the U.S. International Trade Commission (ITC) made an affirmative final rule, which is scheduled for July 27. If the ITC makes a negative determination, the investigations will be terminated.

The Commerce Department launched the anti-dumping and anti- subsidy investigation into Chinese tires last July, at the request of two U.S labor organizations United Steelworkers and AFL-CIO-CLC.

The Chinese Ministry of Commerce had voiced strong opposition to such decision, saying that the probe breached the rules of the World Trade Organization (WTO) and U.S. laws.

Imports of these Chinese tires under investigation were estimated at about 2.3 billion U.S. dollars last year, according to U.S. official data.

The Chinese Ministry of Commerce has repeatedly urged the United States to abide by its commitment against trade protectionism and work together with China and other members of the international community to maintain a free, open and just international trade environment.

Business Leaders React With Dismay to Defeat of Trade Bill 

Patricia Cohen , Katie Thomas 
NYTimes.com Feed

13 June 2015, 

As big a setback as Friday's vote on Capitol Hill was for President Obama's efforts to advance his trade agenda, it was an even bigger rebuff for the leaders of American business. 

While there are deep divisions over trade policy among Democrats, and to some extent among Republicans as well, corporate America has been nearly unified in its support of a deal that would lower various barriers to trade and investment between the United States and 11 other Pacific Rim nations. 

Though many sought to put the best face on the vote, business groups and chief executives were quick to voice their displeasure with the House's rejection of aid to workers harmed by imports, which could doom prospects for eventual approval of a wider trade pact. 

"This is disappointing and discouraging," said Todd J. Teske, chief executive of Briggs & Stratton, a 107-year-old manufacturer based in Wauwatosa, Wis. "We do business around the world, and free and fair trade allows the U.S. and our company to be competitive globally." 

In a classic strange-bedfellows-in-Washington moment, big-business lobbies swung into action Friday afternoon in a concerted effort to save a signature initiative of President Obama, a leader with whom they have rarely seen eye to eye. 

"Manufacturers will not back down in this fight for expanded trade, for the future of our industry and our country," the National Association of Manufacturers said in a statement. 

Manufacturers have been among the most vocal supporters of what is formally known as the Trans-Pacific Partnership, or T.P.P., but officials from other sectors also made their frustration plain on Friday. David French, senior vice president for the National Retail Federation, called the vote "a victory for those with a narrow agenda that puts petty politics ahead of people, while jeopardizing the futures of millions of men and women in America." 

"It is nothing short of astounding that in the 21st century anyone would think it is in our country's best interest to sit back and let foreign governments dictate our role in a global marketplace," he added. 

After the vote, many trade associations representing consumer electronics, semiconductor manufacturers and Silicon Valley firms, as well as individual companies like the computer chip maker Intel, issued statements cheering on the president and urging Congress to reconsider its opposition to the piece of the legislation dealing with assistance to workers. 

Friday's showdown on Capitol Hill makes the odds of a trade agreement before President Obama leaves the White House much longer, but some experts insist the fight is far from over. 

"I'm still hopeful," said Gary Hufbauer, a senior researcher with the Peterson Institute for International Economics, who characterized the vote on Friday as a vehicle for Democrats to show their displeasure with aspects of the pact. "This was a way of them stomping their feet, but in the end I think the president will get his way." 

Bill Lane, director of global government affairs for Caterpillar, echoed Mr. Hufbauer's view that the door was not completely shut. "Even though the process is temporarily stalled, we are optimistic," he said. 

Mark Grayson, a spokesman for the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America, an industry trade group, said that the group was hopeful "that the House will pass the bill so it can get to the president's desk." 

He declined to comment on the group's position on the overall pact, saying it was still being negotiated. But he made clear that the pharmaceutical industry was hoping for what he called "strong" intellectual property provisions to be included in the trade pact. 

He dismissed concerns that the pact could limit access to generic drugs, noting that the overwhelming majority of prescriptions filled in the United States were for generic medications, despite strong intellectual property laws in this country. 

Generic drug industry officials hailed the vote, however. 

Heather Bresch, the chief executive of Mylan, a generic drug maker, applauded the defeat on Friday by the House, saying it would give her more time to lobby against the trade pact. 

She and other leaders in the generic drug industry have argued that the pact goes too far in protecting the patents of the brand-name drug industry and would block access to generic drugs around the world. 

"I think it's scary and dangerous that the president is looking for this kind of authority on a trade bill that I think has serious flaws in it," she said. "It's setting the global generic industry back 30 years." 

"I'm thankful for this reconsideration, and I'm going to use this window to try and educate and let our voice be heard," she said. 

Although certainly a minority, a few business groups oppose the trade pact. Unions, environmental groups and many liberals are also opposed. Many critics cited the job losses that followed the signing of North American Free Trade Agreement more than two decades ago. 

There was also some applause for the defeat from groups like the American Sustainable Business Council, a network of progressive business organizations. 

"The T.P.P. would give multinational corporations unprecedented power to evade safeguards that protect consumers, workers and the environment. It would hurt smaller, innovative businesses," said David Levine, the group's co-founder. 

While most economists generally support the White House's trade agenda, some on the left have kept up a steady drumbeat, warning that it has been structured primarily to advance the interests of Wall Street and major corporations doing business abroad. 

"The more you learned about the T.P.P., the less it sounded like a simple free trade deal and the more it sounded like a handshake between businesses and investors on all sides of the border," said Jared Bernstein, a senior fellow at the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. 

Mr. Bernstein, who served as the chief economist to Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. from 2009 to 2011, argued that voters were also suspicious about the benefits of trade agreements. 

"Many constituents were deeply uncomfortable," he said. "Members from districts where there's nervousness not just about trade deals but about the impact of globalization on jobs and wages had a hard time saying yes." 

Many manufacturing giants have been pushing hard to create a broad set of trade rules across major Pacific Rim nations (not including China, however), in part because they already have a major presence in the region. These include companies like General Electric, Honeywell and Cummins. But even a company like Briggs & Stratton, which exports less than 10 percent of what it makes to Asia, stands strongly behind the pact being negotiated. 

If sales of the gasoline engines for outdoor power equipment that his company makes — along with Snapper lawn mowers, Simplicity tractors and other products — are to grow in the future, Mr. Teske, the company's chief executive, said, new customers in Asia are vital. 

About 85 percent of Briggs & Stratton's products are manufactured in the United States, with factories in Missouri, Kentucky, Nebraska and other states, Mr. Teske said, noting that his work force is efficient enough to be competitive with rival manufacturers in low-wage countries. 

"If we become isolated as a country," Mr. Teske said, "that's not to our advantage." 

Dino Grandoni contributed reporting. 

* House Rejects Trade Bill, Rebuffing Obama's Dramatic Appeal 

* What You Should Know About the Trans-Pacific Partnership 

* Trade Deal's Setback Left Wall Street Unmoved. Why? 

* The Trans-Pacific Partnership Trade Deal Explained 

Barack Obama trade agenda faces world of doubt

By HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/reporters/,DanaInfo=.awxyCttrp1rmzLp21+DougPalmer.html" Doug Palmer

6/12/15 7:01 PM EDT

Japan, the European Union and other countries have been waiting years for a clear signal that President Barack Obama had the political muscle to get trade deals through Congress.

They got the opposite on Friday, when Obama trekked up to Capitol Hill to plead for his trade agenda and got smacked down by fellow Democrats. That spells trouble for the proposed Trans-Pacific Partnership, a massive pact covering about 40 percent of world economic output. The failure of the trade bill also casts doubt on the sprawling European trade negotiations, and will make other nations less likely to trust the Obama administration's ability to negotiate everything from auto tariffs to currency rules around the world.

Story Continued Below

Unless Obama gets the "fast track" trade promotion authority bill, there's no end in sight for the Asia-Pacific talks between the United States, Japan, Vietnam and nine other countries, U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman acknowledged earlier this week. Canada hasn't even made an agricultural offer in the TPP talks and isn't likely to do that anytime soon if Obama doesn't get fast track.

 "None of the countries are willing to come to the table, have another meeting and put their final offers on the table, until they see us having TPA," the top U.S. trade official told the President's Export Council. "They've made that clear, and you can understand why. All these final issues require very difficult decisions in their own systems, and they're only willing to do that if they feel like we have the political support here to move this forward."

For Japan, there's little incentive to agree to tough U.S. demands to eliminate agricultural tariffs on rice and a long list of other farm products if Obama can't get the agreement through Congress in one piece. The same for Vietnam, which is under pressure to strengthen its labor and environmental practices in exchange for increased access to the U.S. shoe and clothing market.

And while U.S. union groups made the proposed trans-Pacific trade pact public enemy No. 1 in their effort to defeat the fast track trade bill, today's action also endangers the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership talks with Europe, negotiations aimed at eliminating tariffs on environmentally friendly goods and promising recent efforts to revive long-stalled world trade talks.

"It's clear the TTIP negotiations are going to take more time than anyone hoped" when they were launched in mid-2013, said Linda Dempsey, vice president for international economic affairs at the National Association of Manufacturers. But fast track approval would provide some momentum and "take an excuse off the table" for European negotiators not to engage more seriously, she said.

Unless Obama and House Republicans can quickly recover from the setback, it could squelch chances of reaching any new trade agreements "for the rest of this administration and possibly for at least a good part of the next administration," said Gary Hufbauer, senior fellow at the Peterson Institute for International Economics.

The House actually went on record with a 219-211 vote in favor of the trade promotion authority bill, with 28 Democrats joining 191 Republicans in support. But the bill is in limbo because members rejected a related move to renew the Trade Adjustment Assistance program to help workers who have lost their jobs because of trade competition. Republican leaders structured the votes in a way that both measures had to be approved to advance the combined legislation.

Big equipment-maker Caterpillar, like many other manufacturers, has been looking to the Asia-Pacific agreement and other U.S. trade deals to open new markets for its exports. It now faces the prospects of competitors in Asia and Europe negotiating deals to cut tariffs without the United States.

"We are befuddled as to why members of Congress who traditionally support Trade Adjustment Assistance choose to reject it in order to deny President Obama the opportunity to reduce foreign barriers and promote economic growth," said Bill Lane, the company's director of global affairs. "Even though the process is temporarily stalled we are optimistic that TPA will soon be enacted."

A decisive final defeat would send the message "the current trade agenda is off for this administration," said Claude Barfield, a resident scholar at the American Enterprise Institute. "It would add to the idea that this whole administration is over and it's better to wait for Hillary Clinton or Jeb Bush or whoever."

Earlier this week, Obama appeared headed to a narrow victory in the House on the approval of the first renewal of the fast-track legislation since it expired in 2007. Both the White House and House Republican leaders, in a rare display of unity, urged lawmakers to look past narrow parochial interests to focus on America's larger role in the world.

"This vote is about doing what's right for the country," House Speaker John Boehner said Thursday as supporters pressed for the final votes to put the bill over the top. "It's about China out there writing the rules for the global economy, and if we stay on the sidelines our allies will gravitate back toward China away from us and away from our workers."

The legislation, which most modern presidents have had, allows the White House to submit trade agreements to Congress for straight up-or-down votes without any amendments. Critics say the procedure is undemocratic, but supporters say the no-amendment guarantee is vital to persuading other countries to make their best trade offers.

Scott Miller, a trade analyst at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, underscored the difficulty of completing the Asia-Pacific talks and other negotiations without the fast track authority. "I don't see why our negotiating partners would have any confidence" in Obama's ability 7676 the agreement through Congress, he said. "Our politics play very big outside the United States. It would be a real blow to U.S. credibility."

Indeed, other countries could decide to complete the TPP agreement without the United States, putting pressure on Obama or the next president to try to find a way forward on the fast track trade bill, Hufbauer said.

Hopes and fears over the outcome of the trade promotion authority vote have been felt across a number of business sectors, including the software industry, which faces an increasing number of impediments to doing business outside the United States, said Victoria Espinel, president of the BSA The Software Alliance.

"This is extremely important to us," Espinel said, noting the bill for the first time would direct the White House to negotiate rules in trade agreements that would facilitate the free flow of data across borders, addressing government requirements for companies to store data within a country to do business or other restrictions.

The transatlantic talks with the European Union are not as far along as the TPP. But spurred partly by the hope of House approval of the trade bill, Obama and European leaders this week pledged to aim for "the outline of an agreement as soon as possible, preferably by the end of the year."

Many consider that an ambitious target because of concerns in Europe about investment provisions of the agreement that opponents argue could undermine the ability of governments to regulate in the public interest. In addition, revelations of National Security Agency spying still hang over the pact and add to public suspicion.

Trade promotion authority also is needed for a number of other negotiations, including the proposed Environmental Goods Agreement aimed partly at fighting climate change by eliminating tariffs on goods such as solar panels and gas and wind turbines as well as air pollution control and water and wastewater treatment equipment.

Another proposed deal, the Trade in International Services Agreement, is also expected to require congressional approval. Its goal is to tear down trade barriers in a broad variety of services sectors, including financial services, information and communication technology, logistics and transportation.

Meanwhile, after 14 years of off-and-on negotiations, the United States and other members of World Trade Organization are pushing to reach agreement by the end of the year on a new world trade agreement covering agriculture and manufacturing concerns, although it's expected to be a scaled-back version of the original vision for the pact.

"If this thing does fail, you have to put Humpty Dumpty back together again," Miller said, noting it took five years for Congress to approve fast track after a failed effort in 1997. "But it can take a while.

 

Sino-US relations: Divorce is not an option 

By David Shambaugh, 

The Straits Times 

12 June 2015, 

THE relationship between the United States and China has rightly been described as the most important relationship in world affairs. It is also the most complex and fraught one. These two titans are the world's two leading powers and are interconnected in numerous ways bilaterally, regionally and globally. It is therefore of vital importance to understand the dynamics that underlie and drive this relationship at present, which are shifting. 

While Washington and Beijing cooperate where they can, there has also been steadily rising competition in the relationship. This balance has now shifted, with competition being the dominant factor. There are several reasons for it - but one is that security now trumps economics in the relationship. 

The competition is not only strategic competition, it is actually comprehensive competition: commercial, ideological, political, diplomatic, technological, even in the academic world where China has banned a number of American scholars and is beginning to bring pressure to bear on university joint ventures in China. 

Mutual distrust is pervasive in both governments, and is also evident at the popular level. The last Pew global attitudes data on this, in 2013, found distrust rising in both countries. Roughly two-thirds of the public in both countries view US-China ties as "competitive" and "untrustworthy" - a significant change since 2010 when a majority of people in both nations had positive views of the other. 

One senses that the sands are fundamentally shifting in the relationship. Viewed from Washington, it is increasingly difficult to find a positive narrative and trajectory into the future. The "engagement coalition" is crumbling and a "competition coalition" is rising. In my view, the relationship has been fundamentally troubled for many years and has failed to find extensive common ground to forge a real and enduring partnership. The "glue" that seems to keep it together is the fear of it falling apart. But that is far from a solid basis for an enduring partnership between the leading powers. 

Sliding downwards 

THE macro trajectory for the last decade has been steadily downwards - punctuated only by high-level summits between the two presidents, which temporarily arrest the downward trajectory. This has been the case with the last four presidential summits. Occasionally, bilateral meetings like the Strategic and Economic Dialogue, which will convene in Washington in two weeks' time, provide similar stabilisation and impetus for movement in specific policy sectors. But their effects are short-lived, with only a matter of months passing before the two countries encounter new shocks and the deterioration of ties resumes. 

The most recent jolts to the relationship, just a few months since Mr Xi Jinping and Mr Barack Obama took their stroll in the Zhongnanhai (the so-called Yingtai Summit), have been the escalating rhetoric and tensions around China's island-building in the South China Sea. Behind this imbroglio lie rising concerns about Chinese military capabilities, US military operations near China, and the broader balance of power in Asia. 

But there have been a number of other lesser, but not unimportant, issues that have recently buffeted the relationship in different realms - in law enforcement (arrests of Chinese for technology theft and falsification of applications to US universities), legal (China's draft non-governmental organisation and national security laws), human rights (convictions of rights lawyers and the general repression in China since 2009), cyber-hacking (of the US Office of Personnel Management most recently) and problems in trade and investment. Hardly a day passes when one does not open the newspaper to read of more - and serious - friction. 

This is the "new normal" and both sides had better get used to it rather than naively professing a harmonious relationship that is not achievable. 

This has given impetus to an unprecedented outpouring of commentary and reports by Washington think-tanks in recent months. I have lived and worked there a long time, and cannot recall such a tsunami of publications on US-China ties - and they are all, with one exception (former Australian prime minister Kevin Rudd's Asia Society report), negative in nature, calling for a re-evaluation of US policy towards China, and a hardening of policy towards China across the board. 

Shift in US thinking 

A QUALITATIVE shift in American thinking about China is occurring. In essence, the "engagement" strategy pursued since Richard Nixon across eight administrations, that was premised on three pillars, is unravelling. 

The American expectation has been, first, as China modernised economically, it would liberalise politically; second, as China's role in the world grew, it would become a "responsible stakeholder" - in Robert Zoellick's words - in upholding the global liberal order; and third, that China would not challenge the American-dominant security architecture and order in East Asia. 

The first premise is clearly not occurring - quite to the contrary, as China grows stronger economically, it is becoming more, not less, repressive politically. There are any number of examples, but political repression in China today is the worst it has been in the 25 years since Tiananmen. With respect to the other two, we are not witnessing frontal assaults by China on these regional and global institutional architectures. But we are witnessing Beijing establishing a range of alternative institutions that clearly signal China's discomfort with the US-led post-war order. Make no mistake: China is methodically trying to construct an alternative international order. 

This disillusion with China in America probably says much more about America than it does about China. One pattern has repeated itself over the past two centuries of the relationship: America's "missionary impulse" to transform China in its image has repeatedly been disappointed by not understanding the complexities on the ground in China and by China's unwillingness to conform to American expectations. So, once again, this seemingly has more to do with the US and its unrealistic expectations, than with China. 

Despite this overall macro climate in the relationship, the US and China still have to coexist, and to do so peacefully if at all possible. We have business to do with each other - both commercial and diplomatic business. 

Perhaps the most immediate opportunity - and one that would give an enormous boost to the relationship - would be the conclusion of a bilateral investment treaty. But negotiating this treaty is hung up in the queue behind the Trans-Pacific Partnership agreement. Given the difficulty the White House is having getting that agreement finalised and through Congress, there may be little appetite in Washington to conclude an investment treaty with China this year. 

Also high on the agenda at present is the real need to forge practical cooperation on a number of so-called "global governance" issues, including North Korea, Iran, the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, Afghanistan, counterterrorism, anti-piracy, climate change, maritime security, economic stability, energy security, sea-lane security, and setting global rules for cyber activity. 

To date, China has been extremely reluctant to collaborate openly with the US on such global governance issues, but now it possibly seems more feasible. This is because President Xi has personally endorsed more "proactive diplomacy" by China in the global governance arena. This will not solve the problems in US-China relations, but it will help. 

The upcoming Strategic and Economic Dialogue and Mr Xi's September state visit to Washington are golden opportunities to discuss these issues, try to forge tangible cooperation, and arrest the negative dynamic in the relationship. The question is whether it will be temporary again, or a real "floor" can be put beneath the relationship. If the past is any indicator, we should not expect too much. 

What worries me is that in this increasingly negative and suspicious atmosphere, "tests of credibility" will increase. The best we can probably hope for over the next two to three years - as President Obama becomes a lame duck and the election cycle stimulates more heated rhetoric about China - is tactical management of the relationship, with sensitivity to each side's "red lines" and "core interests", while hoping that no "wild card" events occur. This could include another military incident in the air or at sea, or renewed tension over Taiwan. 

Even the current situation in the South China Sea has real potential to haemorrhage, as China is not going to stop its island- building activities and hence will not meet American demands that it do so. Or if China, having fortified the islands, proclaims an air defence identification zone over the South China Sea. What is Washington to do then? The potential for military confrontation is not insignificant. 

So, looking to the future, the key responsibility for both countries is to learn how to manage competition, keep it from edging towards the conflictual end of the spectrum, while trying to expand the zone of practical cooperation. 

Neither country has any playbook to guide such a relationship. Henry Kissinger envisions what he calls "co-evolution" between the two powers, but even he concludes that this will require "wisdom and patience". But it is not at all clear to me that the respective political cultures and existing political systems, national identities, social values and world views will afford such a strategic grand bargain today. 

Thus, these two great nations are likely to find it increasingly difficult to coexist - yet they must. However fraught, this is a marriage in which divorce is not an option. Divorce means war. 

The writer is professor of political science and international affairs at George Washington University, and a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution. This is an excerpt from a lecture he gave at the American Chamber of Commerce in Hong Kong on Wednesday. The article was published in the South China Morning Post. 

US President Barack Obama and Chinese President Xi Jinping at the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit last November. Looking to the future, the key responsibility for their countries is to learn how to manage competition and keep it from edging towards conflict, while trying to expand the zone of practical cooperation.

 

Obama reaps whirlwind of past trade vows 
By Edward Luce, 

Financial Times (FT.Com) 

12 June 2015 22:20, 

Two decades ago Bill Clinton promised that the North American Free Trade Agreement would create 1m US jobs within five years. Something nearer the opposite took place. At the end of his presidency, Mr Clinton vowed China's entry into the World Trade Organisation would wipe out America's trade gap with the rising giant. Instead, it grew in multiples. His successors, notably Barack Obama, are reaping the whirlwind. He must now cope with the biggest trade rebuke of any modern US president - and at the hands of his own party. 

US administrations have long been addicted to overselling trade deals. The greater the hype, the harder the backlash. Ironically, they have turned trade into a scapegoat for society's economic ills. Compared to Mr Clinton, Mr Obama's salesmanship was relatively modest. He argued that the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which includes 11 other countries that account for almost 40 per cent of the global economy, would be a foreign policy victory - the centrepiece of his famed pivot to Asia. "If we don't write the rules for global trade - guess what? China will," Mr Obama said. Some of his colleagues were less judicious. 

Earlier this year, John Kerry, the secretary of state, said TPP would create 650,000 new American jobs. His claim was demolished by economists. Even the deal's most ardent enthusiasts say it would only add 0.4 per cent to US gross domestic product over time - a nice bonus, to be sure, but hardly game-changing. 

Given the strident opposition of unions, Mr Obama showed courage in arguing for TPP. Last month, he made his case at the headquarters of Nike, the sports giant - a symbol of the multinational corporations that liberal Democrats revile. He resisted the temptation to promise TPP would create lots of new jobs. Instead, he focused on the higher quality ones that would result from opening economies such as Japan and Vietnam to stronger US services exports and protection of intellectual property rights. It was a nuanced case. Yet he could not resist claiming that TPP would boost "fairness and equity" right here in the US. It will do no such thing. Claiming trade deals make society fairer is like saying exercise will make you beautiful. When you discover the error, you are more likely to give it up. 

That, in a nutshell, is the trade off White Houses have been making - scraping through deals today on the basis of claims that make future deals harder to pull off. Mr Obama is no exception. If he had been more honest, he would have said trade deals are good for efficiency. There can be little doubt that Nafta, the Uruguay Round and China's accession to the WTO were good for the US economy as a whole. The same is true of the 2010 US free trade agreement with South Korea. But they were not good for every American. Far from it. Chinese imports have undercut US producers and obliterated jobs in large tracts of the US. Much of the damage occurred in districts represented by Democrats who now oppose virtually any trade initiative. The US has lost 6m jobs in the past fifteen years. Only 600,000 have returned since the recovery began in 2009. Yet US manufacturing exports are a lot higher than they were 15 years ago. Trade lifts productivity. That means fewer (though better paying) jobs. Efficiency and equity are very different things. 

Little wonder so much of America's middle class is sceptical of the next trade deal. They believe they are being sold a bill of goods. US presidents add insult to blue collar injury by throwing in a sop called Trade Adjustment Assistance - a fund that subsidises workers who have been laid off because of trade. The latest package amounted to $1.8bn over 10 years, which is barely enough to retrain a fraction of those who have been displaced. The TAA was set up by John F. Kennedy when he completed the Kennedy Round of world trade talks in 1962. Richard Nixon tried and failed to get rid of it. Economists have been trashing it ever since. 

Apart from its minute size, TAA is entirely arbitrary. What is so special about workers who have lost their jobs because of trade? Why not retrain those who have fallen victim to automation, illness or some other force? The package is both useless and provocative. Its existence invites antitrade rhetoric without offering any remedy. 

Then there is geopolitics. For decades, US presidents have offered countries preferential access to the US market in exchange for their diplomatic support. During the cold war, the Asian Tiger export boom was underwritten by a US that was fearful they could be the next dominoes to fall to communist insurgency. 

Ironically, Vietnam - the largest domino that fell - would today stand to benefit the most from TPP. Unlike the US, it suffers from high tariff barriers and gross domestic inefficiencies. It also borders China, which is not part of the TPP. At a time when Beijing is threatening its neighbours with annexation of contested atolls in the South China Sea, TPP would bind countries like Vietnam closer to the US. As Mr Obama has argued, the deal would be good for the US on diplomatic grounds. TPP would also be good for the US economy as a whole. But it would be of little help to the middle class. Only Washington can do that (by enacting a comprehensive retraining programme, for example). 

Promising all things to all people often succeeds in the short term. But it suffers from the law of diminishing returns. 

 

US trade plan dealt major blow 

The Daily Telegraph 

13 June 2015, 

BARACK OBAMA's hopes of an international trade deal were dealt a major blow last night after the House of Representatives rejected part of the President's proposal. 

In a dramatic vote, Mr Obama's own Democrats, as well as Republicans, rejected a programme to give aid to workers who lose their jobs as a result of US trade deals with 11 countries. The measure was soundly defeated in a 302-126 vote. 

That was quickly followed by the House's narrow approval of a separate measure to give Mr Obama "fast-track" authority to negotiate the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal. But the legislation is stuck in the House because of the defeat the President and House Speaker John Boehner suffered on the first vote. 

A House Republican aide told reporters Republican leaders hope to try to pass the worker aid portion of the bill on Tuesday. That would allow the entire trade promotion authority legislation to be signed into law by Mr Obama, but its chances were unclear. 

The AFL-CIO, the country's largest labour organisation, argued that funding for the worker aid programme, which runs out in September, would be insuffi-cient. 

White House spokesman Josh Earnest dismissed the failed vote as a "procedural snafu" and was confident Democrats would come around to support the measure. 

Trading partners such as Japan have urged the US Congress to pass fast-track to help wrap up a Pacific Rim trade deal covering 40pc of the world's economy. 

 

Leading Africa's infrastructure drive for economic development 

Pretoria News Weekend 

13 June 2015, 

Infrastructure is Africa's top priority. 

With low levels of intra-regional economic exchange and the smallest share of global trade, Africa is the least integrated continent in the world. 

Infrastructure inefficiencies are costing Africa billions of dollars annually and stunting growth. 

Bridging the gap in infrastructure is thus vital for economic advancement and sustainable development. However, this can only |be achieved through regional and continental co-operation and finding solutions. 

The Programme for Infrastructure Development in Africa (Pida), sponsored by the AU Commission, Nepad Agency, African Development Bank, UN Economic Commission for Africa and regional economic communities, is Africa's solution by building mutually beneficial infrastructure and strengthening the ability of countries to trade and establish regional value chains for increased competitiveness. 

In June last year, under the leadership of the President of Senegal and chairman of the Nepad Heads of State and Government Orientation Committee, His Excellency Macky Sall, the Dakar Financing Summit (DFS) for Africa's Infrastructure delivered a robust and upbeat declaration - the Dakar Agenda for Action (DAA) - which speaks to how the continent's public sector will partner together with the private sector and development players to ensure financing and investment for 16 key Pida regional infrastructure projects. 

The DAA outlines concrete actions and measures towards financing for Africa's infrastructure development. 

The private-sector stakeholders and the African policymakers also recognised that the lack of capacity and funds in project preparation combined with a weak involvement of the private sector were the main issues that constituted the bottlenecks to Pida implementation. 

As an outcome of the DFS, the Nepad Agency together with the Pida stakeholders has taken the lead in addressing these challenges by launching the Continental Business Network (CBN). 

The CBN is an exclusive infrastructure investment advisory platform for African leaders, providing thought leadership and engagement on a range of strategic issues like policy, investment risk rating(s), project structuring and the existing constraints to the implementation of the Pida projects. 

The network will comprise leading African and global business and finance bodies as well as regional and international organisations. 

 

China on FTA spree to rev up economy 

Esther Teo CHINA CORRESPONDENT IN BEIJING, 

The Straits Times 

13 June 2015, 

Beijing opens up market even at expense of some local industries 

CHINA is not only picking up the pace in negotiating free trade deals but also widening its scope under a new strategy that seeks to open up its market further amid a weakening economy. 

Just last week, China inked a free trade agreement (FTA) with South Korea, while another with Australia is expected to be signed within weeks after its basic terms were finalised late last year. 

Trade experts say that as Beijing is under pressure to rebalance its economy towards services, consumption and higher-value sectors, it is now more amenable to signing economically meaningful FTAs with large and advanced economies, even to the detriment of domestic interest groups. 

China joined the World Trade Organisation in 2001 and the early years saw Beijing conclude FTAs mainly with small or developing states that emphasised trade in goods, particularly tariff cuts. In recent years, it expanded the focus to include services, investment and government procurement, the experts noted. 

Former Australian trade negotiator Alan Oxley, who now runs trade consultancy ITS Global in Melbourne, said there has been a change in China's trade liberalisation policy. Since President Xi Jinping took office in 2012, he has opened China's market further, particularly in services, he added. 

Under its FTA with Australia, for instance, China will allow more Australian farm products into the country. But more significantly, Beijing will increase market access for Australia's service sector, including finance, healthcare and telecommunications. 

"Labour costs (in China) are rising and competitiveness will drop unless the service industries become more competitive. Opening up the (service) sector to global competition will achieve that, the same way cutting tariffs in the goods sector of most economies would," Mr Oxley said. 

China's dairy farmers are likely to be affected as all tariffs on Australian dairy products are set to be lifted in four to 11 years of the deal taking effect. 

Similarly, the FTA with South Korea broke new ground: It is the first inked by Beijing with separate chapters on electronic trade, finance and communications. 

A South Korean trade official was quoted by Yonhap news agency as saying that this shows China has "accepted and opened its market to international norms", although some experts say the deal falls short of other FTAs Seoul has inked, both in the items it covers and the speed of tariff cuts. 

China now has trade agreements with 11 countries and regional groupings, including Singapore and Asean, and is negotiating five more, according to the Commerce Ministry's website. 

Its ongoing talks involve a trilateral FTA with South Korea and Japan and another with the six 

Arab states of the Gulf Cooperation Council. 

It also hopes to conclude talks this year on the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership, a trade deal linking Asean with China, South Korea, Japan, India, Australia and New Zealand. 

But experts say there is still considerable scope for China to develop its FTAs if it so wishes. 

Dr Deborah Elms of the Asian Trade Centre said continuing developments in the Shanghai Free Trade Zone (FTZ) are key in assessing how serious Beijing is about opening its market to greater competition. "The FTZ was set up as a test bed for further liberalisation. But businesses have generally been very disappointed with the results," she said. 

"If the zone is intended to be a laboratory, much more will be needed before we can say with confidence that China is prepared to sign on to higher-quality, higher-standard agreements." 

Ongoing negotiations with the United States on a bilateral investment treaty - a radical shift in the way China handles inward investment as all sectors will be open to US investment under the treaty except those explicitly listed - will also signal the way forward for Beijing, Dr Elms said. 

But apart from economic considerations, experts say China's fervour for FTAs is also likely aimed at gaining greater influence in the Asia-Pacific region. 

Senior policy analyst Nargiza Salidjanova noted in a recent US congressional report that even as opposition to China's aggressive security posture rises across Asia, US treaty allies like Japan, South Korea and Australia increasingly depend on economic ties with China for their own growth. 

"China has used this material dependence to its advantage while resorting increasingly to a 'divide and conquer' strategy to pit different countries against one another," Ms Salidjanova said. 

"China's apparent reformist agenda may also turn out to be a Trojan horse strategy to enter and then derail US-led trade initiatives in the Asia-Pacific."

 

 

US agency intends to regulate emissions by airliners 

Manila Bulletin 

13 June 2015, 

Washington- The Obama administration proposed to regulate U.S. aircraft emissions in much the same way as power plants, saying they are a threat to human health because they contain pollutants that help cause global warming. 

Using its authority under The Clean Air Act, the Environmental Protection Agency finding of endangerment to human health clears the way for possible U.S. adoption of international emissions standards. 

The International Civil Aviation Organization, or ICAO, a U.N. agency, has been working for several years on developing global aircraft emissions standards for the first time. Final agreement on those standards is expected in February of next year. 

US regulations would apply only to large planes like airliners and cargo jets and turboprop aircraft, and not to smaller jet aircraft, piston-engine planes, helicopters or military aircraft. 

While negotiations on the standards are still underway, they aren't expected to go into effect until 2020 or afterward, and possibly as late as 2025, say environmentalists following the matter. 

The ICAO standards are also not expected to apply to airliners in service today or those that might be purchased before the effective date, said Vera Pardee, an attorney with the Center for Biological Diversity. The center is one of several environmental groups that sued the EPA to force the agency to issue its finding that emissions endanger public health. 

Airlines typically fly planes for 20 years or more before replacing them. That means it's likely to be decades before planes that meet the anticipated global standards are in widespread use. 

Airline emissions account for about 2 percent of total annual global greenhouse gas emissions. That sounds small, but it's nearly as much as the emissions produced by Germany, the sixth-greatest greenhouse gas producing country, according to a study released last year by The International Council on Clean Transportation, an environmental group with offices in the U.S. and Germany. 

Aircraft manufacturers have already made significant strides in increasing fuel efficiency. Since the early years of the jet age in the 1960s, the fuel efficiency of airliners has increased 70 percent, according to Boeing. There's plenty of incentive to be as efficient as possible: Fuel typically vies with labor as airlines' greatest expense. 

The U.S. airline industry has a set a target of an average annual improvement in fuel efficiency of 1.5 percent, and so far has been successful in meeting that goal, said Nancy Young, vice president for environmental affairs at Airlines for America, trade association for major carriers. 

Alaska, Frontier and Spirit airlines were tied for most fuel-efficient U.S. airlines, the study found. The least fuel efficient was American, which operates a fleet of MD-80 airliners, an older design that is being phased out. 

Changes in the operating strategies of airlines in recent years have also contributed to greater efficiency. Airlines are packing more people into fewer flights. 

However, global aviation emissions are rising because there is more air travel overall. US airlines, which include several of the world's largest carriers, account for about 29 percent of global airline carbon emissions if both domestic and international flights are included. 

The world's two largest aircraft makers have recently introduced into service more fuel-efficient planes designed for long-distance international routes - the Boeing 787 and the Airbus A350. 

Airlines, aircraft makers and the Federal Aviation Administration have also been working with biofuels companies to develop alternatives to jet fuel that could potentially reduce the aviation's industry's vulnerability to the ups and downs of oil supplies and prices, as well as reduce carbon emissions. 

 

Talks to begin on a Pan-African free trade zone

Today online

Published: 11:33 AM, June 13, 2015

JOHANNESBURG — Trade within Africa has long faced many barriers, from the physical to nonphysical: Bad roads, air routes that still favour old colonial ties to Europe, corruption and poor governance. Even as African economies have grown in the last decade, trade between African nations has lagged behind their exchanges with the rest of the world.

But African leaders meeting here this weekend are expected to start negotiations on an ambitious plan to create a continent wide free-trade zone that, perhaps years or decades from now, could foster closer economic and political ties between dozens of nations.

The negotiations, which will take place during an African Union summit meeting here, come days after officials from 26 African countries signed an agreement to create the continent's largest free-trade zone, covering a region of more than 626 million people and a total gross domestic product of US$1.2 trillion (S$1.61 trillion).

The new trading zone will more closely link the powerful economies of eastern and southern Africa, including South Africa, Egypt and Kenya.

The agreement, which was signed in Egypt on Wednesday (June 10) and is called the Tripartite Free Trade Area, will reduce tariffs and link together three existing regional trade groups of African nations. But it fell short of its original goal of combining the three zones into a single one.

"What we are doing today represents a very important step in the history of the regional integration of Africa," President Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi of Egypt was quoted as saying at the meeting in Egypt.

The agreement still needs to be ratified by each country in the relevant areas, but it gave momentum to talks for an even bigger goal: To create a Pan-African trading zone that would encompass the continent, a dream in Africa ever since most nations achieved independence more than half a century ago.

The African Union says it will establish the zone, called the Continental Free Trade Area, by 2017 as a way to create long-term growth, investment and jobs.

"There's been talk about the continental free trade agreement for many, many years, but it's been more like a shibboleth that shows you're committed to regional integration on the continent," said Mr Christopher Wood, an expert on economic diplomacy at the South African Institute of International Affairs.

"It seems like that's changing now," he added. "The African Union has established negotiating principles and some outcomes and a rough timeline that seems like the continental free-trade agreement is going to move from a vision to an actual plan."

 

«L'industrie des crevettes exploite des enfants» 

La Tribune de Genève 

13 June 2015, 

En Thaïlande, l'industrie des crevettes fait massivement travailler des enfants, dénonce Terre des hommes. «Dix heures par jour, six jours par semaine, des petites mains décortiquent des crevettes qui atterrissent dans les assiettes des consommateurs européens», s'indigne l'organisation humanitaire. A l'occasion de la Journée mondiale contre le travail des enfants, le 12 juin, l'ONG a appelé les gouvernements suisse et européens à user de leur influence pour que les autorités thaïlandaises instaurent des mesures de protection des mineurs. 

Selon le rapport de Terre des hommes, la plupart de ces milliers d'enfants sont des migrants sans papiers, originaires de Birmanie pour la majorité d'entre eux. Ils travaillent dans des conditions qui les empêchent de suivre une scolarité. Ces jeunes sont ainsi privés de la perspective de voir un jour leurs conditions de vie s'améliorer. «Je veux devenir médecin, mais ce ne sera pas possible parce que je dois bientôt commencer à travailler», a notamment confié aux auteurs du rapport un garçon de 11 ans. 

Main-d'œuvre bon marché 

Pour l'ONG, «le commerce des crevettes illustre parfaitement la course effrénée de l'économie globalisée qui recherche à tout prix une production bon marché là où le coût de la main-d'œuvre est moindre, sans tenir compte des conséquences sociales et écologiques engendrées». Cette branche a en effet déjà été pointée du doigt dans le passé. L'année dernière, une enquête fouillée du journal britannique The Guardian avait notamment montré que des migrants en état d'esclavage étaient utilisés à large échelle dans l'industrie thaïlandaise des crevettes. 

«Il est primordial d'obtenir le soutien des gouvernements nationaux dans la lutte contre le travail des enfants, explique Ignacio Packer, secrétaire général de Terre des hommes – Fédération internationale. La protection sociale doit être reconnue comme un droit. Les enfants du monde entier, comme ceux de l'industrie des crevettes, ne devraient pas être forcés à renoncer à leur enfance pour travailler. » 

168 millions selon l'OIT 

Dans le monde, ce sont au total 168 millions d'enfants qui travaillent, selon les chiffres d'une étude de l'Organisation internationale du travail (OIT) publiée vendredi à Genève. Si leur nombre est en baisse cette année, «nous n'avons rien à célébrer. Chaque enfant compte», a affirmé hier à Genève l'Indien Kailash Satyarthi, colauréat du Prix Nobel de la paix 2014. 

Le rapport de l'OIT dénonce que le travail des enfants présente des risques immédiats pour leur santé, leur sécurité et leur développement. Mais il relève également que les jeunes qui ont travaillé pendant leur enfance au lieu d'aller à l'école sont condamnés à des emplois précaires et faiblement rémunérés. 

Terre des hommes réclame des mesures à l'occasion de la Journée mondiale contre le travail des enfants 

 

 END


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.