Headlines:

Divisions over how to revive TPP
TPP negotiations must resume promptly to keep talks on course
Stalled TPP should pivot away from geopolitical gamesmanship
U.S. News: Election Cycles Cloud Future of Trade Talks
Brics nations offer the world a taste of genuine economic partnership
OMC : les négociations pour la relance du cycle de Doha toujours grippées
Etiquetado de alimentos: Señal de alerta en la OMC

 

Details:

Divisions over how to revive TPP

Greg Earl, John Kehoe and Misa Han 

3 August 2015

The Australian Financial Review

Pacific trade ministers and business are increasingly split over how to push ahead on a pace-setting regional trade agreement after the failure of talks to close the deal on the weekend amid divisions over dairy industry liberalisation, car component export rules and patent protection for a new generation of drugs.

Japan has called for a new meeting this month, saying any progress would be difficult after that but New Zealand Trade Minister Tim Groser said an agreement was still possible in a year.

Meanwhile the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry (ACCI) said the negotiators had to get back to the table as quickly as possible, but the Australian Industry Group (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"AIG) said the deal should not be rushed to meet political deadlines because it would have a long-lasting effect on business.

Trade Minister Andrew Robb said an agreement could still be achieved after progress on several difficult issues last week but is understood to be concerned that a Canadian election due to be called this week and the attention switch in the US towards next year's presidential election would retard new negotiations.

The 12 members of the US-led Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) group failed to conclude five years of talks on a 21st century trade deal as planned in Hawaii potentially undermining the US pivot to Asia, and shifting attention to whether China will now step up a push for two alternate regional trading zones.

The impasse is now likely to heighten domestic attention on the union campaign against the China-Australia trade agreement, which is more immediate and will have a larger effect for many businesses in Australia than the TPP. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"National Farmers' Federation deputy chief executive Tony Mahar said: "We're keen to get the China free trade agreement ratified and implemented as soon as possible. Given that one has been signed, that's our focus."

The different reaction from two of Australia's top business groups reflects business uncertainty about how best to push for freer trade after the decline of the once-favoured approach of multilateral liberalisation and also the shifting focus of trade talks from tariffs towards new areas including services and regulation.

ACCI chief executive Kate Carnell, who represents numerous services industries, said: "We're feeling disappointed. It shows you how incredibly difficult these multi-party agreements are and why I suppose bilateral agreements have become the order of the day.

"From an Australian perspective, this is tragic. This was a large amount of money to any number of Australian sectors."

But AIG chief executive Innes Willox, who represents many manufacturers, said: "This agreement has been years in the making so taking extra time to get it right is crucial.

"Trade deals should not be rushed to meet political objectives because their impact can last decades. Industry wants a balanced and comprehensive agreement so the extra time should be used to ensure this happens."

The new stumbling block that helped sink the talks was a row over what components could be included in cars, which would have preferential tariffs under the proposed TPP zone.

Japan, a major carmaker, which was under pressure to make concessions on more farm imports, wanted to include components from Thailand that is part of the integrated supply chain for companies such as HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Toyota. But Mexico, the world's fourth largest car exporter, which already has preferential access to the US market, and Canada did not accept non-TPP parts being brought into the group.

Officials say Australia is well positioned to see strong gains across agriculture broadly because it has relatively low tariffs in place already and can expect to get major tariff reductions into other markets.

Nationals Senator Mat Canavan said Mr Robb had done a good job so far but warned he was not prepared to support a TPP that did not provide substantially better access to the US market and that had not been achieved yet.

The pressure on Australia to make concessions to the US in areas - such as sugar imports, patent terms for drugs and carve-outs from investor protection clauses - was underlined by a report in US Trade magazine that Mr Obama called Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Tony Abbott during the ministerial meeting. A government spokesman would not comment on any call.

Fairfax Media Management Pty Limited

TPP negotiations must resume promptly to keep talks on course

By Editorial Desk in Tokyo/The Yomiuri Shimbun/03 August 2015

3 August 2015

ANN Asia News Network

Tokyo (The Yomiuri Shimbun/ANN) - The ministerial meeting of the countries negotiating the Trans-Pacific Partnership framework ended Friday without reaching a broad agreement.

In a joint statement, the 12 participating countries emphasised that ¿we are more confident than ever that TPP is within reach," indicating that they would continue the negotiations.

It is extremely regrettable that the negotiations, which the ministers anticipated would culminate in a broad accord, ended in failure.

Akira Amari, state minister in charge of TPP negotiations, told reporters that he understands the ministers share the view that another ministerial meeting should be held by the end of this month. But no date has been set for such a meeting.

As things stand now, the ambitious vision of creating a huge free trade zone in the Asia-Pacific region may drift off course.

The 12 countries must understand the urgency of the situation and resume talks quickly.

In the latest talks, progress was made on many issues, including tariff cuts and investment rules. The countries have definitely come fairly close to reaching a broad accord.

However, the countries concerned failed to settle specific issues.

The negotiations became tangled, in particular, over the length of data protection to be granted to companies that develop pharmaceuticals and hold patents on them.

The United States, home to many leading pharmaceutical companies, initially called for 12 years, while Australia and New Zealand, both of which want to use generic drugs as early as possible, called for five years or fewer. Splitting the difference, Japan proposed eight years, but the countries failed to come to terms.

Last-minute hard-line stance

A miscalculation developed as New Zealand demanded that Japan, the United States and Canada expand their import quota for its dairy products by a large margin, on condition that it makes a concession on drug patents.

Other countries tried to talk New Zealand into dropping this excessive demand, but it did not relax its hard-line stance. There is no denying that this weakened the momentum for last-minute compromises in drug patents and other areas.

New Zealand cannot escape the impression that it attempted to bring the issue to a conclusion favorable to that country by shifting to a hard-line stance just when the momentum for reaching a broad accord was building up.

In negotiations such as these that intricately involve the interests of many countries, it is vital for each country to display a spirit of compromise from a broad perspective, rather than pressing ahead with unilateral demands.

Despite the latest failure in reaching an accord, it would be best to avoid increased distrust among countries participating in the talks. It is necessary for the countries centering around Japan and the United States, which are leading the negotiations, to continue having level-headed, constructive talks.

There is no telling, however, how the talks will unfold, particularly when taking into account the political schedules of participating countries.

In Canada, a general election is scheduled for October, while in the United States, presidential primaries will start in January next year. In Japan, a House of Councillors election is slated for next summer.

The longer the negotiations take, the more difficult it will be for countries to make compromises on such issues as the opening of markets.

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"ASIA NEWS NETWORK

Stalled TPP should pivot away from geopolitical gamesmanship

Chen Weihua 

3 August 2015

China Daily-US Edition

The failure of the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) talks to reach a final deal last Friday in Maui, Hawaii, contrasted sharply with the optimistic mood in Washington early in the week among some officials and pundits that the largest US trade pact since the North America Free Trade Agreement (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"NAFTA) will be sealed.

The confident mood resulted partly from the victory won by the Obama administration in getting the Trade Promotion Authority (TPA), or fast-track authority in trade negotiations, from the Congress, in June, mostly against Obama's own party and core supporters, such as trade unions, Senate Democratic Leader Harry Reid and House Minority Leader HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Nancy Pelosi.

However, it turned out last Friday that several countries of the 12 Pacific Rim nations negotiating the TPP were not yet ready to compromise on thorny issues such as autos, dairy, sugar and the monopoly period for next-generation drugs.

Though trade ministers are supposed to meet again sometime in August, the earlier optimism has been greatly dampened.

Asked on Sunday if a deal is possible before next year's US elections, New Zealand Trade Minister Tim Groser told New Zealand media: "Who knows?"

While it is one thing how the countries involved are willing to make key concessions on the key issues, it is another for the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"US Congress to approve such a deal when the 2016 presidential race goes into full swing later this year. On Thursday, the Republican candidates will hold the first debate in the primary.

Failing to conclude the TPP would deny Obama a key legacy that he hopes to leave behind after his eight-year presidency. It will also deal a heavy blow to his US rebalance, or pivot, to Asia policy that has been criticized by many for its heavy military component.

Many US pundits have declared that without the TPP, the rebalance will no longer exist.

The US rebalance policy launched by Obama, including the military relocation, the TPP and the strategy of rallying allies, has been met with deep suspicion in China as a strategy to contain China and "looks like an attempt to cut China out of the Asian supply chains", as Nobel economist Joseph Stiglitz said of the TPP.

Such negative Chinese feeling of US geopolitical gamesmanship was reinforced when Obama, in a desperate attempt to sell the TPP to the American public, repeatedly declared: "If we don't write the rules, China will write the rules out in that region."

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Nicholas Lardy, a senior fellow at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Peterson Institute for International Economics and an expert on the Chinese economy, said earlier that it would be good for China to join the TPP negotiations because it would be the first time China truly participated in shaping global rules.

For many Chinese, it is not acceptable for the US president to say that China - with a fifth of humanity, now the world's largest trading nation and the second-largest economy, or the largest already according to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"IMF - is excluded from shaping global trade rules, or any rules of global governance.

Quoting estimates by economists, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Jeffrey Bader and David Dollar, two senior fellows and China experts at the John L. Thornton China Center at the Brookings, wrote in a July 28 article that the potential gains from the TPP are huge for the US, Japan, Vietnam and other countries. They said the long-term effects of the TPP would depend on how other countries in the Asia-Pacific region react to it, and China is the biggest loser from the current version of the TPP, with the loss accounting for a tiny 0.2 percent of China's economy. But they noted China's losses from being left out will rise if more developing countries such as India, Indonesia and Thailand join.

The two believe most of the current TPP countries hope that China is eventually attracted to join. "The benefits of any deep liberalization agreement that includes China will be many times greater than agreements without China," they wrote.

Chinese views of the TPP have been evolving in the past years among some officials and experts, with some believing that joining the TPP will help push along some difficult economic reform agendas at home, just as former Chinese Premier Zhu Rongji did with China's accession to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization in 2001.

But some Chinese experts argue that China will be in a disadvantageous situation if it joined now under the current TPP provisions.

The Chinese government has openly welcomed participation by the US and Japan in both the AIIB and One Belt One Road and the US could reciprocate by extending a welcoming hand to China for the TPP, starting with Obama stopping the negative rhetoric of how the "US, not China, should write trade rules."

None of this should become a geopolitical game.

China Daily Information Company

U.S. News: Election Cycles Cloud Future of Trade Talks

By William Mauldin and Paul Vieira 

3 August 2015

The Wall Street Journal

The U.S. and 11 other Pacific nations trying to hammer out a sweeping trade agreement notched progress in high-level talks in Hawaii but now face a renewed mix of thorny issues complicated by election seasons in the U.S. and Canada.

A snowballing dairy fight threatened to derail the deal last week as top ministers also grappled with an economically larger issue on how automobiles can be produced and traded within the proposed trade bloc. That disagreement pits Japan against the countries of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"North American Free Trade Agreement.

In the U.S., current and former officials concede that it is now unlikely the TPP can be completed and voted on in Congress this year as the Obama administration hoped, before the peak of a presidential campaign that is already highlighting objections to the deal from unions, environmental groups and some conservatives.

Meanwhile, Canada, the third-largest economy in the group after the U.S. and Japan, embarked on an 11-week election season Sunday that could make it hard for Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Stephen Harper's government to agree on opening up the country's protected dairy markets to more imports from the U.S. and New Zealand. Ministers' inability to clinch a deal in Hawaii means the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Canadian government takes on a high-stakes balancing act and the country's dairy farmers will face more uncertainty about their fate under the Pacific deal, called the Trans-Pacific Partnership, or TPP.

"The fact that they didn't get anything done this week is a big problem for everybody," said HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Wally Smith, president of the Dairy Farmers of Canada, before flying out of the Hawaiian island of Maui late Saturday.

Officials reported significant progress toward a deal and said they closed the gap on environmental rules aimed at leveling the playing field for Vietnam and other developing economies in the bloc and also narrowed outstanding differences on a range of issues such as investment rules.

"The issues are not intractable and there remains a real determination to conclude the TPP among all parties," said Australia's minister for trade and investment, Andrew Robb.

Still, the continuing auto and dairy disputes prevented the trade ministers from coming to an understanding on the most divisive issues in the TPP, including labor standards and how long name-brand biologic drugs would be protected against generic imitators.

The cars fight pits the countries that signed Nafta more than two decades ago -- the U.S., Canada and Mexico -- against Japan, whose car industry uses a broad supply chain, sourcing parts from Thailand and other countries not involved in the TPP talks. The Nafta rules require that cars have over three-fifths of their content originating in North America in order to cross the borders duty free. But Japan's auto makers want to be able to source a greater proportion of parts outside the TPP.

Mexico, which is emerging as a global automotive leader, will continue to fight for its interests on automobiles, said Ildefonso Guajardo, Mexico's economy minister, at the closing news conference on Maui.

In the dairy dispute, officials involved in the talks said they're exploring ways to persuade Japan and Canada, which have high barriers protecting their dairy farmers, to accept more of particular milk products from New Zealand, where dairy is the main export and political priority, and the U.S., which is a rising dairy exporter with its own barriers at the border.

Japan has recently faced shortages of butter, creating an opening for officials from other countries to negotiate more shipments, while the U.S. is in a good position to move liquid milk to Canada's population just north of the border.

Participants in the talks expect to meet again in late August or September, but no time or place has been set.

The timing of any deal may well depend on the political winds in Canada, where Mr. Harper dissolved the parliament Sunday and kicked off a campaign.

Dow Jones & Company, Inc.

Brics nations offer the world a taste of genuine economic partnership

3 August 2015

The Daily Telegraph

The seventh Brics Summit just held in Ufa, Russia, marked a major milestone in partnership. Leaders discussed issues of common interest internationally, as well as key priorities to further strengthen and broaden intra-Brics co-operation. They decided to enhance Brics' strategic partnership on the basis of openness, solidarity, equality and mutual understanding, inclusiveness and mutually beneficial co-operation.

Two major economic projects agreed at the previous summit in Fortaleza, Brazil, the New Development Bank and the Contingent Reserves Arrangement, came to fruition after a year of work by experts and talks between our governments.

Among other things, the new bank will fund infrastructure in the developing world, as well as sustainable development projects. The leaders stated that the global recovery was continuing, albeit that growth remained fragile with considerable divergences across countries and regions. If anything, the past year's economic developments only contributed to the sense of urgency in implementing these undertakings.

Brics' co-operation reflected an objective need for co-ordination between new emerging centres of economic growth in a fast-changing world. As always, it is left to national governments to carry out sober analysis and make decisions to bridge the gap between global governance, that often lags behind, and the situation "on the ground". Our efforts complement our commitment to our G20 partners, and we will be working closely with the forthcoming presidency of China in that forum.

As the Ufa Declaration reaffirms, we are strongly committed to working closely in the G20, which is viewed as the premier forum of international financial and economic co-operation. What is of concern, however, is lack of action on further reform of the Bretton-Woods institutions, despite decisions made five years ago to adapt them.

Given the experience of Europe, Africa, Latin America and other regions, we have been steadily enhancing our co-operation. The leaders adopted the Strategy for Brics Economic Partnerships as a key summit outcome, intended to co-ordinate our collaborations in various fields. These include finance, economy and innovation, science and technology, fiscal and social policies, statistics, agriculture, health, emergencies management, education and culture.

This reflects the comprehensive nature of ongoing change in the world.

The above gives a broad overview of what Brics' co-operation constitutes.

In response to outside speculation regarding Brics, we wish to clarify that our forum is not aimed against any parties, but rather stands for win-win co-operation through joint action. It is part of the overall networked diplomacy of each of our nations. Our co-operation is based on the principles of the United Nations, including sovereign equality. No one dictates to anyone or imposes their will, and decision-making is based on consensus. That is why we truly believe that our partnership, representing 43pc of the world population and almost 30pc of global GDP, provides a sustainable model of international co-operation. We strongly support the central role of the United Nations in world affairs and the rule of international law.

Another important area of cooperation is in addressing new challenges to our security, such as terrorism, drug trafficking, new infectious diseases, climate change and many others. They are transnational and can be effectively dealt with only through genuine international efforts at global and regional levels. While co-operating between ourselves, we are open to engagement with other partners on issues of mutual concern. In Ufa, such outreach was extended to the members of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Eurasian Economic Union and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Shanghai Co-operation Organization. It may be recalled this was also pursued in 2013, first with HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"African Union members and last year with the South American Nations.

We are convinced our co-operation serves a broader interest of international community by enhancing the global common space in pursuit of peace, security, stability, development and co-operation for all.

Roberto Jaguaribe, Ambassador of Brazil to the UK; Liu Xiaoming, Ambassador of the People's Republic of China to the UK; Ranjan Mathai, Indian High Commissioner to the UK; Alexander Yakovenko, Russian Ambassador to the UK; Obed Mlaba, South African High Commissioner to the UK

'We wish to clarify that our forum is not aimed against any parties, but stands for win-win co-operation'

Telegraph Media Group Ltd. 

OMC : les négociations pour la relance du cycle de Doha toujours grippées

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Richard Hiault

3 August 2015

Les Echos

Le plan de travail est toujours dans les limbes.

La conférence ministérielle de Nairobi s'annonce ardue.

Le directeur général de l'Organisation mondiale du Commerce (OMC), le brésilien Roberto Azevêdo, l'avait lui-même reconnu mardi dernier avant l'échéance du 31 juillet. A ses yeux, il était improbable que le cadre de travail précis qui devait être élaboré pour relancer une énième fois le cycle de développement de Doha soit effectivement prêt. Comme tout directeur général, il s'est montré cependant confiant sur le fait que les négociations continueront dans les prochains mois et qu'elles porteront leurs fruits d'ici à la dixième conférence des ministres du Commerce, qui se tient à Nairobi, en décembre prochain. A voir.

Les 162 pays membres risquent bel et bien de se présenter les mains vides. Car, sans programme de travail clair et réaliste, cette réunion au sommet court au fiasco, entend-on dans les couloirs de l'Organisation. Pire : pour les plus pessimistes, un tel revers marquerait l'arrêt de mort du cycle de développement de Doha, officiellement lancé en 2001 sans jamais voir le jour. Les questions agricoles et les politiques de subventions des différents Etats continuent de bloquer la situation et empêchent tout accord. C'est ce qu'a de nouveau révélé une réunion, le 22 juillet dernier, du comité sur l'agriculture de l'OMC. Le lendemain, une autre réunion, consacrée cette fois-ci à l'accès aux marchés des produits non agricoles a également révélé la persistance de divergence des Etats membres. « Nous sommes loin d'une convergence de vues. Nous sommes même loin d'un état d'esprit de négociation », avait lancé un proche du dossier. Pourquoi ? Parce que les pays en développement, mécontents de la situation actuelle sur les marchés agricoles, ne sont pas prêts à la moindre négociation sur les autres chapitres. « Si nous n'avons pas de document de travail à temps, la probabilité d'un succès à Nairobi sera bien faible », témoigne un officiel de l'OMC. Comme l'a reconnu récemment la partie américaine, « il n'y a pas actuellement de véritables négociations sur le cycle de Doha. Parce que, depuis 2001, le monde a profondément évolué », témoignait un proche du dossier. A cela s'ajoute une certaine suspicion américaine sur la réalité des chiffres avancés par les autorités chinoises sur l'ampleur de leurs subventions agricoles. Dans un tel contexte, il est difficile de prédire un vaste accord général dans six mois.

Accord sur les produits high-tech

La communauté internationale se dirige plutôt vers une politique des petits pas. A Bali, en 2013, les membres de l'OMC avaient conclu l'accord sur la facilitation des échanges, dont la mise en oeuvre dépend maintenant de la ratification par les différents parlements. Vendredi 24 juillet, à l'OMC, un autre accord portant sur l'élimination des droits de douane sur quelque 200 produits de haute technologie, à l'instar des GPS, appareils IRM et autres écrans tactiles, a été conclu. Le commerce de ces produits est évalué à 1.300 milliards de dollars, ce qui les place devant le secteur automobile, a indiqué Roberto Azevêdo. Si le texte a été négocié par 54 membres de l'OMC, dont l'Union européenne et les Etats-Unis, principaux exportateurs de ces produits, l'ensemble des membres de l'OMC en « bénéficieront », « car les participants (aux négociations) supprimeront les droits de douane visant les importations de ces produits, quel que soit le membre dont ils sont originaires », a expliqué l'Organisation. C'est toujours ça de gagné.

Les Echos

Etiquetado de alimentos: Señal de alerta en la OMC

1 August 2015

La Tercera

LA NUEVA ley de etiquetados de alimentos, cuyo reglamento fue publicado a fines de junio en el Diario Oficial -y que entrará a regir en 2016-, ha generado inquietud en varios socios comerciales de Chile. En la última revisión de políticas comerciales en la OMC, en mayo de este año, Canadá, EE.UU. y México presentaron ante el Comité de Obstáculos Técnicos de dicha organización reclamos por la nueva norma, que coloca a Chile entre los países más estrictos en esta materia.

A esas presentaciones se suman las consultas realizadas por otros 12 países y los reparos expresados por más de 30 naciones desde que comenzó el proceso de elaboración del reglamento en enero de 2013, y que sufrió varios cambios hasta su reciente promulgación.

Si bien el gobierno insiste en que el reglamento aprobado recoge las observaciones que hicieron otros países ante la OMC, el tema no está cerrado, lo que obliga al país a ser especialmente cuidadoso, por el curso que podrían tomar los acontecimientos. En caso de que los reclamos sean presentados formalmente, se creará una comisión que revisará la legislación. Si el reclamo de los países escala y termina en eventuales sanciones, inevitablemente la positiva imagen de Chile como país respetuoso de las normas internacionales se verá dañada y deberá enfrentar un bochorno en un área donde solía exhibir un prestigio indiscutible. Ante esto, el gobierno debe actuar con responsabilidad y no puede ni debe arriesgarse a perder esa reputación de seriedad, lo que hace indispensable revisar la normativa que se pretende aplicar en materia de alimentos.

Empresa Periodistica La Tercera S.A.

END 

 

 

cid:image001.png@01CC55E4.A4F90770

 

Josep Bosch, Information Officer

Information and External Relations Division

+41227395681

 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.
