India to go slow on agricultural talks as US seeks tariff cuts
Philippines reports on Thailand’s compliance to WTO cigarette tax ruling
WTO prodded on key trade issues
Ireland says second major tobacco firm threatens legal action
Lao PDR Customs and Trade Facilitation Project - Additional Financing
FTAs provide plentiful opportunities for agriculture
ASEAN set to declare a unified common market
Comercio cayó 12% en la mayor zona franca del continente situada en Panamá
Africa Economy: Ethiopia to host int'l conference on sustainable dev't
JAPON: 9ème round des négociations de libre-échange
'Protectionist' French law alarms investors

India to go slow on agricultural talks as US seeks tariff cuts
 The Times of India, By Dilasha Seth, 22 février 2015, NEW DELHI: India is likely to go slow on agricultural talks with the US after Washington sought greater market access through tariff cuts for its apples, almonds, walnuts and whiskey. The import duties for these items are at the ceiling level, bound by India at the World Trade Organization.
The video conference of the agriculture joint working group has been put on hold for the time being with India having very little to seek besides market access for grapes, which is a non-tariff issue.
There have been two video conference meetings for intellectual property rights and 'investment in manufacturing' last month before the visit of US President Barack Obama.
"We are still evaluating if there should be a third video conferencing or not. On the agri side, there's hardly anything we are seeking besides grapes. They, on the other hand, want tariff reduction on many items, which cannot be sorted out via bilateral video conferencing as import duties are not US-specific," said a government official.
All these items have a ceiling duty, with walnuts at 100 per cent, fresh apples 50 per cent, and whiskey 150 per cent. Almonds have a specific duty of Rs 100 per kg. These duties make American agricultural products uncompetitive in the market.
Of the $13.8 million worth of apple imports by India in 2013-14, only $0.05 million came from the US. A mere $0.14 million worth of almonds were imported from the US. India and the US formed three working groups during the trade policy forum (TPF) in November --IPR, investment in manufacturing and agriculture.
US assistant secretary of commerce Holly Vineyard is expected to visit New Delhi to discuss bilateral issues sometime in March. "They have not mentioned the level to which they wolike a reduction, but have asked for a reduction in a gradual manner," he said.
Besides tariff reduction, US has also raised certain non-tariff issues, seeking market access for poultry and pork. The two countries have already been battling out the poultry ban imposed by India in 2007 at the WTO. The multilateral organization in its October order had asked India to lift the ban on account of avian influenza, calling it 'unscientific' and non-compliant with WTO rules, which New Delhi has appealed against. Besides, India does not allow pork or meat fed with meat, blood or bones.
India has been seeking withdrawal of non-tariff barriers for grapes as US can become a big market for India as it exports at a different time than the top grapes exporters such as Chile and South Africa. "Potentially US can become a very big market for us as we have a natural advantage of producing grapes when others are not," he said.
India had has put in place all necessary sanitary and phytosanitary measures to ensure that quality of grapes match standards sought by US authorities. Currently, EU is India's biggest market for grapes.

Philippines reports on Thailand’s compliance to WTO cigarette tax ruling
 The Philippine Star, By Louella Desiderio , 22 février 2015, MANILA, Philippines – The Philippines will provide a report on the status of Thailand’s compliance to a World Trade Organization (WTO) ruling on a cigarette tax case this week.
In a notice posted on its website, the WTO said the Philippines would give a statement on Thailand’s customs and fiscal measures on cigarette imports from the Philippine during the meeting of the agency’s Dispute Settlement Body (DSB) on Monday.
The Trade department said earlier the Philippine government is giving Thailand time to address outstanding issues on its compliance to the WTO decision amid a change in the political leadership last year.
Thai army chief Prayuth Chan-Ocha who took control of the country in a coup that toppled the government of Yingluck Shinawatra, was named prime minister by the legislature in August last year.
Among the outstanding issues is Thailand’s compliance to the WTO ruling particularly is the decision of the Thai attorney general to prosecute an importer of Philippine cigarettes and several of its employees for alleged under declaration of customs values from 2003 to 2007.
The Philippine government is asking its Thai counterparts to provide information on the matter to determine whether the customs transactions covered by the WTO ruling are also part of the case Thailand wants to prosecute.
Trade Assistant secretary Ceferino Rodolfo said earlier that as the government waits for Thailand’s action on the outstanding issues, it would also want to ensure that Philippine export interests are not affected and gains from the WTO ruling continue to benefit exporters.
In 2011, the WTO issued a decision ordering Thailand to put in place reforms on customs valuations and taxes.
This, as Thailand’s imposition of higher duties on cigarette imports from the Philippines was in violation of global trading rules.
The WTO ruling was issued for a case filed by the Philippines, on behalf of Philip Morris Philippines, against Thailand for the imposition of higher duties on its cigarette exports.
As outstanding issues remain, the Philippines has two options: to continue surveillance in the DSB or to go to formal proceedings for dispute settlement.

WTO prodded on key trade issues
Manila Bulletin , 22 février 2015,
The Philippines prodded the World Trade Organization (WTO) to deliver concrete outcomes this year, which likewise marks the 20th anniversary of the WTO and the 10th Ministerial Conference (MC10) later this year in Nairobi, Kenya.
Philippine Permanent Representative to the WTO Ambassador Esteban Conejo, Jr., made the declaration during the first meeting of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) Geneva Caucus (AGC) at the Centre William Rappard.
The Philippines takes over the chairmanship of the AGC in 2015 following China's successful chairmanship.
According to Ambassador Conejos, particular attention will be placed on the ratification of the Trade Facilitation Agreement, the formulation of a post-Bali work program and a permanent solution on public stockholding for food security purposes.
In his presentation, Cornejos reiterated the main objectives of the AGC, which are to draft and endorse the statement on supporting the multilateral trading system for the Ministers Responsible for Trade (MRT) meeting in Boracay from May 23 to 24 and draft and endorse the statement on supporting the multilateral trading system for the APEC 2015 Ministerial Meeting and the APEC 2015 Economic Leaders' Meeting in November 2015.
He noted that the statements will highlight that the WTO is "back on track."
Meanwhile, Foreign Affairs Undersecretary for International Economic Relations and APEC 2015 SOM Chair Laura Q. Del Rosario presented an overview of APEC 2015, themed “Building Inclusive Economies, Building a Better World,” and made significant linkages between APEC and the work of the WTO, saying that “the multilateral trading system is the heart of APEC.”
In attendance were Permanent Representatives and other Geneva-based officers of the 21 APEC member economies.

Ireland says second major tobacco firm threatens legal action
 Reuters News , 21 février 2015 22:34 CASTLEBAR, Ireland, Feb 21 (Reuters) - Ireland said a second major cigarette manufacturer, Imperial Tobacco Group, has threatened legal action against the government over plans for a law requiring them to sell cigarettes in plain packets.
Ireland said in 2013 it wanted to become the first country in the European Union to ban branding on cigarette packages and reiterated its plans this week after the legislation prompted a threat of legal action from Japan Tobacco International .
The minister who has designed the legislation, James Reilly, said Japan Tobacco and Imperial Tobacco had written to his department and that one of the firms demanded he tell them in writing by this week that Dublin would not proceed with the law.
"This week I received letters from two of the largest tobacco companies in the world threatening legal action against this state," Reilly said in a speech at his Fine Gael party's annual conference.
"I want to be crystal clear. We will put the health of our children ahead of the profits of Imperial Tobacco and Japan Tobacco International every time," Reilly said to applause from supporters.
No one at Imperial Tobacco, whose cigarette brands include Davidoff, Gauloises and John Player in Ireland, was immediately available for comment.
In a response last year to Britain's health department over its plans to introduce a similar law by May, Imperial Tobacco said plain packaging would infringe international law, could threaten future foreign direct investment into Britain and set a dangerous precedent for other sectors.
Australia introduced a ban a few years ago as a way to reduce smoking and is facing challenges at the World Trade Organization over complaints the laws create illegal obstacles to commerce. (Reporting by Padraic Halpin; Editing by Louise Ireland) 

Lao PDR Customs and Trade Facilitation Project - Additional Financing
 Islamic Business & Finance, 21 février 2015, The objective of the Additional Financing for Customs and Trade Facilitation Project for Lao People's Democratic Republic is to facilitate trade by improving the efficiency and effectiveness of customs administration and simplifying customs procedures to eliminate duplication and redundancy, reduce transactions costs and time to clear goods, and increase transparency and accountability. The additional financing for the Customs and Trade Facilitation Project (CTFP) will provide a vehicle to support Lao People's Democratic Republic (PDR?s) ongoing trade facilitation and public sector institutional strengthening program and is essentially an extension of the current CTFP that was approved in September 2008 and is scheduled to close in December 2013.
This additional financing operation will focus on providing further support in three key areas all designed to ensure full and effective implementation of the new customs law and its translation into modern and business friendly systems and procedures. It will support the preparation of a series of implementing regulations and procedures consistent with international standards and accepted good practice approaches. It will also support the development of a sustainable capacity for the Lao Customs Department (LCD) to train and develop its own personnel. In terms of project management, the additional financing operation will maintain the satisfactory arrangements currently in place for the existing project providing a seamless migration from the CTFP to the additional financing operation thus taking full advantage of existing project management experience and physical resources.

FTAs provide plentiful opportunities for agriculture
 Vietnam News Agency Bulletin, 22 février 2015, Hanoi, February 22 (VNA) - An array of free trade agreements (FTAs) coming into effect this year will open up a wide range of new blindingly bright opportunities for the agricultural sector leading to improved investment opportunities along the entire value-chain, reported The Voice of Vietnam (VOV).
A more perplexing dilemma however, is determining the best business model and strategy to lift agriculture from the production of low value staple food commodities higher up the value chain to make the best of the opportunities.
It was not by chance that the 45th World Economic Forum (WEF) held recently in Davos (Switzerland) placed the issue of food security for more than 7.2 billion people in the world to the forefront of its agenda.
This fact clearly shows the increasingly important role that food producers and suppliers play and most notably highlight Vietnam?s critically important role in ensuring food security in the world.
However, despite being one of the world?s leading agro-forestry-fishery exporters, Vietnam's agriculture reveals weaknesses? low value products at cheap prices, inefficient use of land and natural resources, limited agricultural investment and poor hygiene and food safety.
With the current status of productivity and quality of agricultural products, Vietnamese farmers and businesses are in a pickle to take advantage of the coming golden opportunities absent extensive investment and renovation. Thus, opportunities could be missed and leave Vietnam stagnant, producing low value commodities.
Investors from the Republic of Korea, Australia and Japan are actively looking for favourable investment opportunities and have embarked on a number of land lease projects for production, processing and exports in Vietnam.
If Vietnamese farmers are off the mark in negotiating these agreements they could find themselves simply working as farm labour for foreign investors, or in other words? they will just be employees on their soil.
In the face of limited agricultural investment, foreign direct investment (FDI) inflows in agriculture are invaluable. Therefore it is critically important that these agreements be structured in a manner that enables local farmers and agro businesses to team up with foreign investors on an equal partnership basis.
On a positive note, in recent times, a series of big enterprises across many fields have shifted their investment in the agricultural sector to large-scale agricultural projects based on high-tech models which have brought higher efficiency.
The expanding capital inflows into the agricultural sector show that sufficient resources to restructure the sector are available? it?s just a matter of sitting down at the negotiating table and working out the details.
To this end however, businesses need the support of the government and more incentives to help entice foreign investors to fund land and infrastructure purchases as well as acquire the necessary technologies to revamp the agriculture sector.
To call for more agricultural investment, the Vietnam Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD) has been working hand in hand with multinational groups to implement the public?private-partnership (PPP) model.
Additionally, the MARD, last year, drafted a strategy for attracting FDI in the agro- forestry- fisheries sector until 2030 for submission to the Prime Minister for approval.
Agriculture is the biggest advantage of Vietnam?s economy and it logically follows therefore that agricultural restructuring is crucially important in negotiating free trade agreements. Restructuring is seen as a monumental opportunity that will benefit the whole national economy.
Successful restructuring will not only enable Vietnam to become an agricultural power, but also serve as a promoter of the industry and service sectors in furtherance of transforming into an industrialised and modern nation by 2020./.

ASEAN set to declare a unified common market
 India Today, 21 février 2015, The Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) looks set to declare a unified common market by December 31, 2015. This concept is derived from the European Union style of economic integration which experts say will be difficult to achieve. Efforts are being made to reduce trade barriers and open floodgates for easy investments as well as the free flow of goods, services, products and skilled labour across nations. Meanwhile, top leaders of nations like Indonesia and Malaysia in recent weeks have been pushing for the unification of time zone as opposed to the current system of three different zones spanning over the ASEAN region.
A single time zone would reduce the technicalities of doing business within the southeast Asian region and would help in coordinated opening and closing time for stock markets and banks promoting overall inclusive growth among the southeast Asian nations.
Some experts have serious doubts about the formation and success of the ASEAN Economic Community (AEC) as it seeks to unify economies who are developing and evolving at vastly different rates and are on different stages of progress as per there gross domestic products. Other than this ASEAN nations have distinct cultures, values, languages, currencies and a history of political mistrust.
Yet many see an upcoming power house in the making with a population of around 625 million which is much more larger than the European Union or North America being the third largest labour resource in the world only behind China and India and a ever expanding consumer class. ASEAN already is referred to as Asia's third pillar of growth and development after China and India.
When taken together as an integrated regional economic force, the member states of the ASEAN Economic Community (AEC) form the World's seventh largest economy. Which is behind the US, China, Japan, Germany, France and the United Kingdom and lies ahead of India, Brazil and Russia.
The formation of AEC marks a major milestone in the development and progress of southeast asian nations. As it will open up new opportunities for trade and business in this part of the world by providing a platform for economic liberalization but many leading economists see the AEC as nothing but a paper tiger and point to obstacles in unifying the various economies like economic nationalism and resistance to foreign-owned industries in the member countries like Indonesia and South China Sea maritime disputes that could create an unhealthy environment and hamper regional cooperation.
The ASEAN Economic Community is largely about business participation and economic cooperation in this singular market but all the statistical surveys and analysis done till now suggests low awareness and even lower preparedness. Planned efforts are required to be made to integrate the concept of ASEAN nations and to make the ASEAN Economic Community united under a single time zone.
Eventually if efforts are made in the right direction ASEAN may integrate into a truly border less economic community united by a single time zone and a unified approach of holistic development for all the member nations of the community.
Important facts about the ASEAN Community:
The ASEAN refers to the Association of Southeast Asian Nations. It was established onAugust 8, 1967in Bangkok under the pact known as theBangkok declaration. Its charter was released on December 16, 2008.
The working language of ASEAN is English. It has 10 member states and 2 observers. The member states are listed as Brunei,Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, Phillippines, Singapore, Thailand and Vietnam.
The two observers currently are Timor- Leste and Papua New Guinea.The headquarters of the organization are situated in Manila, Philippiness and the motto of ASEAN Community is"One Vision, One Identity, One Community."

Comercio cayó 12% en la mayor zona franca del continente situada en Panamá
 AméricaEconomía , Sáb, 02/21/2015 - 17:58 Las razones se deben a la situación económica de Venezuela y a los aranceles impuestos por Colombia, países de los cuales depende el comercio en el puerto franco.
Según expertos, la ZLC tiene que incentivar el comercio electrónico y dejar de depender de Colombia y de Venezuela.
Panamá. La actividad comercial de la Zona Libre de Colón (ZLC), la mayor zona franca del continente, que se encuentra en la costa caribeña de Panamá, registró una caída del 12,3% en 2014, debido a la situación económica de Venezuela y a los aranceles impuestos por Colombia, informaron fuentes oficiales.
La gerencia ZLC explicó este viernes a EFE que el futuro del comercio en el puerto franco "depende de la situación en estos dos países", principales destinatarios de las reexportaciones panameñas.
"La zona libre tiene que buscar nuevos mercados, dejar de depender tanto de Colombia y de Venezuela e incentivar el comercio electrónico", apuntó a EFE el decano de la facultad de economía de la Universidad de Panamá, Rolando Gordón.
Según un informe divulgado a principios de año por la administración de la Zona Libre de Colón, no es el primer año que cae el comercio en este puerto franco, que es también el mayor puerto de contenedores de América Latina y la segunda zona libre del mundo después de Hong Kong.
En 2013 la actividad comercial en la ZLC se contrajo un 10,9 % con respecto a 2012.
La gerencia de la zona franca admitió que existe "preocupación" entre los comerciantes y dijo que están "conversando con el Gobierno de Juan Carlos Varela" para buscar soluciones a esta bajada en el volumen de comercio.
Los comerciantes venezolanos, según los cálculos del profesor Rolando Gordón, deben cerca de mil millones de dólares.
"Debido a la situación política y económica de su país, los venezolanos no pueden pagar a tiempo sus deudas en dólares", apuntó el decano.
Con respecto a Colombia, el profesor Gordón señaló que los causantes de la contracción de la actividad comercial son los "aranceles del 10 % que el país vecino puso en 2012 sobre los calzados y los textiles" que salen de la zona franca.
Panamá denunció estos aranceles ante la Organización Mundial del Comercio y está a la espera de que un tribunal de arbitraje de la OMC resuelva el conflicto.
Según el informe divulgado por la ZLC, el mes que registró los peores datos comerciales de 2014 fue noviembre, donde la actividad comercial cayó un 25,5 %. El mejor mes, sin embargo, fue junio con un crecimiento del comercio del 5,9 %.
El valor total del comercio registrado durante 2014 en este puerto franco fue de 24.043 millones de dólares, frente a los 27.421 millones de dólares de 2013 y los 30.792 millones de dólares de 2012.
En 2014 las importaciones fueron de 11.002 millones de dólares, un 13,3 % menos que el años pasados, mientras que las reexportaciones se situaron en los 13.041 millones de dólares, un 11,5 % menos que en 2013.
La Zona Libre de Colón representa el 8 % del producto interno bruto (PIB) de Panamá y se sitúa a la entrada del Canal de Panamá.
Maneja importaciones que proceden de China, Malasia, Estados Unidos, Hong Kong, Taiwán y Japón, que tienen como destino final, en su mayoría, países de toda América.

Africa Economy: Ethiopia to host int'l conference on sustainable dev't
 Xinhua News Agency, By shiferaw Tadese, 21 février 2015 14:39, ADDIS ABABA, Feb. 21 (Xinhua) -- Ethiopia said it has begun preparations to host the 3rd edition of the international conference on development financing in July this year.
The first and second editions of such conference were held in Mexico's Monterrey and Qatar's Doha respectively, and the upcoming conference on financing for development (EFD) will be convened from July 13 to 16 in Addis Ababa, capital of the East African nation.
The conference is expected to build on the previous two conferences and to agree the next international statement of how development should be resourced in the post-2015 period, as the internationally agreed millennium development goals (MDGs) come to an end this year.
Having started preparations, Ethiopia is working very hard to successfully host the conference in a coordinated manner in all aspects of the four-day international event, according to the Ethiopian Ministry of Finance and Economic Development.
Abraham Tekeste, Ethiopia's State Minister of Finance and Economic Development, told reporters on Friday at a press conference that a national inter-ministerial committee has been established to oversee the overall organization of the conference.
Having established other two sub-committees, Ethiopia has been closely working with the UN Department for Economic and Social Affairs, the UN Economic Commission for Africa, the African Union, as well as other regional and international institutions towards the success of the event, according to the minister.
He noted that the conference is expected to agree on how to finance sustainable development in the post-2015 period.
"Ethiopia is hosting this conference as this conference is critical for deciding how sustainable development should be resourced in the post-2015 period, and the means of implementation for Sustainable Development Goals," the minister said.
Ethiopia wants to use the conference to showcase its success to the world on its experience in financing its rapid and sustainable growth, industrialization drive and infrastructure development, according to the minister.
Ethiopia aims to project its new and positive image by exhibiting its diverse culture, tourism and investment opportunities, noted the official.
The conference is expected to bring together high-level political representatives including heads of states, ministers and senior officials of finance, foreign affairs and development cooperation, as well as relevant institutional stakeholders, private sector, philanthropy, non-governmental organizations and civil society organizations.
Mexico hosted the first of such meeting in 2002, which resulted in the Monterrey Consensus that established a broad foundation for financing for development taking into account mobilization of domestic resources, foreign direct investment, official development assistance, trade, debt and systematic issues.
The follow up conference was in Qatar's Doha in 2008 with update including statements on responding to the financial crisis, climate change and volatile markets, and acknowledged the particular challenges faced by lower middle income countries as well as conflict affected countries.

JAPON: 9ème round des négociations de libre-échange
 Agence Europe, Bulletin Quotidien Europe, 21 février 2015, Bruxelles, 20/02/2015 (Agence Europe) - La plupart des domaines que couvrira l'accord de libre-échange entre l'UE et le Japon seront abordés lors du 9ème round des pourparlers, du 23 au 27 février à Bruxelles.
Les sujets qui seront discutés incluent l'accès au marché (marchandises, services et marchés publics), les barrières techniques aux échanges, les règles en matière d'investissement, les mesures sanitaires et phytosanitaires, la coopération réglementaire et la transparence. Le chapitre relatif aux droits de la propriété intellectuelle, qui inclut les indications géographiques, sera abordé lors de la phase intersessions.
L'objectif de ce round est de consolider plus avant les textes de négociation et de faire avancer la discussion sur la liste des mesures non tarifaires que la partie européenne a transmise au Japon en décembre 2014. Les négociateurs européens veulent aussi aller plus loin dans les discussions sur les marchés publics, nous a expliqué une source communautaire, vendredi 20 février. (Emmanuel Hagry)

'Protectionist' French law alarms investors
 Financial Times (FT.Com) , By Steve Johnson , 22 février 2015 07:39, A group of large investors has written to France's biggest companies asking them to opt out of a controversial new "protectionist" law.
Under the Florange law, passed in April, investors that have held stock in a listed French company for at least two years will automatically be granted double voting rights unless the company alters its articles of association to opt out of this provision.
The legislation reverses the current position whereby companies had to expressly choose to introduce double voting rights.
Some investors fear it will strengthen the hand of the French state, which has large holdings in many French companies, as well as trade unions, which typically control the voting rights of employee share schemes, at the expense of minority shareholders.
"The government is effectively changing the law to create an enhanced share class to protect France so it can influence the way France is governed," said Neil Dwane, chief investment officer for European equities at Allianz Global Investors. It is among 19 investors with combined assets of €2.3tn that have written to the chief executives of France's 40 largest companies arguing in favour of "one share, one vote".
Angeli Benham, corporate governance manager at Legal & General Investment Management, which has written its own letter to almost 100 French companies, said: "It is a form of protectionism. In France there are a lot of government or family-owned companies and they are not really interested in what minority shareholders have to say."
Ms Benham said LGIM had so far received just two responses, including one from a CAC 40 company with a large government stake that said it had no plans to opt out.
The campaign comes just weeks after a successful investor rebellion in Italy against a new law that would have made it easier for companies to create "loyalty shares" offering double voting rights to long-term investors.
Prime Minister Matteo Renzi agreed to scrap a law allowing loyalty shares to be created if approved by a simple 50 per cent majority of shareholders, rather than the previous two-thirds majority, amid claims from investors, academics and board members that the watering down would benefit entrenched family shareholders.
Mr Dwane said French companies that moved away from one share, one vote risked driving away foreign investment, raising their cost of capital.
"This kind of behaviour will detract from the willingness to invest in France. French companies will trade at a discount because people feel there is a higher burden of care required because of the interference from the French government. I think it is important that all shareholders are treated equally," he said.
Ms Benham said LGIM, which holds just under 1 per cent of the French market through its index funds, was unable to register for double voting rights because the stock is held in nominee accounts.
Karina Litvack, a non-executive director at Eni, the energy company, and former head of governance and sustainable investments at F&C Asset Management, who was influential in forcing the policy U-turn in Italy, said "the administrative hoops required to qualify for loyalty shares are so unwieldy that, in effect, their only beneficiaries are controlling shareholders".
The Florange law also scraps the principle of board neutrality during offer periods, giving boards discretion to take frustrating measures without prior shareholder approval. It was introduced after ArcelorMittal, the Luxembourg-based steelmaker, defied the French government by closing two furnaces in the north-eastern French town of Florange.
Other signatories to the French letter include Aberdeen, Robeco, PGGM and TIAA-CREF.
The French economy ministry said the measure was designed to promote long-term investment, reduce stock turnover and "allow companies to be managed in a long-term perspective", and that it was not protectionist because all long-term shareholders, regardless of their nationality, qualified for double voting rights.
It estimated that 22 constituents of the Cac 40 already have double voting-right mechanisms in place, while similar systems existed in several other European countries.
"The double voting rights mechanism is not mandatory. The shareholders who oppose it are free to vote against it," the ministry added.

END

Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s).  Please note that this message may contain confidential information.  If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.

