EU failed to comply after losing China screws dispute, WTO says
Russia to reduce import duties for goods again within WTO framework in fall - Deputy Minister of Industry
USTR says voluntary cool label ok, but retaliation looms over debate
Farmers, trade groups at odds over lifting beef ban
Algeria keen to join World Trade Organisation 
Supachai Panitchpakdi: TPP would be a second-best outcome for Asia
Cry of the indigenous market
 
EU failed to comply after losing China screws dispute, WTO says
7 August 2015
Reuters News
GENEVA, Aug 7 (Reuters) - The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union failed to make amends after losing a dispute brought to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization by China over the EU's use of "anti-dumping" duties on Chinese bolts and screws, a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO dispute panel ruled on Friday.
China originally complained about the duties in 2009 and won its case in 2011. It went back to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO in 2013, complaining that the EU, which had only marginally reduced the duties, had not done enough to comply with the ruling against it. (Reporting by Tom Miles; Editing by Andrew Heavens) 
 
Russia to reduce import duties for goods again within WTO framework in fall - Deputy Minister of Industry
7 August 2015
ITAR-TASS World Service
Russia to reduce import duties for goods again within HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO framework in fall - Deputy Minister of Industry
MOSCOW, August 7. /TASS/. The next lowering of tariff protection within the framework of Russia’s commitments in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO will take place in fall of 2015, Deputy Minister of Industry and Trade Victor Evtukhov said on Friday.
Rates of import customs duties are to be reduced in respect of 4,200 sub-positions in the commodity range of foreign economic activity of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Eurasian Economic Union, Evtukhov said. Reduction will vary from 2 to 5% for the majority of commodity sub-positions.
"Russia’s economy is ready for reduction of duties: the process was gradual and we managed to adapt to the change in the trading system in three years. Russian producers will not experience strong import pressure, considering the ruble rate decline against major national currencies," deputy minister said.
 
USTR says voluntary cool label ok, but retaliation looms over debate 

7 August 2015
Inside U.S. Trade 
The Office of the U.S. Trade Representative and trade law experts are offering conflicting views of whether a proposal to replace the current mandatory country-of-origin labeling (COOL) regime for meat with a voluntary scheme would bring the U.S. in line with HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization rules. But this debate appears moot at the moment with Canada and Mexico having already secured the right to impose trade retaliation.
USTR and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" U.S. Department of Agriculture (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" USDA) weighed in during the drafting of the bill introduced last month by Sens. John Hoeven (R-ND) and Debbie Stabenow (D-MI), S. 1844, which would create a voluntary HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" USDA label for meat from livestock born, raised and slaughtered in the U.S. Sources said USTR indicated its belief that the bill would satisfy U.S. WTO obligations.
Publicly, USTR is not taking sides and has said that either a full repeal or a voluntary program could put the U.S. on steady ground. "Both options -- repealing the mandatory labeling scheme or repealing the mandatory labeling regime and replacing it with a voluntary labeling system -- have the potential to constitute compliance with U.S. WTO obligations," a USTR spokesman said in an email to Inside U.S. Trade.
Other legal experts, meanwhile, expressed doubt that the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO would find the voluntary regime compliant, and said even a technically "voluntary" measure would be considered to fall within the remit of the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT) and thus be vulnerable to challenge -- likely with an unfavorable outcome for the U.S.
Two different iterations of the existing mandatory COOL regulation have been faulted by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO as violating Article 2.1 of the TBT Agreement, which prohibits countries from discriminating against imported products.
But they also said that whether or not a voluntary COOL program complies with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO is not a really relevant question at this point. That is because Canada and Mexico have already secured the right through HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO litigation to impose trade retaliation against the U.S., and are only awaiting a determination of how much in value it can be.
Canada and Mexico have pressured the U.S. to simply repeal COOL and argued that even a voluntary program would violate trade rules. In this scenario, if Washington wants to avoid punitive tariffs, it has little choice but to buckle and repeal the program or else negotiate some kind of settlement with Canada and Mexico.
If the U.S. were to put in place a voluntary system and seek to challenge Canadian and Mexican allegations that it is still out of compliance, there are two routes of litigation it could pursue.
First, the U.S. could seek a second compliance panel within the context of its current HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO disputes with Canada and Mexico, arguing that it has complied with its HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO obligations and as a result, the retaliation must be dropped.
Alternatively, the U.S. could launch a new dispute altogether by challenging any retaliatory tariffs that Canada and Mexico may put in place as violating their respective obligations to extend HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO benefits to the U.S. Within that dispute, the U.S. would assert it has complied with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO by enacting the voluntary COOL program.
Either litigation scenario would take years to play out, which would likely mean Canadian and Mexican retaliation would be in effect during that time.
S. 1844 is now pending before the Senate Agriculture Committee, whose chairman favors full repeal of the program akin to the legislation the House passed in June. But he faces the challenge in the fact that Senate Democrats, along with a number of key Republicans are generally opposed to a repeal.
A determination on whether a voluntary COOL regime is HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO compliant would hinge in part on whether a panel found the program to be a technical regulation within the meaning of Annex 1 of the TBT Agreement.
That provision defines a technical regulation as a "[d]ocument which lays down product characteristics or their related processes and production methods, including the applicable administrative provisions, with which compliance is mandatory." Taken at face value, a "voluntary" program would seem to fall outside of this definition.
But Rob Howse, a professor at New York University's School of Law and a supporter of a voluntary COOL program, said he expected such a system to be considered as a technical regulation by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO. Other legal sources, including critics of the proposal, agreed with Howse.
This is because the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO in previous cases has found similarly voluntary labels to be effectively "mandatory" because they require private actors to comply with government regulations in order to legally use the label. This is the element of compliance the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO is looking for in making its determination, Howse said, even though companies technically do not have to obtain the label in order to sell their product on the market.
He noted that the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO had ruled another voluntary U.S. labeling regime, the dolphin-safe label for tuna, as a technical regulation for the same reason. Furthermore, Howse and another lawyer on the opposite side of the COOL debate said that the actual content of the label is immaterial and that it would not make a difference to a panel that the voluntary COOL label conveyed only factual information about a product's origin.
This is because a panel is still likely only to consider the fact that this would be government measure setting down specific parameters that companies would have to meet if they chose to seek the label.
S. 1844 would establish that a packer of beef, pork or poultry may voluntarily designate a product as "exclusively having a United States country of origin label" only if the animal was born, raised and slaughtered in the U.S. The legislation does not allow for voluntary labels for other mixed-origin meat.
Even if the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO determined that the voluntary COOL system was not a "technical regulation," it could be found to be a standard. Under TBT Annex 1, a standard is a document "approved by a recognized body, that provides, for common and repeated use, rules, guidelines or characteristics for products or related processes and production methods, with which compliance is not mandatory."
Howse noted that the TBT Agreement has national treatment obligations for these voluntary measures as well. Annex 3.D and 3.E of the TBT Agreement contain similar obligations for standards that are contained with Article 2.1 and 2.2, which apply to technical regulations.
In addition, the voluntary COOL system would still have to comply with the national treatment obligations of Article III:4 of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). That provision states that national treatment be extended to products from any HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO member with respect to all laws, purchase, transportation, distribution or use, with the exception of differential internal transportation charges under certain conditions.
"It has to be compatible with national treatment obligations either way," one attorney said. 
 
 
Farmers, trade groups at odds over lifting beef ban
Courtney Kueppers; Star Tribune (Minneapolis) 
7 August 2015
Herald Democrat
WASHINGTON - Bob Wilts was 10 years old when the Big Lake, Minn., farm where he grew up got its first beef cow. Fast forward 45 years to today, and Wilts still lives in Big Lake, about 35 miles northwest of Minneapolis. He still raises cattle.
Wilts and his wife, Judy, manage about 30 steers that they sell to individual families and stockyards annually.
But Wilts and other Minnesota ranchers worry about something that they say could threaten their livelihoods and the integrity of the U.S. beef market.
At the end of June, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" U.S. Department of Agriculture announced that it was lifting bans on chilled or frozen beef from Argentina and 14 Brazilian states for the first time since 2001, when foot-and-mouth disease was detected among cattle in those South American countries.
"Beef is high (priced in the U.S.)," Wilts said. "I know that. You go to the store and meat is expensive. But the cow herds are coming back. To risk bringing in a disease that could basically start wiping out everything … to me, it's not worth the risk to save a few bucks."
Where ranchers in Minnesota and across the country see a problem, trade experts see a product that is safe and a ban that has been in place for far too long. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" USDA says the areas approved for trading have been disease free since 2007.
Despite concerns like Wilts', the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization handed Argentina a win on July 24 in a ruling that stated the U.S. continuing to ban imports of beef was unlawful and an act of protectionism.
Bill Watson, a trade policy analyst at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Cato Institute, said he doesn't see a reason to be concerned about beef safety.
"The reason the ban is being lifted is because it's safe," Watson said. "It has been recognized internationally as safe for quite a while. The (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) decision was that the ban itself is protectionist; it's not designed to deal with an actual safety problem, but just to keep prices up and protect producers from competition."
Protectionist policies drive up prices in a way that is bad for U.S. consumers, Watson explained. "If it's a question of food safety then there might be a justification," he continued. "But if it's just to keep prices high, then that's not helping American consumers at all."
Nevertheless, renewing Argentine and Brazilian beef imports has drawn the ire of the nation's powerful farmers' lobby, and politicians have paid heed.
Only a few days after the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" USDA announced the lifted ban, the Senate appropriations committee passed a bill to delay funding for reinstating Brazilian and Argentine beef sales until the Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack jumps through a new set of time-consuming regulatory hoops.
Before any money gets spent, the secretary must update a comprehensive risk evaluation for importing the Argentine and Brazilian products. But he must also update the entire Animal Disease Risk Assessment, Prevention, and Control Act of 2001. And he must report to Congress a specific plan for responding to an animal disease outbreak.
In mid-July, a House Appropriations Agriculture Subcommittee amendment to an agriculture appropriations bill contained similar language.
The White House found this delaying tactic so offensive that last week HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Shaun Donovan, director of the Office of Management and Budget, wrote to Senate appropriators to complain. He argued that the beef import rules would benefit the U.S. economy and that completing the requirements listed in the bill "would, at a minimum, delay the implementation of the rules, potentially by years."
According to the USDA Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, foot-and-mouth disease - sometimes called hoof-and-mouth disease - is a "severe, highly contagious viral disease" that can be passed between animals. Although the disease is not usually fatal, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" USDA says animals affected are not likely to produce milk or meat the way they did before being infected.
The disease has been eradicated from the United States since 1929, but has been present in more recent years in animals throughout Africa, South America, Asia and some areas in Europe, according to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" USDA.
Like Wilts, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Doug Peterson, president of the Minnesota Farmers Union, raises the example of the foot-and-mouth disease outbreak in England in 2001 as a point of concern. The outbreak spread across the country and caused the meat and dairy industries billions of dollars in losses.
Peterson doesn't buy the claims that Argentine and Brazilian beef is safe. There are, he said, "no standards or protocol that can ensure these are a disease free product."
"You spend all the money on developing a brand, an American-branded beef, then you allow countries with a history of hoof-and-mouth disease to import?" Peterson asked. "It's just a matter of watering down the market and some large corporation making the money, not the farmer."
In addition to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" USDA efforts, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" U.S. Food and Drug Administration is crafting new guidelines "to ensure the safety of imported foods." The proposed program would require that "foreign entities demonstrate imported food meets U.S. food safety requirements," according to an HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" FDA news release.
The release also states the agency will look at current accreditation processes to avoid unnecessary overlap. The proposed guidelines are set to be available for public comment 75 days from the July 23 announcement, according to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" FDA.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" USDA officials say they feel confident that the South American regions will export beef to the United States without creating problems here.
However, imports will not begin immediately.
They will have to wait until the Agriculture Department conducts the updated risk evaluation of importing beef from these regions and assesses Brazilian and Argentine regulatory programs, as well as conducting assessments in the regions. Then there's the check list presented by the Senate and House.
Wilts welcomes the delays. Watson questions their necessity.
"I'm not a farmer," said Watson of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Cato Institute. "I don't know how nervous I would be if I was. But my understanding is that these products are not considered unsafe elsewhere in the world. They are being exported around the world, and there hasn't been a problem or a spread (of foot-and-mouth disease). I'm not worried about it … it doesn't seem to me that there's any real evidence that (farmers) should be
 
 
Algeria keen to join World Trade Organisation 
Friday, 07 August 2015 09:35
Middle East monitor
Algeria is keen to continue negotiations with the World Trade Organisation over the country's bid to join the body in a way that serves its national interests.
Algerian Minister of Trade Bakhti Belaib yesterday praised the WTO's decision to hold technical workshops in Algeria to support the negotiations process. In a statement he noted that such a move would help provide a clear vision of the future of negotiations, which would, in turn, speed up the procedures of Algeria's accession to the WTO.
WTO representative Gretchen Stanton said that Algeria has made great strides in the negotiations process despite the change in the pace of negotiations from time to time.
"I see that the negotiation process has made great strides but each time it stops. There are periods of silence," Algeria Press Service quoted her saying.
Stanton said that she hopes the negotiations will progress faster in the future, noting that bilateral negotiations with WTO member states on the accession file are witnessing slow progress.
Negotiations between Algeria and the WTO over the country's accession started in 1987. Algerians fear that accession to the trade-regulating organisation could turn their country into a market for international industrial products in light of weak competition from domestic products.
According to observers, Algeria would be totally marginalised by the multilateral trade organisation because Algeria cannot be an effective trade partner under the WTO's umbrella because, with a small number of exports, it would only become a consumer of imported products.
 
Supachai Panitchpakdi: TPP would be a second-best outcome for Asia
1242 words
7 August 2015
Nikkei Report
NKRP
English
© Copyright 2015. Nihon Keizai Shimbun, Inc. All rights reserved. 
We are witnessing an unprecedented phenomenon in the postwar history of world trade. For the last four years, growth in the volume of goods and services traded has been uncharacteristically outpaced by the rise in global output. As trade has always been a key driver of global growth, the contraction of its share in gross domestic product could put the brakes on future growth.
One way to avoid this outcome is through various configurations of international agreements intended to make trade easier. More than 400 regional arrangements are in existence around the world, including large and vibrant examples such as the 10-member HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Association of Southeast Asian Nations Free Trade Area. However, the U.S.-led Trans-Pacific Partnership risks undermining the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization framework, which forms the backdrop for global trade. It will also place extra burdens on small countries through rules and regulations imposed by large economies that go far beyond the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO framework.
Regionalism rising
Although many economists have called on Asia to move from an export-oriented growth model toward greater reliance on domestic consumption, the regional network of production continues to rely on intra-Asian trade. The network has been boosted by a series of bilateral and regional free trade agreements, and will be further bolstered by the launch of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" ASEAN Economic Community by the end of 2015.
However, the underlying drive has had less to do with trade liberalization per se than with a form of regionalism intended to boost trade for development. This is evident in the discussions on a proposed Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership pact that would include China, Japan, South Korea, India, Australia and New Zealand as well as the ASEAN countries. Crucially, the leading role in RCEP is assigned to ASEAN, which conveniently sidesteps the controversial issue of which country will dominate the partnership.
So far, the rise in the number of bilateral and regional trade agreements has not distracted from the multilateral trade facilitation efforts of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO. However, the launch of talks on so-called megadeals such as the TPP and the Trans-Atlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, being negotiated by the U.S. and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union, puts regional agreements in a different light. These proposed trade agreements, which together include countries responsible for more than 60% of global gross domestic product, will involve rule-making exercises that are far in excess of the norms set by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO agreements.
The TPP negotiations have been underway for the last six years between 12 countries -- the U.S., Brunei, Chile, Singapore, New Zealand, Australia, Canada, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, Peru and Vietnam. The talks cover multiple issues, including upgrading trade-related intellectual property rights, privatizing state-own enterprises, harmonizing competition laws, linking labor rights to trade, setting up dispute settlement mechanisms and liberalizing trade in agriculture and automobiles.
Due to the complexity of market access and behind-the-border issues, the TPP has gone through 20 formal negotiating sessions without reaching a concluding agreement. The latest session, which took place at the end of July in Hawaii, is said to have made major advances and come close to a final outcome. This may turn out to be correct, but the process is highly reminiscent of talks in the early years of this century on a proposed HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Free Trade Area of the Americas, which also went through several secretive negotiation sessions only to founder on the traditionally sensitive areas of intellectual property rights, labor and agriculture.
Contentious chapters
The TPP's most contentious chapters involve so-called 21st century trade and regulatory issues, which are far more complex than those of the failed FTAA and range far beyond the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO arrangements. On copyright, for example, the major stumbling block is the extension of protection from 50 years to 70 years after the lifetime of the author. On patent protection for pharmaceutical products, the proposals include introducing the evergreening principle (which facilitates the extension of patents) and establishing a monopoly period for next-generation biological drugs made from living cells.
On investment, the coverage and the pervasive authority of the proposed investor-state dispute settlement mechanism is perceived by critics as bestowing on multinational companies rights that are equal to those of sovereign states. In the automotive sector, the proposed convergence conflicts with the reality that many Asian producers with regional supply chains source their parts from various countries, not all of which will be members of the TPP.
For those who believe in pushing at the frontiers of trade liberalization at all costs, the TPP is undeniably laudable. But for those who think such an effort should be made through an open multilateral process, the TPP raises fears that the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's role as guardian of the rules of international trade may be diluted and eventually transferred to a group of regional and plurilateral agreements. This would be to the detriment of the smaller economies, which would see their bargaining positions weakened.
The TPP process also raises awkward geopolitical issues. For example, a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" U.S. government decision just before the Hawaii talks to upgrade Malaysia's status in a report on human trafficking was widely seen as a political move designed to allow Malaysia to meet U.S. rules for TPP membership. No upgrading was announced for neighboring Thailand, which has been mounting unprecedented attacks on human trafficking but is not a party to the talks. China, the world's second-largest economy and a crucial element of the Asian economy, has been excluded from the TPP talks even though its domestic markets are key to sustainable growth for many potential members of the pact.
This is one reason why the alternative regional grouping under RCEP remains a viable alternative. But if the TPP is to go ahead, it should avoid behaving in a divisive manner, for example by keeping major economies in Asia outside by putting up regulatory fences so high that new members cannot cross. For those that are negotiating already, the social consequences of the TPP on health care protection, dispute settlement and labor rights will have to be spelled out clearly to prevent the deterioration of Asia's developing and much-needed social safety net. Furthermore, there has to be a road map that can reconcile the competing interests of those countries that will be members of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" ASEAN Economic Community and RCEP as well as the TPP.
Voices of dissent
Many leading economists have criticized the TPP. Nobel Prize-winning economist Joseph Stiglitz has warned that it presents "grave risks" and "serves the interests of the wealthiest." Fellow Nobel laureate Paul Krugman remarked: "I'll be undismayed, and even a bit relieved, if the TPP just fades away." On another occasion, Krugman wrote, "There isn't a compelling case for this deal, from either a global or a national point of view."
The truth is that the TPP is a second-best option for Asia that will create significant adjustment problems, especially for smaller countries. The priority for Asia should be the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership, and if the U.S. and other countries want closer trading relations with Asian countries, it should be in that context.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Supachai Panitchpakdi is former director general of the World Trade Organization and former secretary-general of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. He served on the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" U.N. High Level Panel of Experts on Budget Recosting.
Nikkei Digital Media Inc.
Document NKRP000020150807eb870005v
+	Related Articles



 
NEWS
Cry of the indigenous market
KM GOPAKUMAR 
640 words
8 August 2015
Business Line (The Hindu)
BSNLNE
English
(c) 2015 The Hindu Business Line 
Will Indian medical device manufacturers get govt support, like the pharma sector did? Self-sufficiency in manufacturing medical devices is critical to ensure affordable health care in India. But in this segment, India has not been able to replicate the success it achieved with pharmaceuticals. The Indian medical devices market is dominated by multinationals and the local demand is fulfilled substantially through imports especially in the case of high technology devices (about 80 percent), which constitutes about 68 percent of the total import of devices.
The declared objective of the draft Medical Devices Policy (Policy) is to reduce import dependency, especially on highly priced devices and make India a global hub for production and innovation. However, the Policy fails to outline comprehensive measures to achieve this stated objective and is often couched in broad language. So it fails to pinpoint factors that prevent the development of the Indian medical device industry. For instance, the situation analysis in the draft does not focus on the role of hospitals and doctors and foreign investment in achieving self-sufficiency.
Irrespective of the technological competence of indigenously made Chitra –TTK heart valves or Aravind Eye Hospital Intra Ocular Lenses -- these products failed to dominate the Indian market for reasons that need to be understood by policy makers. Why is there a tendency to prescribe foreign, more expensive medical devices against a more affordable locally manufactured product? Does it have to do with a lack of scientific faith in the product, or is there corruption in the procurement system? 
Though the policy makes the promise of direct price control on selected medical devices – it is conspicuously silent about the method of price control. Unless there is a cost-based price fixing formula, price control will fail on medical devices. The price control would also be ineffective unless the government curbs the practice of steep mark-ups that may take place at hospital or doctor levels. Further, hospital procurement or doctor prescriptions should be based on transparent and independent technical evaluation rather than unethical promotion practices.
A key recommendation of the draft is also the creation of a new authority called the National Medical Devices Authority (NMDA) with the mandate to facilitate the development of the medical device industry alongside with the standard setting and quality control.
But this would put the two roles of the NMDA in a conflict of interest with itself! Quality and standards enforcement should be clearly kept apart from an agency promoting the interests of the industry.
The draft does make a few proposals to curb the import of second-hand medical devices, besides proposing the restructuring of tax and duty structure to promote local manufacturing. However, alignment of trade policy alone is not enough.
There is complete silence on the impact of foreign direct investment (FDI) in manufacturing medical devices. FDI does not automatically result in self-sufficiency in the absence of strong performance requirements in compliance with WTO. The draft should be clear on the limitations of FDI in achieving self-sufficiency especially the dangers of brownfield investment.
Like it was learnt from the pharmaceutical segment, where the Government brought in caveats, albeit after a few large medicine makers sold out -- are similar measures required with medical devices too?
The medical device policy needs to unequivocally support domestic manufacturing and local innovation – as we have seen with pharmaceuticals in the past. There should be favourable treatment to encourage domestic entrepreneurs. But the moot question now is does the Government of India have the political will to make the appropriate changes and do what it did in the 1970s to develop the pharmaceutical industry?
The writer is with the National Working Group on Patents Laws (NWGPL), a no-profit organization working on intellectual property and development issues. The views expressed are personal.
Kasturi & Sons Ltd
Document BSNLNE0020150808eb880000v
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.