Unyielding eurozone gives Athens last chance

What happens if Greece leaves the euro?

BRICS summit gives Putin a chance to show Russia not isolated

BRICS not 'psychologically ready' to sign free trade zone'

Brics to set up $100bn New Development Bank in Russia

BRICS Development Bank: 10 Things to Know

'BRICS bank will play a major role, but much work lies ahead'

Pacific trade ministers to gather in Hawaii from July 28

Saudi Arabia to Invest up to $10 Billion in Russia

Kiev criticizes Russia’s initiative on quotas as violation of tree trade agreement

China urges efforts to boost China-Russia economic, trade cooperation

 


Unyielding eurozone gives Athens last chance

Peter Spiegel in Brussels, Claire Jones in Frankfurt and Kerin Hope in Athens

(Financial Times) 

Athens will be given a final chance to present a new reform plan to eurozone leaders on Tuesday night despite a hardening attitude to Greece in many capitals after the HYPERLINK "http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/ff37c3a0-22e7-11e5-9c4e-a775d2b173ca.html#slide0"emphatic rejection of previous bailout terms in Sunday’s referendum.

But eurozone officials said leaders were unlikely to agree to restart rescue talks to keep Greece in the currency union at a hastily convened summit in Brussels, despite the Greek overture.

The European Central Bank tightened the screw on cash-starved Greek banks on Monday evening when it HYPERLINK "http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pr/date/2015/html/pr150706.en.html"required them to stump up more assets in exchange for emergency loans. It did not reveal the scale of its adjustment to the collateral rules, but expects all four of Greece’s largest banks to retain access to the loans. It kept the cap on these loans at a total of €89bn.

The ECB may have to ask eurozone leaders to guarantee Greek government debt for use as HYPERLINK "http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/fbdadaea-23c2-11e5-bd83-71cb60e8f08c.html"collateral to maintain its liquidity lifeline. Greece’s banks will remain shut until at least Thursday.

Key developments

? Greek banks stay shut until Thursday at the earliest

? ECB governing council meets to discuss emergency loans for Greek banks

? Euclid Tsakalotos replaces Yanis Varoufakis as Greek finance minister

? Greek PM Tsipras will present fresh bailout proposals at eurozone summit on Tuesday

? German chancellor Angela Merkel says it is up to Greece to secure its place in euro

Many officials involved in the talks said there was little willingness to concede on any front, and warned there was not a clear path towards a deal that could avoid a messy default when a €3.5bn bond owed to the ECB comes due in two weeks. 

 “Grexit is on everyone’s lips, but no one is actually saying it,” said one senior official involved in the talks. 

Athens did its best to put its political and financial house in order ahead of Tuesday’s make-or-break meetings. After making a conciliatory speech on Sunday night, Alexis Tsipras, the prime minister, sacked HYPERLINK "http://www.ft.com/topics/people/Yanis_Varoufakis"Yanis Varoufakis, his abrasive finance minister. Mr Varoufakis claimed that other eurozone leaders had demanded his removal. 

He was replaced by HYPERLINK "http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/2785fdc2-2400-11e5-9c4e-a775d2b173ca.html"Euclid Tsakalotos, an Oxford-educated Marxist who is considered more pragmatic than the hardline Mr Varoufakis.

Mr Tsipras also persuaded other Greek political leaders, following seven hours of talks, to back a joint statement that Sunday’s rejection of bailout terms was not “a mandate of rupture” with the eurozone.

Still, eurozone leaders remained sceptical. Valdis Dombrovskis, the European Commission vice-president in charge of eurozone policy, said the No vote “unfortunately widened the gap between Greece and other eurozone countries”, and other leaders said that while they would listen to new Greek proposals, the outlook remained bleak.

“In the next couple of days we’ll see whether there is sufficient trust and the political opportunity to find a solution,” said Jeroen Dijsselbloem, the Dutch finance minister who chairs the committee of his 18 counterparts. “That has to be looked at. It’s not so easy to close a door.”

Eurozone intransigence was fortified by a calm reaction on financial markets to the referendum result and growing probability of Greece’s exit from the euro.

HYPERLINK "http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/2066a902-2346-11e5-9c4e-a775d2b173ca.html"Greece votes No — now what?

Next key date in crisis is July 20, when the country owes €3.5bn on a bond held by the European Central Bank

HYPERLINK "http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/2066a902-2346-11e5-9c4e-a775d2b173ca.html"Continue reading

The euro was up 0.05 per cent at $1.1077. Yields on the 10-year German bund edged down just 3 basis points to 0.764 per cent, while peripheral yields rose. Italian 10-year yields were up 14 basis points at 2.39 per cent, and Spanish 10-year yields edged up by 16 basis points to hit 2.37 per cent.

What happens if Greece leaves the euro?

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Lana Clements

By Lana Clements 

6 July 2015

express.co.uk

CASH-strapped Greece is a step closer to exiting the eurozone after the country voted against an international bailout deal, which entails further austerity measures.

The Greek Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras insisted that the vote was not about the country's future in the single-currency but euro leaders have not shared the leader's confidence.

Germany is among the countries that have warned that it would be difficult for Greece to stay in the eurozone IF it does not agree to economic reforms in exchange for a €7.2billion bailout loan needed to keep it afloat.

With Athens almost completely out of cash there is not much time to find a solution and with every passing day without an agreement an exit grows more likely.

At the moment, the banks in Greece have been closed and are expected to stay shut until the country's future is clear.

So if Greece were forced to leave the eurozone, a so-called Grexit, what would happen?

Back to the drachma

If Greece leaves the euro it would likely mean a return to its previous currency the drachma.

Initially there would be a period of high uncertainty and hardship.

The Greek government has no cash and bankruptcy would mean that few institutions or investors are likely to lend the government any cash.

Inflation would likely soar and ordinary families could struggle to afford the basics needed to live.

However, in the long term it could be a good move for Greece.

At the moment, the Greek economy is in one of the worst recessions of all time, but a change to a devalued currency could help because it would make Greek exports cheaper to neighbouring countries and help give them a boost.

Nicholas Ebisch, currency analyst at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Caxton FX, said: "A re-institution of the drachma would lead to sharply climbing inflation as capital flows out of the country and the country’s foreign exchange reserves would be depleted.

"With the country essentially bankrupt and struggling to introduce a new currency, government wage and pension payments will likely be frozen until liquidity and balance can be restored.

"The consequences of the social unrest that would result from crippling inflation and a bankrupt government are unknown, and it will suffer from economic and diplomatic isolation."

Express

The Greek economic recession is one of the worst in recent history

Greece forms an alliance with Russia

After his isolation in the eurozone, the Greek Prime Minister has repeatedly reached out to the Russian President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Vladimir Putin.

The move is alarming to politicians in the West, including the US.

After a meeting between Mr Putin and Mr Tsiras in June, the Russian deputy prime minister Arkady Dvorkovich said: "The most important things for us are investment projects and trade with Greece.

"If financial support is required, we will consider this question."

An extension of a Russian gas pipeline to Europe running through Greece is set to go ahead and would provide Athens with a vital source of cash.

It's also been suggested that Greece could become the sixth member of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"BRICS development bank - Russia's alternative to the American-led HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"International Monetary Fund .

And membership could provide the cash provisions needed to get Greece back on its feet after leaving the euro.

Contagion risk

At worst, a Greek exit from the euro could lead to another economic crisis on the continent.

Europe is the UK's main trading partner and it's unlikely that Britain's economy would be immune to the effects of another eurozone recession.

Politicians including British Chancellor HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"George Osborne have warned about the risk Greece poses to economic prosperity

However, in recent years banks and private investors have reduced exposure to Greece since 2011 and the fallout among markets is likely to be much smaller than it would have been a few years ago.

Alan Cauberghs, senior investment director at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Schroders, said: "Greece’s links with the eurozone financial system have significantly declined in the wake of 2012, when one of the largest debt restructuring deals in history wiped €100 billion from Greece’s liabilities.

"The risks associated with Greek sovereign debt also largely passed from the eurozone’s banking sector to the eurozone’s public sector."

One of the biggest threats is contagion and investors fear that otter countries who have been bailed out, notably Spain and Italy, could follow the same path as Greece.

Toby Nangle, head of asset allocation at Columbia Threadneedle Investments, said: "Political developments in Greece are important to financial markets principally because they will shape how markets will respond to future political situations elsewhere in the eurozone.

"The markets are watching the impact of recent development on the forthcoming Spanish general election in November, where Podemos – widely understood as Syriza’s counterpart in Spain – currently sits in third place in the opinion polls."

Immigration crisis

Greece is already struggling to cope with waves of immigrants landing from Africa and crossing through from Asia.

If it's economy is plunged into further crisis, it's unlikely to have the resources to cope with influxes of people and could quickly find that it is overrun by illegal immigrants.

This could cause crime and create further social unrest within the country.

Political turmoil

If the quality of life for Greeks dramatically declines, dissatisfaction with the government could quickly escalate and it may be forced to hold new elections.

In the worst case scenario the absence of an effective government could provide an opportunity for extreme and terrorist organisations to wield their influence.

Express

Germany is Greece's biggest creditor

BRICS summit gives Putin a chance to show Russia not isolated

6 July 2015

Reuters News

* Russia to host BRICS summit in city of Ufa

* HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Shanghai Cooperation Organisation also to meet

* Putin sees chance to show Russia not isolated

* BRICS economies want changes in financial order

By Lidia Kelly and Katya Golubkova

MOSCOW, July 6 (Reuters) - The BRICS emerging economies will launch a development bank at a summit this week which President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Vladimir Putin hopes will help reduce Western dominance of world financial institutions and show Moscow is not isolated.

At a meeting in the remote Russian city of Ufa, originally a fortress built on the orders of Tsar Ivan the Terrible, Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa also aim to put the last touches to a $100-billion contingency currency reserves pool.

The BRICS account for a fifth of the world's economic output and 40 percent of its population. The pool and New Development Bank, with an initial $50 billion in capital, are central to their efforts to reshape the Western-dominated financial system.

"At this meeting we will make operational our two biggest institutions, which is key for us to advance as a group and learn more from each other," said a Brazilian official involved in the preparations for the meeting. "Nobody thought that was going to be possible a year ago when we ratified the proposals."

The official asked not to be named as he is not allowed to speak publicly about the two-day summit starting on Wednesday in Ufa, nearly 1,170 km (730 miles) southeast of Moscow.

For Putin, whose focus has shifted to the emerging economies and especially Asia since the West imposed sanctions on Moscow over its role in the Ukraine crisis, the summit is also a chance to show the West that Russia can get along fine without it.

"The BRICS, in addition to their economic and pragmatic agenda, have become an influential factor in world politics," Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said last week.

He denied the five countries' efforts to join forces were aimed against anyone else and praised their "important stabilising role" in international affairs.

SLOW IN COMING

The unity of the BRICS nations is important for Putin in his standoff with the West over Ukraine, especially as Russia suffered the symbolic blow of being suspended from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Group of Eight industrial powers over its seizure of the Crimea region.

But independent foreign policy experts say the BRICS group is still a long way from achieving its main goals and Russian ties with China remain less developed than Moscow would like.

Progress on the New Development Bank, first proposed in 2012, has also been slow.

At last year's BRICS summit in Brazil it was agreed the headquarters would be in Shanghai but China ratified the bank only last week and it is not expected to be operational until next year. Its capital still has to be rated to issue debt.

Other emerging markets such as Turkey, Mexico, Indonesia and Nigeria could join as partners at a later date.

The contingency reserves pool is expected to start operating immediately to help members if they are hit by a sudden exodus of foreign capital.

The summit coincides with a meeting in Ufa of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO), a security bloc grouping China, Russia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan, which India and Pakistan are set to join.

Putin is also expected to hold talks with Iranian President Hassan Rouhani in Ufa. Iran has observer status in the SCO.

(Additional reporting by Oksana Kobzeva in Moscow, Alonso Soto in Brasilia and Manor Kumaj in New Delhi, Writing by Lidia Kelly, Editing by Timothy Heritage and Ralph Boulton) 

Released: 2015-7-6T14:24:33.000Z

Thomson Reuters (Markets) LLC

BRICS not 'psychologically ready' to sign free trade zone'

6 July 2015

Press Trust of India

Moscow, Jul 6 (PTI) BRICS nations are not "psychologically ready" to sign a free trade zone deal but may sign an agreement on more profound economic integration in the next 5 years, a top Russian minister said today ahead of a summit of leaders of Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa.

"Of course, it is now premature to talk about the BRICS economic agreement. But if the approach and the crystallisation of our association as an international group will take place at the same pace as now, the economic agreement within a few years will be quite timely and inevitable," First Deputy Economic Development Minister Alexei Likhachev said.

"I think it can happen within five years," he said.

In his opinion, the correct decision is that "we do not rush events and not grind out an agreement on free trade zone now."

"Countries are not yet ready for it psychologically. But we are already discussing the terms of the agreement regime," he told state-run news agency TASS.

However, Likhachev expressed confidence that "the day when the BRICS countries will speak about the economic agreement is not far away". According to him, the agreement will undergo several stages.

"At first it will be a declarative document that will inspire our countries to cooperate more actively. Then it could be non-preferential agreements, which optimize regulatory system, simplify customs and investment procedures, create the so-called "green corridors" for goods. The third phase is a preferential regime - concessions that we will make in terms of commodity trade," Likhachev said.

On July 9, Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Narendra Modi, President of Brazil HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Dilma Rousseff, Russian President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Vladimir Putin, Chinese President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Xi Jinping and President of South Africa HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Jacob Zuma will meet in Russia's Ufa for a day-long meet.

BRICS account for a fifth of the world's economic output and 40 per cent of its population.

As of 2012, the five BRICS countries have a combined nominal GDP of USD 13.7 trillion and will surpass the size of the US economy which is approximately USD 15 trillion, by 2015.

BRICS ministers of trade and economic development will discuss forming a common approach to the completion of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO Doha round, Likhachev added.

"We plan to discuss common approach to the completion of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO Doha round at the meeting of trade and economic development ministers," Likhachev said.

The BRICS grouping are expected to launch a Common Economic Strategy Document for an easily trade framework for boosting intra-BRICS trade-during the seventh edition of the summit in Ufa, Russia, on July 9.

The New Development Bank will be operationalised at the Ufa summit. PTI CPS AKJ CPS

Press Trust Of India Limited

Brics to set up $100bn New Development Bank in Russia

7 July 2015

Middle East North Africa Financial Network (MENAFN)

(MENAFN - Gulf Times) Ufa, the capital of Bashkortostan in Russia, will witness the establishment of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"New Development Bank (NDB), a joint initiative of Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa (Brics) with an initial capital of $100bn.

The signing of documents on the establishment of NDB - which will have its headquarter in China and whose first president elect is an Indian veteran banker K V Kamath - will take place along the VII Summit of Brics during July 8-10.

The summit is also expected to see the establishment of "Fund of Reserve Currencies" with a capital of $100bn, which is an alternative to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"International Monetary Fund (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"IMF), which "depends on the pressure of the US and EU countries", Russian Ambassador to Qatar HE Nurmakhmad Kholov told the media here yesterday.

The main objective of the bank is the financing of infrastructure projects and sustainable development of the economies of the member-states and developing countries.

It is assumed that NDB, which will provide loans for strategic profitable projects and "long" loans, will be a major multilateral development bank, providing assistance along 'south-south' line and will be an alternative to the 'north-south' cooperation, he said in the presence of envoys from other Brics countries.

The agreement on the establishment of the bank will enter into force when all member states fulfil ratification procedures, he said, highlighting that Russia and India have already ratified the agreement, while South Africa and China are expected to complete this work in July and Brazil will do the same soon.

The bank is open to broad capital injection and also intends to fund projects, not only in the countries of the founders but also in other countries. The banks' initial portfolio will be in dollars but eventually move to a multi-currency basket.

The main task of "Fund of Reserve Currencies", according to Kholov, is to support any Brics member in the case of short-term financial difficulties or problems with the member state's balance of payments.

Unlike the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"IMF, which is based on Washington consensus that comes with special conditions attached in the form of liberal reforms and the opening up of national markets, he said the proposed fund would work on Beijing consensus, which reflects the desire of the countries to maintain their national sovereignty as well as multi-polarity in the world.

Alongside the Brics summit, there will also be meeting of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO), where security issues will also be discussed. India and Pakistan are set to join SCO, which, according to Russian President Vladmir Putin, "is an open organisation and any state that has common aims, can join it."

Russia, Kholov said, has always insisted on retaining the traditional activity of "Shanghai Six" in combating all manifestations of the three evils of terrorism, extremism and separatism.

Middle East North Africa Financial Network Inc

BRICS Development Bank: 10 Things to Know

NDTV 

6 July 2015

Finance Minister Arun Jaitley will participate in the inaugural meeting of the board of governors of the BRICS Development Bank on July 7 in Moscow. On July 8, Mr Jaitley will be participating in the meeting of BRICS finance ministers and central bank governors in the Russian city of Ufa. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"The BRICS Bank has been set up to foster greater financial and development cooperation among the five emerging countries - Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa.

Here is a 10-point cheat-sheet on HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"BRICS Bank

1) HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"BRICS Development Bank is a multilateral development bank operated by the BRICS countries.

2) The bank has been set up as an alternative to other global development institutions like HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Bank and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"International Monetary Fund, which are still dominated by Western powers.

3) Veteran Indian banker KV Kamath has been appointed as the first head of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"BRICS Bank. Mr Kamath will have a 5-year term.

4) HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"BRICS Development Bank will be headquartered in Shanghai, China.

5) Leaders of Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa (BRICS) had last year reached an agreement to establish the bank, with its headquarters in Shanghai. As per the agreement, India got the right to nominate the first president.

6) The bank will have initial authorised capital of $100 billion, and its initial subscribed capital of $50 billion dollars will be equally shared among the founding members.

7) The voting power of each member shall equal its subscribed shares in the capital stock of the Bank.

8) China has pledged to contribute a total of $41 billion to the bank. This will give it the largest voting right at 39.5 per cent.

9) But none of the BRICS countries will have the veto power.

10) The BRICS nations account for nearly $16 trillion in GDP and 40 per cent of the world's population. India is hoping to get more funds for infrastructure development from HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"BRICS Bank. (With Agency Inputs) 

'BRICS bank will play a major role, but much work lies ahead'

7 July 2015

Press Trust of India

Johannesburg, Jul 6 (PTI) The BRICS-backed New Development Bank will play a major role in multilateral development of financial institutions, but there are still many unanswered questions at this stage, the bank's newly- appointed vice president Leslie Maasdorp has said.

As leaders of the bloc meet in the Russian city of Ufa for the 7th summit of the organisation, Maasdorp told the daily Star here that the unanswered questions were because of the fact that the bank was still at ground zero in terms of its establishment.

"The Treasury in South Africa together with the other treasuries in the BRICS countries have done considerable work over the past few years as part of the feasibility studies for the bank," said Maasdorp, a South African banker.

"We will naturally leverage off that work as a significant resource base to steer the establishment of the bank," Maasdorp said.

Maasdorp said he could not comment further on how this would pan out as the president and three other vice presidents had just been appointed to finalise these matters over the next few weeks in Shanghai.

"Our role as the founding core management team is to build the institution into a formidable new player in the infrastructure finance space."

BRICS account for a fifth of the world's economic output and 40 per cent of its population. The New Development Bank will be operationalised at the Ufa summit.

Maasdorp said while the NDB will obviously be a major addition to multilateral development of financial institutions it should be seen as complementary rather than a competitor.

He said the NDP was in some ways part of the strategy to continue the resurgence of Asia and China in particular over the past few decades.

"In no way should this be seen as a fundamental shift though as South Africa has and will continue to enjoy important economic relationships with the West," Maasdorp said, adding that BRICS should be seen as an addition to existing South African economic relationships.

Maasdorp was optimistic about partnering with national and regional development banks: "Local institutions in general always have superior knowledge of national projects and local regulations, better understanding of the risks and so on.

"So when it comes to the design, engineering and financial packaging of new projects I suspect we will work very closely with (institutions such as) the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"African Development Bank, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Bank and others.

"This is not about reinventing the wheel but complementing existing efforts to fast-track infrastructure development in developing countries," Maasdorp told the daily.

Maasdorp has 13 years of global investment banking experience, including a stint as president of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Bank of America-HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Merrill Lynch franchise for southern Africa.

He is one of two nominations approved by the South African government to serve on the NDP. PTI FH ABH

Press Trust Of India Limited

Pacific trade ministers to gather in Hawaii from July 28

Kyodo

7 July 2015

Kyodo News

TOKYO, July 7 -- Pacific Rim countries pursuing a free trade initiative are arranging to hold ministerial talks from July 28 in Hawaii with the aim of reaching a broad agreement there, Japanese Economic and Fiscal Policy Minister Akira Amari said Tuesday.

The United States, Japan and 10 other countries came up with the plan amid growing hopes for an early signing of the Trans-Pacific Partnership after U.S. President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Barack Obama was granted the power last week to seek congressional approval for trade deals with limited interference by lawmakers.

One negotiation source said the ministerial meeting will take place for two days through July 29, but Amari said it is undecided how long the negotiations will last.

Amari told a press conference that Japan is willing to "play the last card" at the planned ministerial meeting to end the prolonged TPP negotiations, and urged other members of the initiative to do so as well.

The talks among ministerial-level officials from the 12 countries will follow "several days of meetings there between chief negotiators" for the TPP, according to a report by the Inside U.S. Trade magazine.

It remains uncertain whether the negotiations will conclude through the planned ministerial meeting, the report said, noting the talks will take place even if the chief negotiators fail to make progress.

The ministers involved in the TPP negotiations last met in November on the sidelines of an international conference in Beijing.

Besides Japan and the United States, the other countries involved in the pact are Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore and Vietnam. They cover some 40 percent of the global economy. China is not involved.

The uncertainty about the progress in the ministerial talks "is largely because some TPP countries lack information about the status of bilateral talks between other parties," the report said, quoting one of the negotiation sources.

The United States and Japan, which are still at odds over some issues, will resume their talks on Thursday in Tokyo to settle disputes over Japan's exceptional tariffs on some agricultural products and what the United States calls nontariff barriers in the Japanese automotive industry.

Wendy Cutler, acting deputy U.S. trade representative, and Hiroshi Oe, deputy TPP chief negotiator of Japan, will take part in the bilateral talks, according to both governments.

The United States, Australia, Brunei, Chile, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore and Vietnam launched negotiations over the TPP in 2010, with Malaysia, Mexico, Canada and Japan joining the dialogue later.

==Kyodo

Kyodo News

Saudi Arabia to Invest up to $10 Billion in Russia

7 July 2015

Dow Jones Newswires Chinese (English)

MOSCOW—Saudi Arabia has signed a commitment to invest up to $10 billion in Russia, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Russian Direct Investment Fund said Monday.

Russia's latest pact with its closest oil-producing rival marks Moscow's efforts to replace Western funding, which has been hit by sanctions, just a few days before a summit of five major emerging economies, known by the acronym of Brics, to be held in Russia's town of Ufa.

The majority of the $10 billion from Saudi Arabia's sovereign-wealth fund, Public Investment Fund, will be spent on Russia's agricultural projects, as well as on medicine, logistics, and the country's retail and real estate sectors, RDIF chief HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Kirill Dmitriev told The Wall Street Journal.

The agreement was reached after a "great" contribution from Mohammad bin Salman Al Saud, Deputy Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia, who met Russia's President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Vladimir Putin during an annual economic forum in Saint Petersburg in June, the RDIF said.

"The key investments will take place on Russian territory, but we will also invest in Saudi Arabia, which we consider a very promising market," Mr. Dmitriev said.

The RDIF also said it signed an agreement with another Saudi Arabian sovereign-wealth fund, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Saudi Arabian General Investment Authority, under which the two sides would seek mutual investment opportunities in Saudi Arabia and other Middle East countries.

Facing a political standoff with the West, Moscow has been turning eastward, saying it would seek Asian investors to reduce reliance on Europe and the U.S. In early May, Russia signed economic deals with China via the RDIF worth up to $25 billion, with Chinese banks investing in Russian companies. However, so far, there has been little evidence that China's money has started flowing into Russia under this pact. 

China urges efforts to boost China-Russia economic, trade cooperation

pengtianxiao 

7 July 2015

Xinhua's China Economic Information Service

IRKUTSK, Russia, July 6 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Xinhua) -- Chinese Vice Premier Wang Yang on Monday asked for efforts to boost China-Russia economic and trade cooperation. Wang made the appeal at a meeting with Russian Deputy Prime Minister Dmitry Rogozin in the southern Siberian city of Irkutsk. Wang said the two sides should work together to optimize the bilateral trade structure. Building on trade in energy and resources sectors, the two countries should explore new areas such as civil aviation materials, space technology and nuclear energy equipment, said Wang. He asked to further improve trade facilitation in order to create favorable conditions for bilateral trade, to find ways of reducing costs by innovating trade models and encouraging cross-border e-commerce. Wang also asked to enhance cooperation in finance.

The two countries should expand trade settlement in their own currencies and the currency swap scheme, and strengthen financial and insurance support for trade with an aim to boost trade with investment, he said. For his part, Rogozin noted that Russia always takes the comprehensive strategic partnership with China as a diplomatic priority. Russia is willing to work with China to optimize the trade structure, expand cross-border logistic channels, enhance financial cooperation, boost mutual investment, strengthen cooperation in high-technology, aviation, space and nuclear energy, Rogozin said. Wang is visiting Russia in his capacity as chief on the Chinese side of the Joint Commission for the Regular Prime Ministers' Meetings of China and Russia. Wang said the main task of his meeting with Rogozin is to implement the important consensus reached by Chinese President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Xi Jinping and his Russian counterpart, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Vladimir Putin, during Xi's visit to Moscow in May, make preparations for Xi-Putin meetings at an upcoming BRICS summit in Ufa, Russia, and in Beijing in September, and make preparations for the 20th regular meeting of Russian and Chinese heads of government at the end of this year. Enditem

China Economic Information Service of Xinhua News Agency

Kiev criticizes Russia’s initiative on quotas as violation of tree trade agreement

7 July 2015

ITAR-TASS World Service

POLITICS: UKRAINE-RUSSIA-TRADE-QUOTAS-REACTION

Kiev criticizes Russia’s initiative on quotas as violation of tree trade agreement

KIEV, July 7. /TASS/. A possible motion by Moscow to impose quotas on the Ukrainian commodities, which run the risk of being squeezed out by dirt-cheap imports from the EU, will be considered by the Ukrainian government as a de facto elimination of free trade between the two countries, the press service of the Ministry of Economic Development and Trade said quoting Ukraine’s trade representative, Natalya Nikolskaya.

"Any imposition by Russia of unilateral restrictions in the form of tariff quotas will be considered as an encroachment on the Agreement on the CIS Free Trade Zone and will mean a de facto elimination of free trade between Ukraine and the Russian Federation," the statement said.

Russian Deputy Minister of Economic Development, Alexei Likhachev said earlier Moscow had proposed to set the quotas for Ukrainian commodities from a ‘risk group’ in case of implementation of an agreement on association between Ukraine and the EU.

"In my opinion, we’ve suggested a most harmless solution," he said. "Since we’re speaking about the risks of whipping out of the Ukrainian goods and their replacement with European ones at dumping prices, we’ve proposed to fix quotas on the basis of the maximum exports of those commodities to Russia over recent years."

Duties will be applied only to the exports in excess of the quotas, as this measure does not contradict regulations of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization.

Ukraine insists, on its part, that antidumping measures can be effectuated only after legal procedures in the framework of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO.

END

 

 

cid:image001.png@01CC55E4.A4F90770

 

Josep Bosch, Information Officer

Information and External Relations Division

+41227395681

 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.
