HEADLINES:
·         'WTO members likely to clash at Kenya meeting' 
·         WTO meet: Food security solution deadlocked in Nairobi
·         EU asks for cap on PDS spending in return for food security deal 
·         India wants WTO meet to take up Bali agenda 
·         Editorial: Getting WTO going 
·         US accuses China over tax breaks for domestic plane makers; Trade
·         Parliament must ratify WTO deals, say NGOs 
·         Don’t make commitments at WTO without Parliament debate: civil society to govt 
·         Australian farmers receive early Christmas present from China-Australia FTA 
·         Xinhua Insight: Four decades on, China seeks greater role in globalization 
·         China Agrees to Implement South Korea, Australia Free-Trade Pacts This Month 
 
 
'WTO members likely to clash at Kenya meeting' 
The Times of India - Delhi Edition 
9 December 2015, 
Trade experts, economists, politicians and activists came together on Tuesday to express worry over the prospects of the Ministerial Meeting of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation (WTO) to be held in Nairobi, Kenya, next week. Various issues at the biannual meet, key to India's struggling economy like food subsidies, market access to industrial goods, pharma patents and 'green' technologies, are likely to cause discord among HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO member countries, broadly on the lines of rich versus poor. At the convention, the presence of Murli Manohar Joshi, BJP leader and former Union minister, and representatives from BJP-affiliated trade unions sent a ripple of excitement. Joshi, recounting his opposition to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO since its inception in the early nineties, said that consumerism and blind exploitation of natural resources were the lynchpins of the Western economic model which they want to impose on all. He took a dig at "bullet trains and smart cities", both proposals of the Modi government, as being part of this model. Congress and Left parties' representatives also spoke. Biswajit Dhar, JNU professor and an expert on global trade negotiations, said the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO itself was being sought to be subverted by developed countries, forcing for consideration issues that serve their interests. In 2001, international trade negotiations entered a new round at Doha. A Doha Development Agenda was adopted that included some accommodation of developing countries' concerns for discussion. Since then, for the past 14 years, country representatives have struggled to arrive at a consensus, mainly because the rich bloc wants to break down trade barriers including subsidies and support for the poor in developing countries. S P Shukla who was India's chief negotiator at GATT, the precursor to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO, recounted how India had fought to keep the developing world's interests protected. Several examples of India losing out under the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO regime were given at the meet. These included the Information Technology Agreement which made India eliminate tariffs on over 200 IT products. This led to the complete decimation of India's electronics hardware industry . For the full report, log on to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" http://www.timesofindia.com
 
WTO meet: Food security solution deadlocked in Nairobi
By The Economic Times | 9 Dec, 2015, 11.56AM IST
NEW DELHI: With just a week for the World Trade Organisation's (WTO) ministerial meeting to commence in HYPERLINK "http://economictimes.indiatimes.com/topic/Nairobi" Nairobi, talks remain deadlocked with no end in sight for India's demand to find a permanent solution to its food security problem. While the G-33, a developing country grouping including India, is insisting that a permanent solution to Delhi's concern be found in the Kenyan capital, there is stiff resistance from the developed countries, which grudgingly accepted a permanent peace clause that will prevent any HYPERLINK "http://economictimes.indiatimes.com/topic/WTO" WTO member from raising a dispute even in case of a breach of the cap on procuring food products. 
Sources said the developed countries are seeking some sort of caps or even suggesting safeguards to ensure that the goods procured do not find their way into export markets. Besides, they have indicated that there is no rush to finalise the deal given that the deadline is still two years away. But, having agreed to an agreement on trade facilitation, India is keen to settle the issue at the earliest to ensure that it does not have to "pay up" twice for settling the same issue. In his report to the general council in the run-up to the ministerial meeting that starts next Tuesday, WTO director general HYPERLINK "http://economictimes.indiatimes.com/topic/Roberto-Azevedo" Roberto Azevedo has indicated that countries are far from arriving at a consensus. "They (G33) have noted that the recent G33 proposal seeks to address the systemic concerns of members. Others consider that the proposal still does not adequately address a variety of concerns, both systemic and trade-related. The latest consultations, based on the proposed texts, have not so far taken us much closer to convergence..." But, this is not the only issue on where the 162 members are at odds. In fact, negotiators said the developed countries are not focusing much on food security . Instead, the two big themes are putting an end o the Doha Round and getting new issues on the table, something that India has opposed. And, if that was not the only pressure point, a bigger worry is the demand from some of the developed countries led by the US to graduate India and China into the league of "emerging economies", which will mean that they have to undertake more obligations than developing countries, which is their current classification. Similarly , on the issue of special safeguard mechanism SSM), again an issue being pushed by the G33, talks remain deadlocked and the possibility of an agreement currently looks remote. "If you look at he position of each side, by no means they are illogical or irrational. It's now a question of how much political will each one has on moving ahead," said a source. 
 
EU asks for cap on PDS spending in return for food security deal 
D Ravi Kanth, Mint, Geneva, Dec. 9 -- The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU) has insisted that India must accept a financial cap on market price support programmes if New Delhi wants a permanent solution for the public stockholding programmes for food security at the Nairobi meeting of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization next week, according to people familiar with the development. In an audacious proposal that is rarely heard in global trade negotiations, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU has indicated that Brussels will accept a permanent solution for exempting the acquisition of foodstuff at administered prices on the condition that New Delhi agrees to a financial cap on the public distribution programmes regardless of economic and developmental challenges, said a person who asked not to be identified. During closed-door meetings over the past five days, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU also suggested more burdensome and stringent conditions for the permanent solution than what were agreed as part of the interim solution in the 2013 Bali ministerial decision. The US remained silent during these meetings when the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU floated the proposal for a financial/quantitative cap on subsidy programmes involving the acquisition of foodstuff at administered prices, the person said. India rejected the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU's argument on the ground that public stockholding programmes are critical for the continuation of farming for low-income and resource-poor farmers in developing nations. India asked whether the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU and the US are also prepared to accept such a cap for the trade-distorting international food aid which is causing havoc in the international market and many developing and poorest countries, particularly in Africa. At another closed-door meeting convened by the chair for Doha agriculture negotiations on 5 December, Australia, Paraguay and Canada presented what is called room document in which they argued that they are not required to find a permanent solution at the Nairobi meeting as per the Bali Ministerial Declaration of December 2013. At the Bali ministerial, trade ministers set a deadline for finding the permanent solution by end-2017, at the 11th ministerial meeting, while members at the General Council had mandated concerted efforts to resolve this issue by agreeing to a permanent solution by 31 December. India reminded Australia, Paraguay, and Canada that the General Council decision had mandated members to make a concerted efforts for finalizing the permanent solution prior to the 10th ministerial conference which is starting in Nairobi on 15 December, according to people familiar with the meeting. At the same meeting, the US maintained that concerted efforts do not mean that members have to agree to the G-33 proposal. The proposal of the G-33 group, led by Indonesia and including India, China, the Philippines and 43 other developing countries, has called for amending the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's agreement on agriculture by inserting a new annex six to cover the domestic subsidies underpinning the public stockholding for food security purposes. It says programmes for the acquisition of foodstuff at administered prices by developing and poorest countries "with the objective of supporting low-income or resource-poor producers", and for subsequent distribution at subsidized prices with the objective of meeting food security requirements shall be exempted from subsidy reduction commitments. In his report to the General Council on Monday (7 December), WTO director general HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevedo spoke about the ongoing consultations convened by the chair for Doha agriculture negotiations Ambassador Vangelis Vitalis on public stockholding programmes and the special safeguard mechanism. On public stockholding programmes, Azevedo said the G-33 proposal "still does not adequately address a varies of concerns, both systemic and trade-related". Commenting on the special safeguard mechanism (SSM), the director general said there are "sustained divergent views, the negotiations on this issue have reached an impasse". "The latest consultations (by the chair), based on the proposed texts (of the G-33), have not so far taken us much close to convergence, but as with the SSM, work continues in various format," the director general maintained. Azevedo also noted that there is a large list of issues in the export competition pillar such as the timeframes and conditions envisaged for the elimination of export subsidies, repayment terms in the area of export finance, coverage of self-financing provisions and monetization in food aid which are still unresolved. But there is a growing view among a large majority of developing countries that a concerted attempt is now being made by some powerful countries to deny the permanent solution for public stockholding programmes for food security and the special safeguard mechanism for developing countries to counter unforeseen surges in imports of agricultural products, an African trade official said, requesting anonymity. 
 
India wants WTO meet to take up Bali agenda 
The Economic Times, 9 December 2015, NEW DELHI: In the run-up to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation’s ministerial conference in Nairobi next week, India has said it wants the agenda finalised at Bali in 2013 to be implemented before it makes any fresh commitments.  India is not willing to make binding commitments on new areas such as labour, environment and competition that the developed countries have been trying to introduce into the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO mandate, officials said.  HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO’s tenth ministerial conference is set to take place from December 15-18. Commerce and industry minister Nirmala Sitharaman said in an interaction with the media on Monday, “The grievance is that many things which are part of the development agenda don’t have a work programme. Even after Bali in 2013, there is no work programme like there was for trade facilitation agreement.”  While India had agreed to ratify the trade facilitation agreement (TFA), clarity is yet to emerge on the rest of the Bali package that comprises agriculture issues including public stockholding for food security purposes and export competition, cotton and issues pertaining to least developed countries. The commerce department has circulated an interministerial note on TFA and the Cabinet will consider it soon.  Developed countries have been trying to insert new issues related to investment, competition, labour, government procurement, environment, climate change and global value chains.  According to India’s trade negotiators, though, discussions on Mode 4, involving movement of natural persons, in the services agreement will be welcome even though the country has not taken any position on this issue.  Sitharaman said that India’s wish list from the ministerial has four elements – permanent solution for stockpiling for food security, safeguard mechanism in case of sudden rise in imports or fall in prices, no differential treatment only because India is a high growth emerging economy and the inclusion of peace clause in the draft ministerial declaration. "Our effort to ensure that the unfulfilled elements of Doha find a place somewhere and work programmes are given differentiated treatment is not applicable and we have enough instruments for protecting from any sudden surge,” the minister said. Asked whether India will be considered an obstructionist country because of such a stance, she said, “I didn’t get the feeling that in current phase of working towards Nairobi, India is seen as obstructionist. I am not asking for something new, so how can I be seen as obstructionist?” While safeguards mechanism was not part of the Bali outcome, India has been pressing for it because it will give it the right to impose contingency restrictions on imports when import volumes rise above a certain level or prices fall below a certain level. 
 
Editorial: Getting WTO going 
The Financial Express, 9 December 2015 -- Predictably, commerce minister Nirmala Sitharaman has dug in her heels ahead of the Nairobi WTO ministerial meeting, and talked of how many of the issues agreed to in earlier rounds need to be addressed before any new issues are brought up. Sitharaman is right in opposing the attempt by developed countries to wind up the 14-year-old Doha Round, but why oppose negotiation on investments-they are being done on a plurilateral basis and, in any case, India is welcoming of FDI in most areas. And why insist on a permanent solution to the food-stocking-by-FCI issue since India has been given a permanent ceasefire on this by the US anyway? Besides, trade negotiations are a tricky business, and take place in a world where relations are constantly realigning-no HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO strategy can afford not to pay close attention to large trade pacts that are being stitched up like the Trans-Pacific Partnership between countries that account for a fourth of India's exports. That India does not want to be part of a TPP-type trade pact is obvious since it will have to dilute its stand on patents and also significantly dilute market access barriers/duties. But, it is precisely because multilateral fora like the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO protect India's interests that India needs to show more flexibility. Also, while several HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO positions-on food security and food subsidies-appear unfair, they are in India's long-term interest. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO definition of aggregate measure of support (AMS) at 1986-88 prices needs to be updated for inflation-several experts argue this is actually allowed under HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO rules-but there are easier ways around this. If India was to give fertiliser subsidies by way of cash transfers to farmers, and fashion them as US-style 'income-support', India could be within even the unfair HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO rules; if cash transfers were made to the poor instead of the elaborate FCI-led procurement-cum-PDS system, this would reduce the AMS since the FCI-payments are considered to be subsidies in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO system. That India would save by having much lower buffer stocks, and could use this money to pay for crop insurance and much more is an additional bonus. Similarly, countries should be allowed to stock foodgrain or other items for distribution to the poor, but HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members have a point when they say this cannot be allowed to distort trade. There is a nuanced argument even here since, while FCI clears its stock at a discount and some part of this finds its way into export markets, that's because FCI is inefficient-in the case of paddy, while FCI procured it at Rs 1,310 per quintal last year, the economic costs ended up at around Rs 2,210-2,396. So when the stock is cleared, it has to be sold at below the economic cost, but there is no real subsidy involved-all that is being done is to ensure FCI's inefficiency is not passed on to private buyers. But if FCI was to buy less grain-it buys anywhere between 2-3 times what is required-and food subsidies were given by way of cash transfers, there would be no need to then offload grain in the market at what looks like a subsidy. Another reality that needs to be kept in mind is that as India signs more bilateral pacts with countries in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU, for instance, it will have to lower import duties and grant higher market access. So far, the dominant view in the government is that India has not benefited as much as its trade partners have. The primary reason for this is that, in many areas, India is simply not competitive enough. Given that India is most competitive in areas where import duties are the lowest and where there is greater market access/competition, the solution is to unilaterally cut duties and lower market access barriers. That will also give a big fillip to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO process since, if India doesn't thwart it, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO can march ahead-let's not forget, when the US lowers tariffs bilaterally instead of plurilaterally, it also incurs losses as it is no longer sourcing from the cheapest country. 
 
US accuses China over tax breaks for domestic plane makers; Trade 
By Shawn Donnan in Washington, Financial Times, 9 December 2015 -- The US has launched a new front in its trade battles with China , accusing Beijing of giving unfair tax breaks to domestic plane producers in a sign of Washington's anxiety over China's nascent aircraft industry. US officials said yesterday they had filed a request for consultations with Beijing over a value added tax exemption that is given to domestic aircraft manufacturers but not foreign ones. The move is the first step in bringing a case at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation , the Geneva-based adjudicator of global trading rules. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU and US have battled for years at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO over state programmes designed to benefit aircraft manufacturers such as HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Airbus and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Boeing. But yesterday's launch marks the first case brought anywhere against China over commercial aircraft. It also comes as the administration of US President Barack Obama has increasingly sought to use a tough stance on China as a selling point for its trade agenda. The US, Japan and 10 other economies in October concluded negotiations over a Pacific Rim trade agreement, the Trans-Pacific Partnership , which the administration has portrayed as a counterbalance to a rising China. The deal faces an uncertain future in Congress, however, with most Democrats opposing it and prominent Republicans expressing misgivings over some of its provisions. The administration has throughout this year presented the TPP as a geopolitical as well as an economic project in the hope of building support in Congress. It also has launched HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO and other enforcement cases against China in an effort to portray itself as a tough defender of US jobs from unfair competition, a popular move in the legislature. "We are taking this action today because American workers and producers deserve a fair shot to compete - and win," Mike Froman, the US trade representative, said yesterday. The US claims that China's tax concession for aircraft manufactures violates HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO rules because it discriminates against foreign producers. While imported commercial aircraft are subject to 17 per cent VAT, domestic planes are not. That was not much of an issue in the past. But China's aircraft industry has been growing rapidly and is beginning to compete with manufacturers such as HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Boeing, particularly for the rapidly growing regional aviation market in China. The US also claims that China sought to hide the VAT exemption from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO by not disclosing it as required. "Transparency of laws and regulations impacting trade is a core HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO commitment that China must uphold, just as it expects other countries to do," Mr Froman said. 
 
Parliament must ratify WTO deals, say NGOs 
By Arun S., The Hindu, 9 December 2015, NEW DELHI,NATIONAL Days ahead of the Nairobi meeting of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation (WTO) for negotiations towards an agreement to open up global trade, civil society groups have urged the Union government not to undertake new binding commitments without public consultation as well as before debate and ratification by Parliament. Organisations such as the Forum against Free Trade Agreements and the National Working Group on Patent Laws and WTO also asked Parliament to take inputs from all stakeholders and carry out a thorough assessment of the employment, social and environmental impacts arising out of the commitments India makes at the WTO-level talks as well as due to the various free trade agreements (FTA) between India and other countries.  They expressed concern over India engaging in ‘non-binding’ discussions on ‘new’ issues such as environment and labour that the developed world is keen on introducing during the December 15-18 meetings in the Kenyan capital. The new issues pertain to global value chains, e-commerce, competition and investment provisions, transparency in government procurement and state-owned enterprises. The civil society groups alleged that the new issues — which the rich world terms as the latest challenges facing world trade — represent the corporate agenda of the advanced countries to further pry open developing country markets. 
Support from Joshi 
The civil society groups held a ‘National Convention’ here on issues related to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO meet and also received moral support for their cause from BJP leader and former Union Minister Murli Manohar Joshi and former BJP leader Govindacharya, who addressed the event. Mr. Govindacharya said the government should publish a ‘white paper’ on the gains and losses from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO agreements and FTAs and place it before Parliament. 
‘Battle for protection’ 
Mr. Joshi said India should treat the Nairobi meet as an ‘important battle’ for protection of the interests of poor farmers and small traders as well as India’s food security programmes. The groups said India should provide leadership to developing countries by highlighting issues of concern to them, including reduction of ‘huge and trade distorting’ agri-business subsidies in developed countries. 
‘Don’t relent on tariffs’ 
They said India should also ensure that the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO mandate of ‘Special and Differential Treatment’ (S&DT) for developing countries is not abandoned by agreeing to aggressive tariff cuts in farm products — as demanded by the developed world. S&DT gives developing countries, among other things, longer time periods for implementing HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO agreements and commitments as well as provisions for safeguarding their trade interests. 
 
Don’t make commitments at WTO without Parliament debate: civil society to govt 
Our Bureau, Business Line (The Hindu), 9 December 2015 -- Centre urged to resist pressure from developed countries to include new issues Civil society groups, trade unions, trade experts and farmers’ organisations have asked the Centre not to take on any commitment at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation’s (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) ministerial meeting in Nairobi next week without due debate in Parliament and public consultations. “Given the deep democratic deficit in HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO processes, we call for a moratorium on any new commitments. “We underline that no commitments should be made before due debate and ratification by Indian Parliament and public consultation,” a declaration ‘in defence of people’s rights at the 10th WTO Ministerial Conference in Nairobi’, jointly endorsed by several non-government organisations as well as some politicians stated. 
Note of caution 
The declaration noted with concern the concerted push by developed countries such as the US and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU to push “fundamentally flawed, pro-corporate and anti-democratic process of free trade and investment liberalisation’’ by supporting issues that were earlier rejected such as investment, government procurement and competition policy (Singapore issues). 
21st century issues 
“Further, the so called 21st Century issues such as e-commerce, environmental goods and global value chains are now on the table with the sole purpose of eliminating autonomous policy space of the South,” the declaration said. Trade ministers from 161 member countries of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO will meet in Nairobi on December 15-18 to decide on how to go forward with the on going Doha development round launched in 2001. Civil society groups and workers organisations such as Forum Against FTAs, National Working Group on Patent Laws and WTO, Madhyam, New Trade Union Initiative and National Confederation of Officers Association participated in the national conference. Others endorsing the draft included a number of peasant organisations, student and youth groups, and people’s campaign organisations and some politicians. 
Threat for farmers, traders 
Speaking at the forum, BJP veteran Murli Manohar Joshi said that the future of small farmers and traders was at stake and it was a very important battle that the government would have to fight at Nairobi. 
“It is not the last fight at Nairobi. To win the war the government has to look ahead,” Joshi said. RSS ideologue KN Govindacharya, who too spoke at the conference, endorsed the draft. Speaking to BusinessLine on the sidelines, Govindacharya said that it was time for the government to quit the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO as it was not able to make any gains from it. “The government should come out with a white paper stating which sectors have gained because of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO and which ones have lost out,” he said. 
 
Australian farmers receive early Christmas present from China-Australia FTA 
By Matthew Burgess, Xinhua News Agency, SYDNEY, Dec. 9 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xinhua) -- Australia's agriculture sector have received an early Christmas present on news the first round of Chinese import tariffs will be cut on Dec. 20 when the China-Australia Free Trade Agreement comes into force. Signed in June, both countries have exchanged the agreement's enacting letters which is expected to drive up trade worth now 100 billion Australian dollars (72 billion U.S. dollars) annually, cutting import tariffs on wide ranging products including agriculture and financial services needed to service a rising middle class. The first round of tariff cuts will happen on Dec. 20, with a second cut to take effect from Jan. 1 2016, helping improve the competitiveness of the nation's produce into China amid stiff competition, Australia's agriculture minister Barnaby Joyce said on Wednesday. "The China-Australia FTA will also close the gap between Australia and those countries that already have FTAs with China, such as New Zealand and Chile, and provides a significant advantage over other major competitors in the market which do not have FTAs with China," Joyce said in a statement. 
The first year of tariff cuts is worth 400 million Australian dollars (288 million U.S. dollars) to the local agriculture industry, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" the National Farmers Federation have said. Despite the China-Australia FTA being signed in June, the implementation of the agreement has had a rocky path into implementation by local political campaigns that have been labelled as xenophobic, risking the future growth of the struggling economy. Australia is undergoing one of its most significant economic transitions as the commodities boom comes to a halt, helped by a low Australian dollar and strengthening business and consumer sentiment, tailoring exports to capitalize on the rising Asian middle class. "Now the (China-Australia FTA) has come into effect, it's time to get on with the job," Professor James Laurenceson, economist and deputy directory of the Australia-China Relations Institute, told HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xinhua. "(Australia is) still far better off being exposed to a Chinese economy growing at around 7 percent than HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD economies growing at 2 percent." Australia's agriculture industry has been the bright spot of the local export economy, up 11.4 percent year on year despite a 4.1 percent decline in goods exports, dragged by falling iron ore which led to Australia's trade deficit blowing out to 3.3 billion Australian dollars in October, according to official figures released last week. 
 
Xinhua Insight: Four decades on, China seeks greater role in globalization 
renke lizhengwei likun pengyong yeqian gaojie xiongxiangyi qinchun louchen, Xinhua News Agency 
BEIJING, Dec. 9 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xinhua) -- When Luo Feng visited Sri Lanka years ago, he noticed that the most popular products in airport duty-free stores were not cosmetics or chocolate, but rice cookers and washing machines. The Chinese businessman saw an opportunity. Luo is founder and chairman of Beijing's IZP Technologies Group, a big data and cross-border payment platform. He found Chinese exports to South Asia subject to high tariffs while Sri Lanka's people need affordable home appliances. "Why not establish a manufacturing base here?" He came to an idea that Chinese manufacturers could invest in Sri Lanka to produce and sell home appliances without import tariffs. In a bid to achieve this goal, IZP's subsidiary Globebill has reached an agreement with HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Sri Lanka's central bank on clearing. In cooperation with the China Merchants Group, IZP is improving Sri Lanka's infrastructure in ports and transportation. The company is also considering buying an airport as a free trade zone. It has been no more than four decades since China opened its door to the outside world. From a country of almost universal poverty and isolation, it has become the world's second largest economy with intensive integration into the whole world. Mark Bartlam of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Nankai University, Tianjin, has the first-hand experience of these changes. After getting his PhD from HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Oxford University in 2000, he came to China to continue his work in biochemistry. "China's research system is becoming more internationalized and open. You meet many foreign scientists in China's universities. Universities are recruiting people from all over the world," Bartlam said. Bartlam said there were no special policies in 2000, which could treat foreign scientists working in China equally in terms of funding application. "It was difficult for me then, but now I can get as much funding as my Chinese colleagues," he said, referring to the efforts of Chinese universities to attract more top researchers from all over the world. For ordinary Chinese people, greater integration with the world means they have much more choices on their shopping lists. "One direct benefit for ordinary people is easy access to foreign products due to the boom of cross-border e-commerce. As customs and quarantine systems are simplified, imported products are getting cheaper," said Liu Enzhuan, executive dean of Tianjin Academy of Free Trade Area. Cross-border e-commerce business can avoid tariffs and value-added taxes of as much as 30 percent. An increasing number of cross-border e-commerce platforms are doing businesses in eight cities allowed by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" General Administration of Customs of China. Some estimate that the market will be worth 1 trillion yuan (155.7 billion U.S. dollars). "In the past foreign travel agencies are not allowed to do overseas travel businesses in China, but in the future they will be. Foreign health care services will also be allowed in the zone," said Wang Qingsheng of the administrative committee of the Tianjin pilot free trade zone. But opening up in China at present is more about "going out." Wang Yiwei of Renmin University, Beijing, calls the opening up in the early 1980's the "globalization in China." At that time China created special economic zones in coastal areas to attract foreign investment and export products with favorable tax policies and others. "That way was not sustainable at all. Opening up will enter a new, more participatory, stage or 'China in globalization'," Wang added. At a meeting in late October on development plan for next five years, the Communist Party of China (CPC) Central Committee called for a higher level opening-up, actively joining global economic governance and the supply of public goods. China has built four pilot free-trade zones in Shanghai, Guangdong, Fujian and Tianjin, piloting reform of traditional administrative procedures. For instance, Shekou area of Guangdong pilot free trade zone has built a dedicated commercial court and an international arbitration mechanism to provide a better legal environment adaptable to international standards. "We will not attract foreign investment with favorable tax policies, but with favorable and reproducible systems," said Wang Qingsheng. In terms of discourse power in global economy, China is strengthening it with the Belt and Road initiative and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Asia Infrastructure Investment Bank. The Belt and Road initiative is a grand blueprint for China's overseas strategy. In his latest work -- Belt and Road: Opportunities and Challenges -- Wang Yiwei describes the proposals as an inevitable result of opening up. The IZP's Globebill has become one of the most important cross-border payment platforms for renminbi, especially in central and Western Asia, Russia and Latin American countries. IZP is developing a "decoding" system for customs in different countries, to shorten clearance time where systems are not advanced. Some are worried that China's participation in the world will threaten their market, but Luo Feng did not agree. The IZP has purchased an airport in Parma, Italy, and plans to turn it into a hub for China's businesses. "Our development will bring more opportunities for others. If we bring Chinese tourists, trade and other resources, the place will become a new financial center," Luo said. "We are developing a new market rather than competing with others," Luo said. 
 
China Agrees to Implement South Korea, Australia Free-Trade Pacts This Month 
Dow Jones Institutional News, 9 December 2015 08:38, BEIJING--China agreed to implement its bilateral free-trade agreements with South Korea and Australia this month, the Ministry of Commerce said Wednesday. For both agreements, the first tax cut for trade will be effective Dec. 20 and the second will start Jan. 1, 2016, the ministry said in a statement on its website. The two agreements will boost bilateral trade and investment, promote investment transparency, and create a fair and convenient trade and investment environment, the ministry said. 
 
END


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.