
·         Bangladesh wants LDC-specific decisions in Nairobi 


·         WTO participating states welcome Ukraine joining the Agreement on Government Procurement 


·         Summit likely to highlight G20’s inner political tensions 


·         Spotlight: Chinese president proposes innovation, open economy for boosting global growth 


·         La industria del acero argentino en la región alerta sobre efectos de la creciente importación de productos chinos


·         Mittal calls upon G20 leaders to commit to Internet access for all 


·         G20 grapples with fundamental economic questions for Turkey 


·         Modi, Obama unlikely to meet during G20 summit in Turkey 


·         Reform Benefits China and the World: Former WTO Chief


·         WTO: Africa backs India on affordable, lifesaving drugs 


·         Afghanistan & Liberia will get WTO membership


·         Industry minister chairs WTO national committee meeting 


 


 


Bangladesh wants LDC-specific decisions in Nairobi 


The Financial Express (Bangladesh) 

15 November 2015, 

310 words, 

English

Copyright 2015. The Financial Express 

 

Bangladesh, Nov. 15 -- In the up-coming 10th ministerial conference of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organisation (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO), Bangladesh wants substantive, binding, LDC-specific decisions which should be commercially meaningful on all four elements of the Bali package. 

Mr Shameem Ahsan, the Ambassador and Permanent Representative of Bangladesh to the United Nations Offices in Geneva, made this assertion in an interview with ICTSD Bridge-News last week on the ahead of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO highest level meeting, to be held in Kenyan capital Nairobi on December 15-18 this year. 

Bali package was adopted at the 9th ministerial conference of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO in 2013. In this package four elements for Least Developed Countries (LDCs) are Duty-Free Quota-Free (DFQF) market access, rules of origin, the operationalisation of the service waiver and cotton issue. 

"We are also hopeful that we will have an outcome close to our satisfaction on the special and differential treatment (S&DT)," said Mr Ahsan who is also Coordinator of the LDC Consultative group at the WTO. 

Bangladesh is now the LDC Coordinator at the WTO and commerce minister Tofail Ahemd is designated as the coordinator. 

In reply to another question, Mr Ahsan said that the LDCs have a unique status in the membership of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO because LDCs are exempt from any kind of obligations. 

"LDCs are not in a 'give and take' situation, which is the case with other members, or the rest of the membership. Therefore the LDCs would like to see the decisions, the declarations on issues of interest for them being implemented. So this is the specific angle of the LDCs: we always look for implementation." 

Published by HT Syndication with permission from The Financial Express. 

For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com 

International Publications Limited 

 

 

 


WTO participating states welcome Ukraine joining the Agreement on Government Procurement 




182 words, 

English, 

RIAORE, 

© [2015] RIA OREANDA. All Rights Reserved 

Economy. Geneva. OREANDA-NEWS. November 16, 2015. Member countries of the Committee on Government Procurement of the World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO) approved the accession of Ukraine to the Agreement on government procurement (Agreement on Government Procurement, GPA). 

The Ministry of Economic Development and Trade of Ukraine officials emphasize that the GPA Agreement extends the main principle of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO – an equal access to markets - to government procurement. Therefore, Ukraine opens access to its public tenders for the GPA parties as also the GPA parties open access to their procurement markets. Joining the Agreement means for the Ukrainian companies the opening of the global market for public procurement of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO countries, which is estimated at USD 1.7 trillion. 

According to specialists of the Ministry of Economic Development and Trade, joining the GPA is a positive signal for foreign investors and a proof that Ukraine adopts best practices and gets the support of leading world countries. 

The Ministry expects the Verkhovna Rada to ratify the GPA before the end of 2015. 

Information Agency Oreanda News, LLC 

 

 

 

 


Summit likely to highlight G20’s inner political tensions 


Gideon Rachman 


16 November 2015 00:56, 

Copyright 2015 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web. 

 

The first HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"G20 summit was held in Washington DC in 2008 in the immediate aftermath of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Lehman Brothers collapse. Annual G20 summits have since become a part of the world’s political architecture but it is becoming increasingly apparent that the group is unlikely ever to fulfil the hopes of those analysts who saw it as the perfect forum for governing a multipolar world. 

The attraction of the G20 is that it is a much broader and more diverse group than the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"G7, which dates back to the 1970s and comprises six western nations, plus Japan. The onset of the financial crisis in 2008 made it clear that western nations alone could no longer hope to manage the global economy. It was crucial to find a forum that included rising economic powers such as China, India, Brazil and Indonesia, which account for so much of global output. The G20, which existed as a grouping for finance ministers, looked like the answer. Its first three summits in Washington, London and Pittsburgh were credited with taking important decisions to tackle the economic crisis, in particular by agreeing a plan to boost global demand. 

The G20 has established itself as a forum for global economic management. It has created a Financial Stability Forum, which has aimed to tackle the issue of banks that are too big to fail. The group has increased the pressure on tax havens and banking secrecy. Non G20 members, such as Switzerland, have come under concerted pressure to open up their financial systems to scrutiny. Together with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD grouping of advanced economies, the G20 has done important work on “base erosion and profit-shifting”, the efforts by multinational companies to reduce tax bills by booking profits in low-tax jurisdictions. 

While the G20 has gone some way to meeting the aspirations of those looking for a broader forum for the discussion of global economic issues, it has not widened its mandate into politics. In 2008, some of its advocates touted the group as a potential board of management for the world — larger and more representative than the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"G7, and smaller and less bureaucratic than the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"UN. 

The hope was that, as G20 leaders developed working methods and camaraderie, they might broaden their agenda to cover questions of security and the environment. 

But it has proved too hard for countries as diverse as the US and China, Saudi Arabia and Australia or the UK and Russia, to forge common understandings on the biggest political issues. The years since the first summit have seen the political gaps between members widen. Russia’s annexation of Crimea proved a turning point. Australia — hosts of the last G20 summit in Brisbane — signalled at one point that they were reluctant even to invite HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Vladimir Putin, the president of Russia. He did go to the Brisbane gathering (and was pictured awkwardly cuddling a koala bear, alongside Australian prime minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Tony Abbott) but left early. 

The split between Russia and the west has meant the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"G7 has rediscovered its vocation — as a smaller and more coherent alternative to the G20. As political tensions between Russia, China and the west have grown, the attractions of a mainly western forum have become evident again. 

Political tensions within the G20 are likely to be highlighted at the Antalya summit. Its Turkish hosts have been pushing a very busy economic agenda but this risks seeming like worthy blather, compared with the horrors of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"Syrian civil war. Syria’s city of Aleppo, ripped apart by the war, is a few hundred kilometres from Antalya. With some 2m Syrian refugees in Turkey, some people hope that this summit could provide the impetus to launch a co-ordinated international effort to help the refugees and relaunch diplomatic efforts to end the war. In reality, that is highly unlikely to happen. The differences in outlook between Russia and Turkey itself are too stark. 

That will not prevent HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the Turkish president, from using the summit to burnish his image. Mr Erdogan’s AKP party may have secured a big election victory, but he has been criticised, especially overseas, for his increasingly authoritarian style of government. He will relish the chance to play the role of international statesman. 

Once the Turks finish their G20 presidency, they hand over to China. A year of Chinese leadership may revive interest in the G20, since the ideas and priorities that Beijing promotes will be closely watched. But if the Chinese want their presidency to boast tangible achievements, they are likely to stick tightly to the G20’s founding mission — international economic management. 

The Financial Times Limited (AAIW/EIW) 

 

 

 


Spotlight: Chinese president proposes innovation, open economy for boosting global growth 


Hou lijun



Copyright 2015. Xinhua News Agency. All rights reserved. 

ANTALYA, Turkey, Nov. 15 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Xinhua) -- As impacts of the international financial crisis are lingering, Chinese President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Xi Jinping said Sunday on the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Group of 20 (G20) summit that targeted medicine for sluggish growth must be prescribed. 

In a speech entitled "Innovative Growth That Benefits All," the Chinese leader pointed out that the G20, a main forum for global economic and financial cooperation, should work to maintain a stable economic growth in the short term, while seeking to inject new impetus into the world economy in the long term. 

Xi's proposals for boosting global growth through effective measures as well as China's endeavors to deepen reform and build an open economy have also been recognized by overseas experts. 

ROOT CAUSE OF WEAK ECONOMIC GROWTH 

Themed with "collective action for inclusive and robust growth," the ongoing G20 summit, held in the Turkish resort city of Antalya, is expected to underpin global confidence and ensure strong, sustainable and balanced growth for the world economy. 

Why seven years into the crisis, the world economy is still slow in recovery and weak in growth? 

Xi gave his answer in the speech that the momentum generated by the last round of scientific and industrial revolution is waning and the potential for growth under the traditional economic system and model of development is diminishing. 

At the same time, the problem of uneven development is far from being resolved, and the inadequacies of the existing economic governance mechanism and structure have become evident. 

"These factors have weakened the momentum of global growth and dampened effective demand, which are manifested in sluggish growth," said Xi. 

He stressed that the G20 members should not only address the immediate challenge by stabilizing growth, but also tackle the root cause by gathering momentum for long-term development. 

"The governments of the G20 nations should work together in terms of macro economic policy coordination," said Tristram Sainsbury, a research fellow in the G20 Studies Center at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Lowy Institute. 

"They need to know that more growth is needed, and more actions are needed," he said. 

EFFECTIVE MEASURES TO REVITALIZING GROWTH 

The dynamism and creativity unleashed through institutional reform and the new industries and products enabled by the development in science and technology have been essential for the world economy to turn the corner and recover from previous major crises, said Xi. 

New ideas and new business forms such as Internet+, sharing economy, 3D printing and smart manufacturing are generating enormous business opportunities and demand. 

Xi said the G20 members should seize the opportunities, and make innovation-driven development and cultivation of new growth points the new priorities of G20 cooperation. 

Revitalizing trade and investment and restoring the two engines of the world economy to high-speed operation is another priority for the G20, said Xi. 

In 2014, foreign direct investment around the world dropped by 8 percent, which deserves close attention. 

"We should reject protectionism and uphold and strengthen the multilateral trading regime in order to provide sufficient space for the development of different countries," said Xi. 

In the wake of the failed HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO) Doha trade negotiations that stumbled because complex issues could not be resolved, nations are now forming regional trade blocks, which are politically charged. 

"Regional trade deals are potentially overlapping trade routes, and that leads to trade diversion rather than trade creation," said Sainsbury. 

Xi said the G20 members should ensure that regional free trade arrangements serve as a useful complement to multilateral trading regime, rather than create new obstacles. 

CHINA REMAINS DRIVING FORCE FOR GLOBAL ECONOMY 

After 30-plus years of fast growth, China also experiences a slowdown, which has stirred speculations that China's economy will come to a halt and may drag global rehabilitation down. 

However, Xi said China has the confidence and ability to sustain a medium-high growth rate and continue to create development opportunities for other countries. 

The Chinese economy is predicted to grow about 7 percent this year, which will continue to contribute as high as about one third to the global growth, he said. 

Yuksel Gormez, a senior economist with HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Central Bank of Turkey, told HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Xinhua that the world should read China's economic numbers in a correct way. He said the growth in China is continuing in volume terms, but dipping in percentage terms. 

"When China becomes a 20-trillion dollar economy, even a five-percent growth will create one trillion dollars of net value in one year," he said. "Can you say China is not growing?" 

Xi admitted that China has come to a crucial point when it must adjust the growth pattern and structure of the Chinese economy. 

"This endeavor won't be a smooth sailing. It won't happen overnight," he said, adding that China's resolve to push forward structural reform is rock-firm and its policy to open up further is clear. 

"The emerging economies may have plateaued a little bit, but that is because the reform is necessary," said Akshay Mathur, an expert on geoeconomics studies at Gateway House (Indian Council on Global Relations). 

"China's 'new normal' aims at better quality growth with more consumption, this is a hard work, it takes time," he said. 

China has adopted a proposal on formulating the 13th Five-Year Plan (2016-2020) on national economic and social development, which aims to build a "moderately prosperous society" and double its 2010 GDP and per capita income of both urban and rural residents by 2020, said Xi. 

In the next five years, China will adhere to a path of innovative, coordinated, green, open and shared development, and will encourage a system that nurtures innovation, said Xi. 

The country will try to realize the synchronous development of the new type of industrialization, IT application, urbanization and agricultural modernization, he added. 

China, Xi said, will highlight green and low-carbon development, improve its environmental quality, become heavily involved in global economy, and carry out the Belt and Road initiative. 

All these efforts will inject strong impetus into China's economic growth while unleashing demand for the world economy, said the president. 

 

 

La industria del acero argentino en la región alerta sobre efectos de la creciente importación de productos chinos

AméricaEconomía

15 November 2015 15:48

808 words, (Spanish)

 

A lo largo de las tres jornadas de debate se destacó que China produce el 50% del acero del mundo con una sobrecapacidad del orden de los 425 millones de toneladas al año, lo que significa seis veces la producción anual de la siderurgia latinoamericana.

Buenos Aires. La industria del acero volvió a alertar sobre el creciente índice de las importaciones chinas en la región, a partir de mantener una industria subsidiada y fuera de los márgenes de la Organización Mundial del Comercio (OMC), y que pasó de representar el 6 por ciento del consumo que poseía hace 5 años al actual 13 por ciento del mercado latinoamericano. 

Así se planteó en ocasión del 56 Congreso de la Asociación Latinoamericana de Acero que se realizó esta semana en Buenos Aires, con la participación de todos los representantes de la cadena de valor de la región.

A lo largo de las tres jornadas de debate se destacó que China produce el 50 por ciento del acero del mundo con una sobrecapacidad del orden de los 425 millones de toneladas al año, lo que significa seis veces la producción anual de la siderurgia latinoamericana.

En ese sentido, se afirmó que “a través de precios de dumping y subsidiados, China está desplazando a los productores nacionales de las cadenas de valor del acero en América Latina”.

“La región recibe cada vez más acero de China en condiciones de comercio desleal al no cumplir las reglas de la OMC” se destacó durante el Congreso en el que se afirma que “no es posible que una economía de mercado genere una sobrecapacidad de esa magnitud que equivale a 100 plantas siderúrgicas de 4 millones de toneladas de capacidad y una inversión de 500 mil millones de dólares”.

Para los industriales de la región, esta enorme capacidad de sobreproducción empuja al país asiático a tener que exportar cifras récord estimas en 100 millones de toneladas por año para mantener la actividad y el empleo, más allá del déficit que arrojan muchas de sus plantas.

En este sentido, las cifras reveladas en el encuentro detallan que el acero chino ya abastece el 13 por ciento del consumo de la región, lo que hace cinco años representaba apenas el 6 por ciento del total, con lo cual el mercado latinoamericano ya se convirtió en el segundo destino de los productos del país asiático con un récord estimado para 2015 de 9,7 millones de toneladas.

Las empresas del sector afirman que “el daño del efecto China ya es visible” en distintos países través de paros técnicos, cierre de plantas siderúrgicas, despidos de trabajadores y dificultades financieras, y se estima que por cada millón de dólares que ingresan en productos con acero chinos se pueden perder hasta 64 empleos en el subcontinente.

“Las empresas privadas no pueden competir contra el comercio desleal del Gobierno chino” afirmaron los industriales al reclamar a los gobiernos locales inspecciones aduaneras efectivas para evitar contrabando y evasión de cuotas antidumping, normas de calidad, aplicación de los instrumentos previstos por la OMC y el ejercicio de la denominada Diplomacia Comercial.

En el caso argentino, la industria local es el tercer productor de acero de América Latina con 5,5 millones de toneladas alcanzadas en 2014 -un crecimiento del 5,8 por ciento respecto a 2013- con una capacidad instalada de 7 millones de toneladas.

Con un consumo nacional aparente de 5 millones de toneladas anuales, el sector que invirtió unos 3.600 millones de dólares en los últimos 10 años -se calculan otros 400 millones para 2015- alcanzó exportaciones por 809 mil toneladas, el 16 por ciento de la producción total.

En cuanto a las importaciones que alcanzaron en 2014 las 784 mil toneladas, lo que representó una disminución del 1,6 por ciento respecto al año anterior, en tanto que dos tercios de las compras locales provienen de Brasil y el resto de China con una composición que evoluciona a lo largo de los últimos años en favor del país asiático.

En particular las compras a China son ferroaleaciones de valor unitario muy alto y productos con valor agregado como determinados tipos de chapas, barras, perfiles, tubos y similares.

La Cámara Argentina del Acero destacó en un reciente informe que “el estricto control de las importaciones que tuvo lugar en la Argentina en los últimos años no logró impedir el fuerte desbalance en el comercio de productos manufacturados con uso intensivo de acero” de China que “afectó particularmente a la industria metalmecánica, clientes de la industria siderúrgica”. 

 

 


Mittal calls upon G20 leaders to commit to Internet access for all 


Puja Mehra 
The Hindu 



(c) 2015 Kasturi & Sons Ltd 

 

BUSINESS harti Enterprises Chairman and Vice-Chairman of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"International Chamber of Commerce (ICC) HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Sunil Bharti Mittal on Sunday urged world leaders to commit and invest in developing digital infrastructure to deliver a brighter and more prosperous future to their citizens. 

Speaking at the B20 – G20 session at the ongoing G20 Summit in Turkey, immediately following the inaugural address by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Recep Tayyip Erdogan, President of the Republic of Turkey, Mr. Mittal said the Internet can become the cornerstone of a more inclusive global economic growth. 

Mr. Mittal underlined the urgent need to bridge the global digital divide and provide easy and affordable access to Information Communication Technologies to millions across the world. “If we want to help people feed, heal, educate and employ themselves, we need to ensure they can connect to the Internet...The challenge of connecting the world will require us to take many different and complementary actions in the coming years,” he said. 

Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Narendra Modi, who is attending the G20 Summit, has outlined ‘Digital India’ as one of the key priorities for his Government. 

Stressing the need for supporting the growth of small and medium enterprises (SMEs), which generate 60 per cent of the world’s private sector employment, Mr. Mittal said in his address: “Globally, 95 per cent of the enterprises are SMEs and these should be at the core of the global growth strategy outlined by the G20 nations...they can become a major source of employment opportunities for youth and support a more inclusive economic growth.” He made a case for easier finance options for SMEs. To take just one example: SMEs often rely on bank credit to allow them to export, but ICC new data shows that over 50 per cent of SME applications for trade finance are now turned down by banks, he said. 

He spoke of the need of bringing more women and youth into the mainstream economic growth to ensure balanced growth within economies. “The global economy is facing considerable headwinds and the unemployment rate amongst youth across the world is at a high of 13 per cent...We must create meaningful opportunities for the young people to avoid social unrest.” 

Mr. Mittal also highlighted the agenda outlined by the ICC B20 for the revival of the global business environment which calls for the ratification and implementation of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organisation’s (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO) Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA), which India is yet to do. 

“New HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO research suggests that the TFA could boost global trade flows by an unprecedented $3.6 trillion, creating more than 20 million jobs in the process,” Mr. Mittal argued and said that the impact of implementing the TFA would be greater than eliminating all remaining tariff barriers the world over-and could lead to an increase in SME exports by up to 80 per cent in some economies as the Internet opens up new market opportunities. Although 51 countries have ratified the TFA to date, 108 are required to do so for the agreement to come into force. IBAC members are calling on the G20 economies to do all they can to speed effective implementation of this landmark agreement in the months ahead. 

On behalf of the global business community, he called on the G20 to commit to a comprehensive strategy to boost youth and female participation in the workforce. 

A key aim should be to reduce mismatches in skills, not least through better public-private collaboration on national skills strategies and education plans, he said. Mr. Mittal also said that though the launch of the Global Infrastructure Hub under last year’s Australian G20 presidency was a major step in the right direction, more needs to be done to build on this important platform given that a the worldwide spending gap on infrastructure is forecast to reach $15 trillion to $20 trillion by 2030. 

In their outreach to governments over the past few months, ICC CEOs have emphasized that if the G20 is serious about creating jobs it must urgently help deserving businesses get financing for their viable investments. A prudent starting point for the G20 would be to commit to exploring whether the implementation of tougher financial regulation has inadvertently stymied the flow of finance to small businesses. A cogent strategy to deepen SME access to alternative forms of financing must also be established. 

ICC’s delegation in Antalya-comprising business leaders from across the G20-will is led by Mr. Mittal. The ICC group also includes: HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Marcus Wallenberg, Chairman, SEB; HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Gerard Mestrallet, CEO, Engie; HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Peder Holk Nielsen, CEO, Novozymes; Khalid Alireza, Chairman, National Petrochemical Industrial Company; Antonio Brufau, Chairman, Repsol; HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Alexander Shokhin, President, Russian Union of Industrialists and Entrepreneurs; John Denton, CEO, Corrs Chambers Westgarth; Alejandro Ramirez Magana, Director General, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Cinepolis; HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Sam Walsh, CEO, Rio Tinto; and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Paul Bulcke, CEO, Nestle. 

In addition to meetings with the G20 leaders, ICC will also be participating in a range of side events on issues ranging from SME growth through to the UN Sustainable Development Goals. 

If we want to help people feed, heal, educate and employ themselves, we need to ensure they can connect to the Internet...The challenge of connecting the world will require us to take many different and complementary actions in the coming years 

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"SUNIL BHARTI MITTAL 

 

 


G20 grapples with fundamental economic questions for Turkey 


Mehul Srivastava 


16 November 2015 00:56, 

Copyright 2015 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web. 

 

 

When the leaders of the world’s biggest economies gather at the G20 summit in the Mediterranean town of Antalya this week, they will be meeting in a country that has first-hand knowledge of the biggest dilemmas confronting many of them. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"Turkey is a bellwether emerging market, a geopolitically vital nation and a country where allegations of authoritarianism are on the rise. 

The G20 nations are wrestling with fundamental economic questions such as the divergence in monetary policy between the US — as it prepares to raise interest rates — and Japan and the eurozone, which continue with ultra-loose policies. The net effect matters a great deal to countries such as Turkey, which have become notable destinations for funds unleashed by quantitative easing — a temporary home for restless capital as it desperately searches for returns. 

In Turkey, the prospect of an eventual tightening of the monetary spigot provokes significant anxiety, and rightly so. Like the old warning from HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Warren Buffett about those in receding tides who may have been swimming naked, Turkey’s immediate future rests on how its economy responds to tighter monetary conditions in the US, after a prolonged period that kept its companies awash in borrowing, reduced trade imbalances, and, above all, held out the promise of future prosperity to a restive population. 

The likely impact on the stability of a key strand in the convoluted web of Middle East politics remains unclear, complicating vital questions, especially how to deal with Isis and Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, whose rivalries a few hours south of Antalya have driven 2.2m refugees into Turkey and several hundreds of thousands into Europe. 

If the economy shudders, as many, from rating agency HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Moody’s to worried economists across Turkey have warned, what then happens to the hypnotic hold that President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Recep Tayyip Erdogan exerts over voters? Just two weeks ago they returned his Justice and Development party (AKP) to power after a short taste of the vagaries of unconcentrated political power — weak coalition governments and political infighting — heightened fears over jobs, inflation, indebtedness and national security. 

While the elections provided some clarity on Turkey’s politics — no more elections till 2019, for instance — they offered little reassurance over the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"unsure footing of the economy. 

For every dollar of foreign direct investment that Turkey attracted last year, for example, its business community spent 30 cents buying assets overseas. According to Guven Sak, an economist at Turkish think-tank Tepav, that means Turks themselves are unsure of how their businesses may fare in a country where they have lost faith in the justice system, and feel frustrated by the investment climate. At the same time, the police have intensified their activities, mostly to maintain order after the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"Gezi Park protests in Istanbul in 2013 spread across the country, without an accompanying increase in judicial restraint. “I am not saying this is evidence of a police state,” says Mr Sak, “but there is certainly something going on.” The economic impact is obvious, he says: “You need to make sure that the capitalists are here to do the job and they are leaving because they want a better rule of law.” 

There are also worries over the fact that the combination of the costs of financing Turkey’s current account deficit and the net effect of the debts coming due, what economists call the gross external financing requirement, has reached about 27 per cent of GDP, the highest among emerging market peers. For now, Turkey has been able to roll over that debt. Whether that will still be the case after US interest rates start to rise is unclear. 

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"Turkey’s current account deficit is smaller than just two years ago, but at over 5 per cent of GDP is still the most ominous of the economy’s macro indicators. Since the Turkish economy depends to a large extent on domestic consumption — people buying things like cars, cement or household goods — and much of what it consumes, including oil, comes from overseas, any success in boosting GDP also swells the deficit. The solution, both the government and economists agree, requires fundamental change to the Turkish economy: higher value exports and a knowledge economy based on better education and ambitious reforms, all of which will require time and scarce resources. These are “structural issues that need to be grasped immediately”, says Bulent Gultekin, professor of finance at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania, and a central bank governor in the 1990s. 

One question for those at the G20 this week is whether Turkey has time to change before the tide turns. The last decade and a half has transformed it from a nearly bankrupt nation into a relatively open economy that has allowed many of its citizens to enjoy a much better quality of life than their parents. The country has strengths that create the kind of space needed for HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"tough reforms: the national debt is just a third of GDP and the government takes care to try to balance the budget; inflation is dropping and oil remains cheap. 

“Reforms tend to deliver results over medium and long term but have immediate impact on expectations,” says finance minister Mehmet Simsek confidently. “As you begin to implement your reform programme, expectations improve.” 

The promise that tomorrow’s economy will be better than yesterday’s has kept many people in emerging markets loyal to governments, nowhere more so than Turkey. With Mr Erdogan and his government again indisputably at the helm, and both economic and geopolitical uncertainties guaranteed to continue, Turks look to him for solutions that go beyond election sloganeering. 

This is where Turkey’s true challenge lies. Can the same politicians who delivered an economic transformation in the early 2000s rise to the occasion again, bringing about a greater fundamental shift in the foundations of the country while steering it through uncertainty? 

“The party was given the benefit of doubt for a few years into their power, and look where we are right now,” says Prof Gultekin. “The question people are asking is this: ‘These people are still in power, and will they do things differently than they have in the past few years?’ For now, the sentiment towards Turkey has soured and they have to turn that around very quickly.” 

 


 


 


Modi, Obama unlikely to meet during G20 summit in Turkey 


Nayanima Basu 
456 words, 



 (c) 2015 The Hindu Business Line 

Both leaders recently discussed key bilateral issues on the new ‘hotline’ In a major deviation from earlier times, the much-publicised bilateral meeting between Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Narendra Modi and US President Barack Obama is unlikely to happen on the sidelines on the 10th G20 summit in Turkey. 

This is because both leaders recently spoke on the newly set up ‘hotline’ and discussed all issues of bilateral importance, with a special focus on climate change conference in Paris and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO ministerial meet in Kenya, both of which will take place in December, official sources told the BusinessLine . 

During the phone call, which took place a day before Diwali, Modi and Obama took stock of the “joint efforts on key areas of bilateral cooperation and to preview global issues ahead of the upcoming G-20 summit, East Asia Summit, and Paris Climate Conference,” stated a White House press release. 

The release also said that both leaders shared their perspectives on developments in South Asia and discussed the progress made on shared economic and security priorities, including implementation of the Joint Strategic Vision for the Asia-Pacific and Indian Ocean Region and addressing the global challenge of climate change. 

BEPS initiative 

Meanwhile, officials in the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) maintained that both sides are now “actively working” on the decisions taken at the recently concluded Indo-US Strategic and Commercial Dialogue. 

At the G20 summit, India is expected to strongly urge member countries to join the Base Erosion and Profit Shifting (BEPS) initiative under the aegis of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD), and take up the issue of maintaining the development agenda under the Doha Round of talks at the upcoming ministerial meeting of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO in Nairobi. 

According to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD estimates, BEPS method will impact over 9,000 firms across the world. 

BEPS helps introduce common taxation standards and prevent tax evasion by multinational corporations. 

“There is a fear that the developed countries might demand wrapping up of the Doha Round in this ministerial now that they got what they wanted by way of the trade facilitation agreement. But we cannot let that happen and that is what the PM is going to strongly pitch for,” a senior MEA official said. 

Modi will go straight from the UK to attend the summit in Antalay, Turkey on November 15-16. He is expected to hold bilateral meetings with some of the other leaders of G20 countries. On top of the list are Turkey, France, Germany and Japan. 

On the hotline, Modi and Obama shared their perspectives on developments in South Asia and discussed the progress made on shared economic and security priorities 

 

 

 

 


WTO: Africa backs India on affordable, lifesaving drugs 



By CHRISTABEL LIGAMI, TEA Special Correspondent, 

The East African 



Copyright 2015 Nation Media Group. All Rights Reserved. 

 

Africa is rallying behind India in its push to protect a controversial patent policy on medicine, to ensure that poor countries still have access to cheaper generic drugs manufactured by Indian pharmaceutical companies. 

India is known as the “pharmacy of the developing world,” as medicines produced by generics companies in the country are among the most affordable in the world. 

At the recent India-Africa Business Forum, African leaders agreed to support India’s stand on the full use of the flexibilities provided by the agreement on Trade-Related aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (Trips) — administered by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organisation — at the upcoming WTO Ministerial Summit from December 15 to 18 in Nairobi. 

US pharmaceutical companies such as Roche, BMS, Bayer and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Pfizer, and trade lobby groups have been at the forefront of the push for a review of India’s intellectual property rights (IPR) law so that they comply with international trade norms — a move that could deny poor countries access to cheaper generic drugs manufactured by Indian firms. 

Intellectual property rights are granted to inventors, artistes, and other creators regarding the use of their innovations. 

Under the Indian Patents Act, if the government considers a drug to be unaffordable for the nation’s general population, it can issue a compulsory licence granting companies permission to manufacture a generic version at a fraction of the cost of the original drug. Furthermore, based on norms set by the WTO, if it is in the public interest, such a licence can be awarded by a government without the consent of the patent owner. 

However, the US has been contesting this flexibility in a bid to protect its multinational pharmaceutical companies. 

According to a WTO trade expert in Geneva, the IPR clause on flexibility in drug patenting will be a top agenda for the US at the WTO Ministerial Summit in Nairobi. 

“The US has introduced ‘Trips-plus’ provisions that more aggressively protect patented drugs, plants, and seeds from public use and in some cases backtrack on the limited gains made in the Doha Declaration,” said the expert. 

In the 2001 WTO Doha Round, the Declaration on Trips and Public Health provided a limited amount of flexibility, allowing the domestic manufacturing of generic drugs for public health crises. 

The US, he said, prompted by pharmaceutical companies, has utilised international IPR to sue governments of developing countries for manufacturing generic versions of patented drugs. 

In many poor countries, where the cost of patented drugs is high, cheap medicines are relied on to treat public health crises such as HIV/Aids, cancer as well as other potentially deadly health problems like diarrhoea. 

In March 2012, for instance, India’s patent office allowed Hyderabad-based HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Natco Pharma to make a generic version of German pharmaceutical company Bayer’s cancer drug Nexavar. Bayer’s Nexavar reportedly costs about $4,500 a month for 120 pills while Natco’s generic version costs about $145 for a month’s dose. 

Swiss multinational HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Novartis owns the cancer drug Glivec and it holds a patent for the drug in many countries including the US. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Pfizer, another US drug company, is also involved in patent-related disputes in India. 

According to an April 2013 article in the US medical journal Blood, the price of branded Glivec was $92,000 per patient, per year in the US, while in India, the drug was being sold for around $21,171. 

“When patents are granted in the country, Indian generic manufacturers will not be able to automatically produce cheaper versions of these medicines, which could have a significant impact on access to affordable medicines, both in India and beyond, as many newer medicines [invented after 1995] are highly likely to be patent-protected,” said Ison Ndirangu, director of economic affairs and international trade in HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Kenya’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Trade. 

This means drugs for diseases like cancer and HIV, whose generic versions are cheaper, will not be accessible to many due to their high cost. 

“African leaders agreed to support India’s role in providing high-quality, low-cost generic medicines, which are essential for healthcare around the world,” said Mr Ndirangu. 

However, he said, Africa and India agreed to collaborate in the drug manufacturing sector. 

“Kenya, for example, is in discussions with India to help us set up drug manufacturing plants so that we can produce the same drugs at a lower cost,” said Mr Ndirangu. 

Although Kampala-based pharmaceutical firm CIPLA-Quality Chemicals Ltd, an Indian pharmaceutical company, manufactures antiretroviral and anti-malarial drugs for the East African market, the cost of production is high, which results in lower quantities, which are not enough for regional consumption. 

READ: Uganda leads push for permanent waiver on drug patents 

Before 2005, India did not grant product patents on medicines. This allowed for the production of low-cost generic versions of medicines that were patented in other countries. Competition among generic producers in India has seen the price of medicines to treat diseases such as HIV, hepatitis and cancer fall by more than 90 per cent. 

India has become a key source of essential medicines, such as ARVs, at a low cost and over 96 per cent of all HIV medicines purchased by donors for treatment programmes in developing countries come from India. 

Nation Media Group Limited 

 

 


Reform Benefits China and the World: Former WTO Chief


(HYPERLINK "http://english.peopledaily.com.cn/"People's Daily Online)    23:03, November 15, 2015

China’s reform will benefits not only the country but also the world, former World Trade Organization chief Pascal Lamy told the People’s Daily, saying that China’s potential for development and mammoth demand from its huge population will ensure its development speed remains above the average global level.

The Frenchman spoke highly of China’s contribution to the boom in the international business. Before China’s entry into the WTO, its trade volume accounted only 4 percent of the world, but now it has become one of the biggest trading nations. Besides, China will see a further increase in its commodity imports in the future.

Lamy believed that China’s economy is in a positive transition - from ultra-high speed growth a middle-to-high speed growth, from an export-oriented economy to a domestic consumption-dominated economy, seeking an economic increase of both quantity and quality. The transition is a complicated systematic process, which will meet setbacks and challenges, he noted.

He suggested that China needs to be cautious in drafting reform policy. China, based on its past success, should reform foreign trade to sharpen its international competitiveness.

The G20 summit is convening in Antalya, Turkey from November 15 to 16 while Hangzhou, capital of East China’s Zhejiang Province, is set to host the summit next year.

Hosting the G20 summit is an opportunity for China to introduce its new thoughts and new measures to the world, Lamy said, adding that China could also prove the responsibility it has already shouldered in accordance with its economic scale and importance.

 

 

 

Afghanistan & Liberia will get WTO membership

The Financial Express

16 November 2015 19:58

138 words, (English)

In the upcoming ministerial conference of the World Trade Organisation (WTO), members of the organisation will welcome two new members- Afghanistan and Liberia.
The ministerial conference, 10th in nature, will take place in Nairobi, the capital city of Kenya on December 15-18, 2015. In the conference, membership of Afghanistan and Liberia will be formally endorsed.
Thus total membership of WTO will be increased to 163.
Liberia’s accession to WTO was finalised in last October while Afghanistan’s accession in the second week of November. These two countries will be eighth and ninth Least Developed Countries (LDCs) to join the global organisation since 1995.
Six more LDCs are negotiating to join the WTO. They are Bhutan, Comoros, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Sao Tome & Principe and Sudan.

 

 

 


Industry minister chairs WTO national committee meeting 


Bahrain News Agency 

15 November 2015, 

183 words, 

© 2015, Bahrain News Agency, All rights Reserved - Provided by SyndiGate Media Inc. 

Manama, Nov. 15 (BNA): Minister of Industry, Commerce and Tourism and Chairman of the National Committee of the World Trade Organisation (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO) Zayed R. Alzayani has headed the committee's 5th meeting, in the presence of the members who represent government and related authorities. 

The meeting discussed a number of topics listed on the agenda, including the ratification of "Bali Package" that aims to streamline trade. "Bali Package" was launched at WTO Ninth Ministerial Conference, held in Bali, Indonesia, on December 2013. 

The meeting also reviewed BAHRAIN-US Free Trade agreement (FTA) and both the countries obligations towards HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO and a summary on the latest developments of the joint project between the industry, commerce and tourism ministry and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"United Nations Development Programme (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"UNDP) in Bahrain. 

A number of topics pertaining to the coordination on the GCC and Arab levels within HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO framework were discussed as well as preparation for WTO 10th Ministerial Conference to be held in Nairobi, Kenya from 15 to 18 December 2015. 

 

 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.
