HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO Member States Add Services to 2011 Least-Developed Countries Waiver Accord
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO Week Ahead: Plurilateral Talks Resume With TiSA, GPA Negotiations
·         HYPERLINK \l "Obama to raise trade talk concerns with Merkel
·         HYPERLINK \l "China exports fall as trade surplus hits record
·         HYPERLINK \l "UK trade deficit hits four-year high
·         HYPERLINK \l "G20-Spurring growth centre stage as finance chiefs meet in Istanbul
·         HYPERLINK \l "Essential Elements to a G-20 Growth Plan
 
WTO Member States Add Services to 2011 Least-Developed Countries Waiver Accord
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, February 9, 2015
 
Feb. 6 — World Trade Organization members agreed to provide least-developed countries (LDCs) with preferential access to an array of trade-related services during a Feb. 5 meeting in Geneva, enhancing a waiver accord adopted in 2011 to expand LDC access to non-LDC markets.
 
More than two dozen WTO members agreed to grant favorable treatment to the WTO's 48 LDC members as to multiple services sectors and modes of supply, WTO officials said at a Feb. 6 press briefing.
 
Council for Trade in Services Chairman Choi Seokyoung of Korea commended the “very high level of engagement” on the issue and described the meeting as an important “stepping stone towards operationalization” of the LDC services waiver, according to his prepared remarks.
 
Members will resume their discussions at the next Trade in Services Council meeting scheduled for March 19.
 
Sectors and Modes of Supply
 
The meeting builds on an agreement forged at the WTO's eighth Ministerial Conference in 2011, whereby non-LDC members were permitted to grant all LDC's greater access to their services markets.
 
The agreement failed to propel any concrete results until LDC members submitted a collective request last year to indicate the services sectors and modes of supply to which they wanted preferential access.
 
At the Feb. 5 meeting, numerous delegations said that they were willing to provide improved access in modes 1, 2 and 3, including few restrictions on the following services sectors: 
• professional services,

• information technology and computer services,

• other business services,

• construction services,

• distribution services,

• financial services,

• transport and logistics services,

• tourism services, and

• recreational and sporting services.

Other categories under mode 4 include the expansion of access for the temporary movement of LDC businesspeople, the waiving of fees for business and employment visas for LDC persons, the waiving of economic needs and labor market tests for LDC members and the extension of the duration of stay of LDC professionals for certain markets. Such preferential treatment would be implemented once these members have completed their domestic processes and notified the WTO.
 
Canada said that it would grant full or nearly full access to 75 percent of the sectors that LDCs had identified for preferential treatment.
 
Rapid Implementation ‘Vital.’
 
WTO Director-General Roberto Azevedo said that it is “vital that we implement all the elements of the Bali Package without delay—and particularly the decisions on LDC issues,” according to a statement.
 
“The decision on operationalizing the LDC Services Waiver is one of these, and is extremely important,” he said. “I urge potential preference-granting members to indicate where they intend to provide preferential treatment to LDC services and service suppliers.”
 
Members agreed to digest and analyze the commitments offered at the Feb. 5 meeting and to work to process the offers with their domestic governments by July 31.
 
LDC group coordinator Amelia Anne Kyambadde said that the meeting marks a “decisive test on the credibility” of the WTO. “A successful outcome of this meeting will greatly impact the lives and livelihoods of millions of our poor people,” said Kyambadde, Uganda's minister of trade, industry and cooperatives.
 
 
WTO Week Ahead: Plurilateral Talks Resume With TiSA, GPA Negotiations
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, February 9, 2015
 
Feb. 6 — World Trade Organization members plan to resume their negotiations this week on a pair of plurilateral agreements amid broader discussions aimed at completing the Doha Round of trade negotiations.
 
Also this week, the European Union will lead the 11th round of negotiations on the Trade in Services Agreement (TiSA) from Feb. 9-13.
 
Separately, the WTO Government Procurement Committee will discuss China, Ukraine and Moldova's bids to join the Government Procurement Agreement (GPA) at a meeting scheduled for Feb. 11.
 
WTO Director-General Roberto Azevedo and the chairs of the WTO's various trade negotiating groups plan to continue intensive consultations aimed at advancing a work program to resolve the remaining issues of the Doha Round.
 
TiSA Talks Continue
 
When TiSA negotiators last met, they discussed a draft proposal offered by Turkey to incorporate health services into the agreement.
 
The proposal seeks to establish a structure that permits patients to seek authorized healthcare services in other TiSA countries and receive reimbursement for the cost of such treatments in their home country.
 
“There is a huge untapped potential for the globalization of healthcare services even though it is being reflected in the growing cross-border delivery of health services through movement of consumers (patients), personnel or by electronic means,” according to a leaked copy of the proposal.
 
The trading partners currently participating in TiSA negotiations are: Australia, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, the European Union, Hong Kong, Iceland, Israel, Japan, Korea, Liechtenstein, Mexico, New Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Switzerland, Taiwan, Turkey and the U.S.
 
The U.S. recently sought comment on adding Uruguay to the list of negotiating members (242 WTO, 12/17/14).
 
GPA Talks Resume
 
China's latest revised proposal to open its state procurement market to foreign bidders will lead the Government Procurement Committee's Feb. 11 discussions.
 
Last month, China offered several improvements in its latest bid, including lowered thresholds at which GPA levels would apply to procurement contracts and increased entity coverage (3 WTO, 1/6/15).
 
Current members—including the U.S. and the European Union—said the offer does not go far enough and will likely encourage China to expand its list of GPA-compliant state-owned enterprises, among other issues.
 
China agreed in 2001 to accede to the GPA, which sets out rules guaranteeing fair conditions of international competition for government procurement contracts and prohibiting discriminatory treatment between local and foreign suppliers as well as between foreign suppliers from different countries.
 
Ukraine, Moldova GPA Bids
 
GPA members will discuss Ukraine's second revised GPA offer, which a handful of European members recently commended as a “major step” in its bid to accede to the agreement.
 
Members said they are optimistic that Ukraine's accession could be concluded sometime in the first half of 2015, according to the Government Procurement Committee's latest report.
 
GPA members will also consider approving Moldova's bid to join the GPA.
 
There are 43 parties to the GPA, including: Armenia; Canada; the European Union, with its 28 member states; Hong Kong; Iceland; Israel; Japan; Korea; Liechtenstein; the Netherlands with respect to Aruba; Norway; Singapore; Switzerland; Taiwan; and the U.S.
 
China, Ukraine and Moldova are among 10 WTO members that have started the process of acceding to the GPA, including: Albania, Georgia, Jordan, the Kyrgyz Republic, Oman and Ukraine. Last year, GPA members invited Montenegro and New Zealand to join the agreement.
 
Azevedo Meetings
 
On Feb. 9 Azevedo will address a meeting of the WTO African Group to discuss a protocol amending the Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) Agreement to improve access to medicines.
 
On Feb. 10 Azevedo will meet with Gyan Chandra Acharya, the under-secretary-general and high representative for Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and the Small Island Developing States.
 
Azevedo has made no arrangements to hold an informal Heads of Delegation meeting this week, a WTO spokesperson told Bloomberg BNA.
 
On Feb. 10 and 12 the WTO Trade Policy Review Body will review the trading status of Brunei Darussalam.
 
 
Obama to raise trade talk concerns with Merkel 
Shawn Donnan, World Trade Editor 
9 February 2015
Financial Times (FT.Com)
 
US President Barack Obama is expected to raise concerns about the pace of trans-Atlantic trade talks with Angela Merkel when the German chancellor visits Washington on Monday with US officials fretting that supposedly reinvigorated negotiations are instead getting off to a false start.

Following the November appointment of Cecilia Malmstrom, the new European trade commissioner, both sides pledged a "fresh start" to talks over a Trans-Atlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, or TTIP, that had been crawling along since beginning in July 2013.

But a senior US official told the Financial Times that Washington was disappointed with the progress made in last week's round of formal negotiations, the first since the re-launch, and had decided to press its case with Ms Merkel on Monday and in European capitals in the coming weeks.

That frustration was partly in evidence in Brussels last week. "This week's round was constructive, but we do need to see more, further concrete progress ... if we are to turn this fresh start into a reality," the chief US negotiator, Dan Mullaney, told reporters on Friday as the discussions wrapped up.

The US has in recent months been pressing the European Union to agree to exchange new offers on the number of tariff-free goods. Many see this as the easier part of the negotiations compared with the more complex question of easing regulatory barriers to trade across the Atlantic.

Last year the US offered to eliminate tariffs on 88 per cent of goods traded between the two economies, significantly lower than the 96 per cent put forward by the EU. But since then US officials have been trying to improve their offer while also extracting more from the EU.

Liberalisation of services is another bone of contention for Washington, which is irked that the EU has refused to offer a similar package to that negotiated with Canada in a recently concluded trade agreement.

The decision to raise the issue with Ms Merkel did not reflect any conflict between the German chancellor and Mr Obama over TTIP, the official said. Washington remains convinced she supports the trans-Atlantic talks, in spite of scepticism among many Germans.

The concerns were instead focused on EU officials and the European Commission, the senior US official said, and whether officials in Brussels were meeting their leaders' desire for more rapid progress. Mr Cameron last year called for "rocket boosters" to be placed under the talks.

Two senior EU trade officials on Sunday dismissed the US concerns as "spin" and told the FT that they hoped to exchange new tariffs and services offers by July.

The EU officials also said that there had been progress over the issue of financial services regulation in TTIP, something the US side has resisted in part because of fears that it might water down the strict Dodd-Franck regulations introduced in the wake of the 2008 crisis.

But the disagreement highlights how tensions remain between both sides despite efforts to make a fresh start.

European officials have also privately raised concerns that Mr Obama's administration is more focused on sealing a 12-country Pacific Rim trade agreement now nearing conclusion, the Trans-Pacific Partnership, or TPP, than the trans-Atlantic one.

Speaking at a security conference in Munich on Saturday, Vice President Joe Biden sought to placate the EU. "TTIP is not the stepchild to TPP," the vice president said.

"We have not taken our focus off of Europe. We have not decided that the future lies in the Pacific Basin. We are a Pacific power. We will assert that power, and we will remain a Pacific power. But we are also an Atlantic power."

 
China exports fall as trade surplus hits record
Charles Clover in Beijing 
Financial Times
February 8, 2015 9:32 am
 
China’s slumping economy hit trade in January. Imports and exports came in worse than anticipated and the monthly trade surplus bulged to a record $60bn as a survey published on Sunday revealed that manufacturing, a key sector to the Chinese economy, contracted in January for the first time in more than two years. 
 
China’s exports fell 3.3 per cent in January from a year earlier, while imports slumped by 19.9 per cent, according to data released on Sunday by the Customs Administration. Analysts polled by Reuters had expected exports to rise by 6.3 per cent and imports to fall only 3 per cent, to give a trade deficit of $48.9bn.
 
The majority of the slump in imports was the result of falling commodity prices, especially coal and oil, according to analysts at ANZ Research. 
 
China’s iron ore imports and crude oil imports fell by 9.4 per cent and 0.6 per cent respectively by volume. However, in value terms, iron ore imports dropped by 50.3 per cent and crude oil imports declined by 41.8 per cent.

The data reflect the cooling of China’s economic growth engine — last year the country’s gross domestic product grew at its slowest rate in more than two decades. 
 
“China’s manufacturing sector is under great pressure as both external and domestic demand remains sluggish,” said ANZ in a statement. 
 
However, analysts say strong seasonal distortions due to the Lunar New Year holiday — where consumption usually spikes and production falls — make it difficult to interpret January trade numbers. Last year the holiday fell in January, and this year it falls in February.

The ballooning trade surplus would normally be expected to support renminbi appreciation but the currency in fact weakened in January by 0.7 per cent, reflecting investment-related outflows.

The latest balance of payments data show that China posted its biggest quarterly capital and financial account deficit on record in the fourth quarter last year, a trend that is likely to have continued in January.

China suffered its largest capital outflows on record in the fourth quarter last year, according to balance of payments data released on Tuesday. The deficit of $91bn on the capital and financial accounts was the worst since quarterly data were first compiled in 1998. 
 
Policy makers have responded to the weakness in the economy by cutting interest rates, and last week the central bank cut the required reserve ratio for its banks as it stepped up efforts to counter the impact of capital outflows and encourage banks to boost lending amid fresh data showing a weakening economy.
 
 
UK trade deficit hits four-year high
Ferdinando Giugliano, Economics Correspondent 
Financial Times
February 6, 2015 11:50 am
 
The UK trade deficit hit a four-year high in 2014, highlighting how companies are struggling to sell their goods abroad despite government efforts to boost exports.

The deficit widened to £34.8bn in 2014, the biggest gap since 2010 when it stood at £37.1bn. Both exports and imports fell last year, though the former fell more sharply, plunging £16bn. While the UK registered a surplus in its trade in services, the deficit in goods, excluding oil, stood at a record £110bn.
 
The government had hoped that a depreciation of sterling, which has fallen 16 per cent in trade-weighted terms since 2007, would help British companies become more competitive in their overseas markets.

But economic stagnation in the eurozone, the UK’s main trading partner, and a tendency by exporters to use the cheaper pound to expand profits instead of market share, help to explain why this has not happened.

“We are clearly not making adequate progress in rebalancing our economy,” said David Kern, chief economist at the British Chambers of Commerce. “Much greater efforts are needed to develop a national strategy for boosting exports, with improved access to finance for growing firms.” 
 
There were signs, however, that falling oil prices helped to narrow the deficit in the last few months of the year.

While the trade deficit widened in December, growing to £2.9bn from £1.8bn in November, the less volatile quarterly performance was more encouraging. In the last three months of the year, imports exceeded exports by £7.1bn, the gap narrowing from £8.7bn in the third quarter as oil imports fell.

The volume of overall goods exports rose 4.5 per cent in the fourth quarter, while the volume of imports increased 1.4 per cent. This means that net trade is likely to have made a positive contribution to growth in the three months to December, when the economy expanded 0.5 per cent. 
 
Goods export volumes to EU countries, excluding oil and other volatile items. rose 1.5 per cent between the third and fourth quarters, while the same figure for non-EU states stood at 3.2 per cent.

Economists are optimistic that the outlook for UK trade in the months ahead will brighten, predicting that the effect of lower oil prices and the European Central Bank’s quantitative easing programme will help boost demand in the eurozone. However, any improvement could be limited by the steep depreciation of the euro against sterling. 
 
“The hope for UK exporters has to be that global growth will pick up as 2015 progresses, with eurozone economic activity benefiting from very low oil prices, the much more competitive euro and the ECB’s major monetary stimulus,” said Howard Archer, an economist at IHS Global Insight.

“However, the strength of sterling against euro could hamper UK exporters, although the pound has at least retreated markedly against the dollar in recent months,” he added.
 
 
G20-Spurring growth centre stage as finance chiefs meet in Istanbul 
* Sluggish growth, turbulent markets concerns for G20
* Turkey pushes greater inclusion of developing nations
* Regulation, infrastructure financing also on agenda 
 
By Nick Tattersall

ISTANBUL, Feb 8 (Reuters) - Finance ministers and central bankers face a tough task coordinating action to spur global growth at G20 meetings this week, with major economies running at different speeds and monetary policies diverging.

Concern over the ability of the United States to sustain the global economy as most of the world slows will be high on the agenda as the Group of 20 leading economies hold talks in Istanbul on Monday and Tuesday.

The meetings come as Greece casts a new shadow over Europe, cheap oil plays havoc with inflation and growth forecasts and a strengthening dollar threatens emerging economies.

"There is a lot at stake," IMF Managing Director Christine Lagarde said in a blog post on Friday. "Without action, we could see the global economic supertanker continuing to be stuck in the shallow waters of sub-par growth and meagre job creation."

Turkey's Deputy Prime Minister Ali Babacan told an Institute of International Finance (IIF) meeting on Sunday that tackling sluggish global growth and giving low income nations more voice will be among the priorities for Turkey's G20 presidency.

The former will be easier said than done.

U.S. Treasury Secretary Jack Lew said last week the United States could not be "the sole engine of growth" and a senior U.S. official said Washington's message going into the meetings would again be that Europe is not doing enough.

World financial leaders agreed last year to launch new measures to raise their collective gross domestic product growth over the next five years and create millions of new jobs.

The pledge, called the Brisbane Action Plan, entails about 1,000 commitments. European officials said leaders in Istanbul were likely to agree to focus down to just 5-10 priorities per country to make them easier to monitor.

"Kick-starting global growth will be front and centre" at the G20 meetings, Canadian Finance Minister Joe Oliver said last week, citing the stalled euro zone, slowdowns in China and India and geopolitical crises in Ukraine, Iraq and Syria as key risks.

"Though America is carrying the world economy at the moment, that is simply not sustainable," he added.

Germany is likely to argue that its rising domestic demand and plans to increase public spending show Europe's largest economy is doing what it can, according to European sources familiar with the G20 agenda.

DELICATE BALANCE

Babacan said pushing G20 members to meet previous reform commitments would be key, a strategy he has dubbed: "Keep your word, or explain".

"It has a lot to do with leadership ... Doing the necessary but difficult things," he said.

Coming good on pledges made at November's G20 summit in Brisbane could add more than $2 trillion to the global economy and create millions of new jobs over the next four years, Lagarde said in her blog post.

UBS Chairman Axel Weber said enabling the private sector to help close the financing gap for an estimated $60-70 trillion in infrastructure spending needed by 2030 would fuel growth.

Higher capital requirements are limiting banks' ability to invest and regulators should "revisit whether they got that calibration right", the former Bundesbank president told the IIF meeting.

"My key message to policymakers would be very easy -- don't work against the private sector, work with it," he said.

The G20 put together a global stimulus package during the 2007-09 financial crisis but today's challenge is more delicate, with diverging monetary policies a cause of global turbulence.

The U.S. Federal Reserve looks set to raise interest rates this year, a stark contrast to impromptu cuts from India to Australia, Canada to Denmark, as well as China's cut in bank reserve requirements and the abrupt end to the Swiss franc cap.

A senior Canadian official said the G20 communique would probably emphasise the importance of central bank actions in sustaining demand and said the Fed and Bank of England had voiced support for other central banks' actions to lift growth.

Turkey's own monetary policy may also be in the spotlight. Its central bank is under government pressure to cut interest rates ahead of a June election despite stubborn inflation, with critical comments by President Tayyip Erdogan last week sending the lira to a record low.

Erdogan renewed his criticism of the central bank on Sunday, saying it would be "held to account" if it failed to manage the lira's exchange rate against a strengthening dollar.

A source close to French Finance Minister Michel Sapin said Greece would be discussed, although the situation was very different to a few years ago, with protection mechanisms in place and European markets less sensitive to its woes.

France has also asked to discuss the fight against terrorist financing, an important topic for Turkey given fighting with Islamic State militants taking place just over its southern borders in Syria and Iraq. (Additional reporting by Jan Strupczewski and Ece Toksabay in Istanbul, Jason Lange in Washington, Randall Palmer and David Ljunggren in Ottawa, Jean-Baptiste Vey in Paris, Gernot Heller in Berlin; Writing by Nick Tattersall; Editing by Catherine Evans and Stephen Powell) 
 
 
Essential Elements to a G-20 Growth Plan
BY JACOB LEW AND GEORGE OSBORNE
9 Feb 2015 The Wall Street Journal Europe
 
Reform, including free trade, should join fiscal and monetary measures on the agenda.
 
Over the past few years, our two governments have worked to fuel economic growth, create jobs and improve living standards. Our economies are now growing solidly. 
 
However, finance ministers and central-bank governors from the G-20 nations gather on Monday in Istanbul against a backdrop of challenges. Global growth is forecast to slow. Deflationary risks are evident in some regions. There is a shortfall in demand. And we face rising geopolitical risks from Ukraine and the Middle East that require coordinated action. 
 
Our message at the G-20 is this: Governments must use the full set of tools they have at their disposal to support their economies and realize the collective G-20 objective of strong, sustainable and balanced global growth. 
 
Any comprehensive plan must include three crucial ingredients. 
 
First, fiscal policies must maintain a responsible fiscal path while ensuring sufficient resources for education and infrastructure investment for the future. In the U.K. and U.S., fiscal deficits have fallen by half as a share of gross domestic product in the context of stronger economic growth, spending reductions and revenue increases. Precise requirements will differ by country, but all countries need credible plans that can be flexibly implemented. 
 
Crucially, plans must be designed to protect the most growth enhancing investments. The burden of reducing deficits must be shared fairly. In the U.K. and the U.S., action was taken to ensure that those with the broadest shoul bear the greatest burden. In addition to prior actions in the U.S., additional measures to bolster the middle class and lower our deficits were contained in President Obama’s budget proposals last week. At an international level, the G-20 must continue eliminating incentives for tax avoidance and cracking down on tax evasion, including through coordination and increased transparency. 
 
Second, central banks are playing a critical role in supporting accommodative credit conditions that encourage business and household spending and counter deflationary pressures. Forceful monetary-policy actions in the U.S. and U.K. were essential in helping our economies recover after the global financial crisis. But central banks cannot do the job alone. 
 
The third ingredient for a comprehensive economic plan must be the implementation of pro-growth structural economic reforms to boost productivity and raise living standards. Domestically that must include better infrastructure, support for small businesses, regulatory reforms that safeguard financial stability and improved education for all. It must also include strong efforts to address impediments that make certain economies structurally less competitive, including the variety of rigidities that constrain growth in several European countries. 
 
We share a common interest with our European partners in seeing Greece sustain and build upon its hard-fought progress on reforms. In close consultation with its European and international partners, it is important that Greece implement a credible and comprehensive approach to reform, recovery and economic growth. At the European level, there needs to be renewed momentum to complete the single market for services and capital. The entire Continent must do more to support growth and jobs, recognizing that countries have varying degrees of fiscal space. 
 
All countries must also honor their G-7, G-20 and International Monetary Fund exchange-rate commitments and obligations. Inders ternationally, we must all strive for further progress on trade agreements that benefit our workers and reflect our values. We are working to conclude a comprehensive EU-U.S. trade deal that would significantly expand trade between our nations and support new opportunities for millions of workers in both Europe and the U.S. 
 
A comprehensive approach utilizing all three ingredients would help dispel uncertainty and inspire the confidence needed for investment and growth. 
 
Finally, the best laid plans can be undone by geopolitical shocks, so we need to contain risks, especially in Ukraine where the situation is of increasing concern. In the end, this crisis needs a political solution. The EU and the U.S. have worked closely together to impose costs on Russia for its actions in Ukraine and must be prepared to do more if the situation deteriorates, while leaving open a diplomatic off-ramp if Russia chooses to change course. At the same time, we need to ensure sufficient financial support for Ukraine, including increased support from the U.S., Europe and international institutions as Ukraine undertakes essential economic reforms. 
 
In an uncertain world there is once again an urgent need for international coordination to confront problems, contain risks and deliver a comprehensive plan for strong, sustainable and balanced growth.
Mr. Lew is the U.S. treasury secretary. Mr. Osborne is the U.K. chancellor of the exchequer.
END


  ________________________________  
Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.