HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO membership opens new horizons for Kazakhstan's economy - President Nazarbayev
·         HYPERLINK \l "Le Kazakhstan salue la fin des négociations en vue de son adhésion à l'OMC
·         HYPERLINK \l "El presidente kazajo destaca las perspectivas económicas tras acuerdo con OMC
·         HYPERLINK \l "Botswana Becomes First African Nation to Ratify WTO Trade Facilitation Accord
·         HYPERLINK \l "Philippines Extends U.S. Poultry Ban
·         HYPERLINK \l "Pacific trade pact returns to Senate for second test
·         HYPERLINK \l "Greece offers new proposals to avert default, creditors see hope
·         HYPERLINK \l "Reshaping the future of global trade for universal economic growth
 
 
WTO membership opens new horizons for Kazakhstan's economy - President Nazarbayev
22 June 2015
Kazinform International News Agency
 
ASTANA. KAZINFORM - Head of State Nursultan Nazarbayev has addressed the people of Kazakhstan on the occasion of conclusion of the negotiations on Kazakhstan's accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO), the president's press service reports.

The final session of the Working Group at which it was officially announced that Kazakhstan had completed negotiations on the accession to the WTO was held in Geneva on Monday (June 22).

"This is a historical milestone for all of us. Kazakhstan will become the 162nd member of the WTO. The world's largest economies have recognized Kazakhstan as a country with favorable investment climate pursuing trade policy in accordance with the norms of international law.

WTO membership will open new horizons for our economy and give Kazakhstan a more stable access to foreign markets, and to our consumers - a greater choice of goods and services. Kazakhstan will be in a better position to attract foreign and domestic investors. We will be given a chance to create new enterprises and workplaces.

Kazakhstan's effort to join the WTO has taken 19 years. All this time our Government and experts were working hard to promote favorable terms for Kazakhstan... We've managed to align the WTO and EEU requirements bearing in mind our own national interests," President Nazarbayev stressed in his address.
 
 
Le Kazakhstan salue la fin des négociations en vue de son adhésion à l'OMC 
22 June 2015
Agence France Presse ECOFI
 
 
Les négociations entre l'Organisation mondiale du commerce et le Kazakhstan en vue de son adhésion sont achevées, a annoncé le président kazakh qui a dit espérer de "nouveaux horizons" pour cette ex-république soviétique d'Asie centrale riche en hydrocarbures.

"C'est un événement historique pour nous", a salué le président Noursoultan Nazarbaïev, 74 ans.

Les négociations entre Astana et l'OMC ont duré presque vingt ans: commencées en 1996, elles avaient été ralenties par l'adhésion du Kazakhstan à l'Union économique eurasiatique constituée par Moscou et à laquelle participent également l'Arménie, le Kirghizstan et le Bélarus.

La dernière ligne droite des pourparlers a été conduite par un groupe de travail le 10 juin à Genève, qui a admis avoir mené "l'une des négociations les plus complexes" de toute l'histoire de l'organisation.

"L'adhésion à l'OMC ouvre de nouveaux horizons à notre économie: elle permettra à nos entreprises d'accéder aux marchés étrangers et à nos consommateurs d'obtenir une large sélection de biens et de services", a estimé M. Nazarbaïev.

Selon le président kazakh, "90% du commerce kazakh est réalisé avec des pays-membres de l'OMC", comme la Chine ou la Russie, appartenant à l'organisation depuis 2001 et 2012 respectivement.

L'adhésion du Kazakhstan deviendra officielle lorsque le pays participera en décembre à la conférence ministérielle de l'OMC, dont il sera le 162e membre.

Vaste république désertique, le Kazakhstan est la plus grosse économie d'Asie centrale, doté notamment d'immenses réserves d'hydrocarbures et de minerais. Après avoir connu une décennie de croissance à deux chiffres, le pays a été fragilisé par la crise en 2008 et par celle de son grand voisin, la Russie, en 2014.
 
 
El presidente kazajo destaca las perspectivas económicas tras acuerdo con OMC
 
Astaná, 22 jun (EFE).- El presidente kazajo, Nursultán Nazarbáyev, destacó hoy la "apertura de nuevos horizontes" que abre para la economía del país la adhesión de Kazajistán a la Organización Mundial del Comercio (OMC) como miembro 162 del organismo.

"Este hecho es histórico para nosotros. Las principales economías del mundo han reconocido a Kazajistán como un país respetuoso con el medio ambiente y una política comercial y de inversión acorde con el derecho internacional", dijo Nazarbáyev en la página web de la Presidencia.

La exrepública soviética solicitó su adhesión a la OMC el 29 de enero de 1996, y en estos años adecuó sus tarifas y aranceles a las exigencias de la OMC.

En medio de este proceso, el país se integró en la Unión Económica Eurasiática (UEE) como miembro fundador junto con Rusia y Bielorrusia.

Armenia que también forma parte de esa Unión se adhirió posteriormente.

A consecuencia de su integración en la UEE Kazajistán tuvo que renegociar todos los acuerdos realizados previamente, y el proceso de adhesión a la OMC se ralentizó.

" Ser miembro de la OMC abre nuevos horizontes para nuestra economía. Proporciona a nuestras empresas acceso a los mercados extranjeros y a los consumidores una gran variedad de productos y servicios", señaló el presidente kazajo.

La OMC actualmente consta de 161 miembros y hay 21 países que están negociando el acceso, incluidas las antiguas repúblicas soviéticas de Azerbaiyán, Bielorrusia y Uzbekistán.

"El Estado debe cumplir con las normas internacionales. Al mismo tiempo, las empresas de Kazajistán tienen que aprender a competir con las reglas de la OMC", añadió Nazarbáyev.

"Tenemos mucho trabajo por delante. Todos los productores tienen que ponerse al día con el nivel mundial ", concluyó. EFE
 
 
Botswana Becomes First African Nation to Ratify WTO Trade Facilitation Accord
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, June 23, 2015
 
June 22 – Botswana ratified the World Trade Organization's Trade Facilitation Agreement, making it the first African nation to do so.
 
The TFA instructs WTO members to improve their customs procedures and expedite the movement, release and clearance of goods, among other commitments.
 
Once fully implemented, the TFA could reduce global trade costs between 12.5 percent and 17.5 percent, according to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). Just a 1 percent drop in global trade costs could save as much as $40 billion dollars in trade costs, OECD officials said this month.
 
After two-thirds of the WTO's 161 members submit their instruments of acceptance, the TFA will be ratified and enter into force.
 
Australia, Hong Kong, Japan, Malaysia, Mauritius, Singapore and the U.S. already have ratified the agreement.
 
 
Philippines Extends U.S. Poultry Ban
WTO Reporter, June 23, 2015
 
June 22 — The Philippines Department of Agriculture said it would impose a temporary ban on imports of poultry meat, day-old chicks, eggs and semen from Missouri; Whitley County, Ind.; and Dixon County, Neb.
 
The ban was announced after an outbreak of highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) virus serotype H5N2 was confirmed in commercial and backyard poultry flocks in those regions, according to recent World Trade Organization filings.
 
“The Philippines is instituting this emergency measure to prevent the entry of the HPAI virus to protect the health of the local poultry population,” the filings said.
 
The Philippines already has banned U.S. imports of poultry from Idaho, Minnesota and Washington, among other states that have reported HPAI outbreaks to the World Organization for Animal Health.
 
More than 30 countries have banned U.S. poultry imports this year as producers struggle to contain the largest outbreak of avian influenza in U.S. history.
 
To date, more than 48 million birds have tested positive for HPAI in 15 states, according to the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
 
 
 
Pacific trade pact returns to Senate for second test 
By Krista Hughes and Richard Cowan 
 
WASHINGTON (Reuters) - U.S. President Barack Obama's signature Pacific trade pact faces another test in the Senate on Tuesday as legislation needed to close the deal returns for a second run through the chamber.

The legislation has already endured six weeks of congressional wrangling and two close brushes with failure after revolts by Obama's own Democrats, many of whom believe trade deals will threaten U.S. jobs.

The bill, which would establish a fast track through Congress for trade deals, needs support from 60 senators to clear a procedural hurdle. Although the measure passed the Senate a month ago on a vote of 62-37, including backing from 14 Democrats, some may withdraw support.

Fast-track legislation gives lawmakers the right to set negotiating objectives for trade deals such as the 12-nation Trans-Pacific Partnership, or TPP, but restricts them to a yes-or-no vote on the final agreement.

Trading partners say they want fast-track legislation enacted before finalizing the TPP, which would be the biggest trade deal since the North American Free Trade Agreement liberalized commerce between the United States, Canada and Mexico two decades ago.

It took two attempts to pass this same procedural hurdle on the legislation's first run through

Opposition in the House of Representatives, where Democrats refused to renew a previously uncontroversial program providing aid to workers hurt by trade, has forced the measures apart again.

Senators will vote Tuesday on limiting debate on fast-track and - if that vote succeeds - on the actual bill on Wednesday, before tackling a second bill extending trade benefits to African nations. That bill now also contains the worker aid program.

Republicans want both measures to pass this week before Congress goes on a week-long break so that Obama can promptly sign them into law.

"If we simply vote the same way we did a couple of weeks ago, we won't miss this opportunity," Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell said on Monday.

The TPP, a potential legacy-defining agreement for Obama, would open markets for U.S. exporters like Intel Corp and Caterpillar Inc, extend monopoly periods for Pfizer Inc and rivals' medicines and cut import costs for companies like Wal-Mart Stores Inc.

 
Greece offers new proposals to avert default, creditors see hope 
 
* Eurogroup chairman says proposal is a basis for talks
* Merkel warns that summit cannot make a decision
* Greek stock market surges 9 percent on hopes of deal
* ECB increases emergency liquidity for Greek banks

By Renee Maltezou and Jan Strupczewski

BRUSSELS, June 22 (Reuters) - Greece took a step back from the abyss on Monday with the presentation of new budget proposals that euro zone leaders welcomed as a basis for a possible agreement in the coming days to unlock frozen aid and avert a looming default.

European Council President Donald Tusk, who chaired an emergency summit of leaders of the 19-nation currency bloc, called the Greek proposals "a positive step forward". He said the aim was to have the Eurogroup finance ministers approve a cash-for-reform package on Wednesday evening and put it to euro zone leaders for final endorsement on Thursday morning.

However, there must first be a detailed agreement with representatives of European governments, the European Central Bank and the International Monetary Fund to ensure the numbers add up, he said.

European stock markets and Greek assets surged on Monday on hopes of a last-minute deal to ease a crisis that is threatening to drive Greece out of the euro and weaken the foundations of the European Union's single currency.

"I am convinced that we will come to a final agreement in the course of this week," European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker told a late-night news conference.

German Chancellor Angela Merkel, whose country is Greece's biggest creditor, was more cautious. "I can't give any guarantee that that will happen," she said of a final agreement. "There's still a lot of work to be done."

The Greek proposals included higher taxes and welfare charges and steps to curtail early retirement, but not the nominal pension and wage cuts first sought by lenders. Leftist Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras, elected in January on a promise to end austerity measures, also appeared to have avoided raising value added tax on electricity or loosening job protection laws.

Tsipras said the ball was back in the creditors' court and they should provide a deal that would make Greece's huge debts affordable. "We are seeking a comprehensive and viable solution that will be followed by a strong growth package and at the same time render the Greek economy viable," he told reporters.

The cash-starved country must repay the IMF 1.6 billion euros by June 30 or be declared in default, potentially triggering a bank run and capital controls.

Jeroen Dijsselbloem, chairman of the euro zone finance ministers, known as the Eurogroup, described the new Greek document as comprehensive and "a basis to really restart the talks". He said negotiations in the coming days would show whether the numbers added up.

He left the summit saying only that there would be "hard work for the next few hours".

German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schaeuble was the most negative, telling reporters earlier in the day he had seen nothing really new from Greece.

Participants said Schaeuble questioned in the Eurogroup meeting whether the European Central Bank should continue emergency lending to Greek banks if there was no deal this week and whether it should not be accompanied by capital controls.

A Greek official said ECB chief Mario Draghi had reassured Tsipras in a private meeting that the central bank would continue to support Greek banks as long as Athens remained in a bailout programme. An ECB source said there was no direct link between the emergency liquidity assistance and the programme.

Participants said IMF chief Christine Lagarde cast doubt in the meeting on whether the proposals were sufficient to make Greece's public finances sustainable.

"We have a huge amount of work to do in the next 48 hours. We are not at all at the end of the route," Lagarde said on leaving the summit.

Tsipras had demanded a promise of debt relief as a condition for a deal, but both Merkel and Juncker said now was not the time to discuss it. An EU diplomat said Tsipras struck a very cooperative tone in the summit and promised to work further on the proposals to ensure a deal this week.

Juncker said he had proposed a 35 billion euro programme for growth-enhancing measures in Greece up to 2020. The money appeared to be a restatement of existing EU budget funds earmarked for Athens.

"GREXIT" AVOIDED?

Tusk said he had called the summit to try to break the deadlock and avoid a worst-case "uncontrollable chaotic Grexit", while letting experts thrash out the details.

He called for an end to the "blame game" between Athens' young left-wing Syriza government, which sought to scrap the austerity measures that were a condition of past bailouts, and creditors who refused to keep funding Greece without being sure that its public finances are sustainable.

The U.S. government sought to pressure all sides to reach a swift agreement and avert a crisis that has been weighing on world markets.

U.S. Treasury Secretary Jack Lew urged Tsipras in a phone call to make a "serious move" at reaching a deal with Athens' creditors to avert "immediate hardship for Greece and uncertainties for Europe and the global economy". He also telephoned Lagarde to underline that all sides in the talks must come to a rapid agreement.

With anxious Greek savers continuing to withdraw cash, though apparently in smaller amounts on Monday than last week, the ECB increased its emergency lending to Greek banks for the third time in a week.

But after months of acrimony, the positive mood music in Brussels gave investors hope that an agreement might be near.

European shares hit their highest level in a week and the Greek stock market jumped 9 percent while the borrowing costs of Italy, Spain and Portugal - the countries most likely to be hit if Greece headed for the euro zone exit - fell sharply.

The DAX index of leading German shares closed up 3.9 percent and France's CAC 40 stock index was up 4.1 percent.

TAX AND PENSION REFORMS

In its proposal, Greece offered to raise the retirement age gradually to 67 and curb early retirement. It also offered to reform the value-added-tax system to set the main rate at 23 percent, and promised additional taxes on business and the wealthy.

Economics Minister George Stathakis told the BBC that Athens had avoided crossing "red lines" set by Syriza, since it would not cut pensions or wages or raise the VAT rate on electricity.

In an example of the anger that Athens has caused in northern Europe, Hans-Peter Friedrich, deputy parliamentary floor leader for Merkel's conservatives, said there was no point in "dragging out a bankruptcy for political reasons".

"We do the greatest harm to Europe if we lie to ourselves", he said, adding that he was sceptical that the Greek government would provide adequate assurances to win German parliamentary support for further aid.

Several thousand pro-European Greeks staged a demonstration in favour of staying in the euro on Monday in central Athens, a day after thousands of leftists had rallied to protest against a new round of cuts. (Reporting by Karolina Tagaris, Angeliki Koutantou, George Georgiopoulos, Deepa Babington, James Mackenzie, Julia Fioretti, Robin Emmott, Paul Taylor, Francesco Guarascio, Alexander Saeedy, Foo Yun Chee, Andreas Rinke, Tom Koerkemeier, Elizabeth Pineau, Michelle Martin, Alastair Macdonald, Philip Blenkinsop, Robert-Jan Bartunek, Astrid Wendlandt, Lefteris Karagiannopoulos and Andrius Sytas; writing by Paul Taylor and Matthias Williams; editing by David Stamp, Kevin Liffey and Leslie Adler) 
 
 
Reshaping the future of global trade for universal economic growth 
23 June 2015
PACNEWS, the Pacific News Agency Service
 
JOHANNESBURGH, June 23 -- Landmark events taking place this year have the potential to reshape the future of Commonwealth trade. Officials and experts will meet in South Africa to consider how international trade can be made more inclusive to support sustainable development.

The Commonwealth Trade Symposium will provide participants with a unique opportunity to share perspectives and review trade-related topics in one forum. The symposium will take place in Johannesburg, South Africa from 23-24 June 2015.

Bringing together member countries with diverse economic characteristics, the conference aims to highlight issues critical to creating a trade system that supports sustainable development. Experts will provide the latest thinking on areas such as trade challenges of developing countries, aid for trade, and engaging the private sector.

'The purpose of this conference is to support member countries to achieve their development objectives as the trade landscape evolves', said the Commonwealth Deputy Secretary-General Deodat Maharaj.

Maharaj added: 'As the world is close to agreeing the new development targets, it is vital we take every opportunity to promote a global trade agenda which accelerates economic growth the world over. We believe that effective participation in global trade is an essential prerequisite for sustainable development. It is good for jobs, it is good for growth and good for our Commonwealth.'

'The Commonwealth has taken a leading role in promoting a rules-based, transparent, free and fair multilateral trading system. We will continue to strengthen the trading capacity of all our member states by supporting regional trading arrangements which complement a multilateral system and by exploring the potential of intra-Commonwealth trade.'

The year 2015 is a pivotal year for development. The global trading landscape will be transformed by a number of milestone events: the post-Bali work programme; the WTO's 10th Ministerial Meeting; the UN adoption of the new sustainable development goals, which include targets on trade; the fifth Global Aid for Trade Review; and a new international agreement on climate change.

Global trade is increasingly characterised by global and regional production networks. Research shows that less developed countries have not been able to participate in these networks in such a way that promotes sustainable inclusive growth.

Discussions during the conference will consider how trade, a cross-cutting issue in the new development goals, can support sustainable economic growth across the Commonwealth. Participants will explore issues related to South-South trade and small states with a view to increasing participation of the South in emerging and evolving production networks.

Commonwealth Heads of Government issued a stand-alone statement on trade at their last meeting in 2013, the Kotte Statement on International Trade and Investment. They reaffirmed their commitment to a fair and transparent multilateral system while taking into account the requirements of capacity-constrained countries such as small states, least developed countries and Sub-Saharan Africa..... (COMSEC)
END


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.