Modi goes globe-plotting
Ireland shows the way with plain packaging tobacco law
U.S. business leader expects TPP deal to be reached "before June"
Obama  promotes benefits of trade deals; Workers and small firms are focus in push for Asia and Europe agreements
Obama pushes rural trade efforts, Pacific partnership
Trade Minister in China for FTA discussion
China,Korea Democratic peoples Republic of : CHINA, SOUTH KOREA signs FTA
Value of trade agreements gets new push

 
 
 

Modi goes globe-plotting
2 March 2015
India Today
(c) 2015 Living Media India Ltd   
 
For long, New Delhi has followed an incremental approach in the execution of its foreign policy-gradual and graded. Prime Minister Narendra Modi is keen to change that. He wants to maximise outcomes, corner all that India can get or gain from any country, meet his counter-parts more than halfway even if that means added political risk. In short, he wants to align India's foreign pol-icy with his expansive and ambitious domestic agenda.
 
However, in doing so, Modi is also raising expectations on delivery, an area where India has been found wanting. Be it attracting investments or taking up projects in other countries, particularly the neighbourhood, India's response has often fallen well short of the talk. It's between these poles that the Modi government's foreign policy is beginning to take shape around a few clear principles-bring best practices to energise domestic initiatives such as Clean Ganga, smart cities and renewable energy; emerge as an economic magnet and net security provider in South Asia, extending to the Indian Ocean; increase clout by organising the influential Indian diaspora as a strong lobby group; locate the sphere of influence in a cultural narrative.
 
His is a maximalist approach, which starts with removing political hurdles that obstruct meaningful economic cooperation. For instance, when the new Sri Lankan president was coming to India, it was clear that not much could have moved in substantive terms as the political situation in Colombo is still fluid. Yet, the idea of a civil nuclear agreement was explored and sealed, simply to signal that both countries have overcome the negative sentiment generated by fears of India building reactors in Kudankulam. It was a similar idea that helped resolve the nuclear liability issue with the United States and allowed the two sides to move on and focus on issues such as Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) membership.
 
Neighbourhood and the zone of influence
 
Petroleum and Natural Gas Minister Dharmendra Pradhan was sitting the farthest among the Turkmenistan- Afghanistan-Pakistan-India (TAPI) gro up of ministers when Pakistani Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif reached out to him at the steering group meeting in Islamabad. He took him aside and walked a while, asking him about Modi and how he was coping in power. Sharif sent a warm message through Pradhan, signalling once again that he was keen to engage. The Pakistani government had, in the meantime, sought to address Indian concerns over Lashkar-e-Taiba commander Zaki-ur-Rehman Lakhvi's possible release by ensuring that he remains in prison, which was seen positively in India and created an opening to climb down from its position of no talks.
 
Yet, concerns remain because Pakistan still wants the freedom to talk to separatist groups in Kashmir. And that's why Modi's 'cricket diplomacy' is important. Beneath the symbolism is a fresh attempt to rope Pakistan into the SAARC narrative. Given that the political environment in all neighbouring countries is in India's favour at this point, the idea is to push the envelope with Pakistan and get matters moving under the SAARC rubric. If Pakistan continues to be recalcitrant, then India would step up efforts at the sub-regional level by initiating projects such as the BBIN grid, which seeks to provide grid connectivity across Bangladesh, Bhutan, India and Nepal.
 
On the bilateral plane, government insiders say, India may be open to looking at Pakistani proposals for restructuring the dialogue mechanism. The Sharif government had suggested creating a separate dialogue on Kashmir and terrorism, moving out of the composite dialogue structure. There are counter-views to that in South Block but insiders say India is willing to explore this if Pakistan shows the intent to move forward on the SAARC economic cooperation agenda.
 
Along with this, New Delhi has decided to explore the limits of its influence in the Indian Ocean with the Prime Minister set to visit Maldives, Sri Lanka, Mauritius and Seychelles in March in a bid to link them to the Indian security matrix. This would be an extension of the Maldives model, opening up possibilities of joint military exercises and training.
 
Similarly, up North too, while maintaining the traditional relationship with Russia, New Delhi is now working on a major push in Central Asia. It's likely that high-level visits, including at the PM's level, may follow to key countries in this area, particularly Turkmenistan, Tajikistan, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan and Kyrgyzstan. Also being explored is a cultural connect that dates beyond the Islamic phase in the region, pointing to an era where trade and transit flourished despite the difficult terrain.
 
If there is one area where the Modi government's plans are still on the drawing board, it's West Asia. Fighting a tricky security situation there with growing ISIS influence, the view in South Block is to let the US play the lead and avoid any contentious decision that may upset the equilibrium. Hence, the temporary pushback to the demand from BJP ideologues on changing the Palestine vote and weighing decisively in favour of Israel.
 
Big powers and the west
 
The United States is clearly central to Modi's plans. By showing a willingness to address US concerns, particularly on the economic side, the government is hoping to reap dividends across the developed world as many of those issues-from nuclear liability to liberalising FDI regimes-are common to other countries. Besides, closer ties with the US are necessary for deeper intelligence-sharing, which is crucial to counter terror attacks.
 
But here, the larger focus is on attracting best practices in priority economic areas. After a recent meeting of all Indian heads of mission in Delhi, the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) is preparing a to-do list for all mission heads that essentially would task Indian ambassadors and high commissioners to proactively identify areas of expertise in their respective domain countries which can give an impetus to Modi's domestic agenda.
 
So ahead of his visit to Germany in April, a study has been done to figure out how the cleaning of Rhine river can serve as a model for cleaning the Ganga. It's believed that this is the model that will eventually be worked upon in India. Germany has also been identified for partnering on the solar rooftop plan besides adopting a couple of smart city projects. France, the other country Modi will visit during the same trip, is being targeted for spurring the 'Make in India' initiative in the defence sector.
 
At a political level, the idea is to move beyond the complex European Union (EU) structure and strike bilateral initiatives with key power centres of the EU such as France and Germany-even Spain is being included in the list.
 
Looking east
 
Strategic considerations play out here the most given China's preeminence and the security concerns that arise from its growing clout. The big shift under Modi, according to sources, is that he wants to reduce the barriers to do business with China and has instructed officials to find a way by which India does end up deterring Chinese investment. Setting up industrial parks is one such example. While that effort is underway, India is stepping up engagement with China's own neighbourhood, setting itself up as a benign and better alternative when it comes to longer-term economic cooperation. Japan, therefore, has emerged as the focal point along with South Korea as future investors in India.
 
The challenge however is to provide a credible option in Southeast Asia. India has not moved fast enough on connectivity projects such as the trilateral highway across Myanmar and Thailand; or for that matter shown intent in strengthening defence partnerships with smaller countries in the region. The UPA government had adopted a cautious policy on this front to avoid provoking China.
 
At the same time, the bigger challenge would be to balance this out with economic accommodation of China through ASEAN's regional free trade agreement regime RCEP (Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership). The commerce ministry fears that China would gain freer access to its markets through this agreement but insiders say matters have come to a point where New Delhi may just appear to be the only holdout and would need to take a call soon.
 
For this reason, a closer economic relationship with China has to be balanced by a robust security architecture and that is the delicate balancing act, besides delivering on deadlines, the Modi government is backing itself to do under its Act East policy.
 
Diaspora connect
 
Reunion Island is among the tiniest outlying Francophone outposts in the Indian Ocean, over eight hours from Paris, but still a sovereign French territory. A sizeable chunk of its population is of Indian origin, an almost forgotten cultural connect that Prime Minister Modi is set to exploit. Nothing major, just an outreach by way of a speech in Paris that will be telecast live on this island miles away when Modi visits France in the next two months. BJP General Secretary Ram Madhav, it is believed, is already on the job, working out the logistics.
 
Foreign policy in the Modi era is not a simple case of furthering national interest. It's also about reconstituting the Indian identity on which interests are constructed, a scheme of things in which the few hundred thousand Indian-origin people in Reunion Island are also counted as an important political constituency, a source of power. So, behind the loud cheers of Madison Square Garden or in Sydney lies a cold fact-this is organising India's international population under Modi's leadership.
 
And to this end, all the previous NRI outfits of the BJP such as the Overseas Friends of BJP, have been made redundant. It's a firm belief with Modi that once the overseas Indian population coalesces around him, his clout as PM will increase. This is different from his predecessors, who worked hard at forging strong personal bonds with their foreign counterparts. Modi, on the other hand, is keen to make a political statement as not just the Prime Minister of India but also the voice of all Indians.
 
This is a clear political effort being spearheaded by the BJP which is using its clout with Indian forums overseas to ensure that party actions move in tandem with the government. And where it's difficult to find a sizeable diaspora, the effort is to set up friendship forums and nurture them through party contacts.
 
Meanwhile, the party side of the foreign policy business is now focused on influencing the revamp of the Indian Council for Cultural Relations. Last heard, plans were afoot on creating programmes around the reach and influence of Yoga, Ramayana and the Vedas.
 



 
 
 
Press Release
Ireland shows the way with plain packaging tobacco law
 
The Maori Party   
28 February 2015
Copyright 2015, scoop.co.nz   All Rights Reserved.   
 
 
The Maori Party congratulates the Irish Government for passing plain packaging tobacco legislation this week.
"Good on Ireland for showing political nerve in the face of a powerful tobacco industry."The Maori Party is determined to see plain packaging legislation here in New Zealand progress through Parliament, sooner rather than later", says Maori Party Co-leader Marama Fox.
 
Former Associate Health Minister and Maori Party Co-leader, Dame Hon Tariana Turia, introduced the plain packaging bill to Parliament more than two years ago.
 
Maori Party Co-leader Hon Te Ururoa Flavell doesn't buy the reason for the Government stalling on progressing the plain packaging bill. The Health Select Committee reported favourably on the bill in August last year.
 
"Waiting for the World Trade Organisation decision means more people die or are sick from smoking-related illnesses. We're tired of standing at the graveside of loved ones who have had their lives cut short from this highly addictive and poisonous drug", says Mr Flavell.
 
According to the Ministry of Health, around 5000 individuals die each year from smoking or second-hand exposure. That's 13 deaths every day which affect thousands of whanau.
 
"All it takes is courage and the same resolve that Tariana had to halt the decline in health and indeed the avoidable deaths of too many of our people who get caught in the smoking trap," says Mr Flavell.
 
The Maori Party co-leaders will be encouraging the Associate Health Minister Hon Sam Peseta Lotu-iga to lead on this bill and implement other tobacco controls so the Government stays on track with its target of Smokefree Aotearoa by 2025.
 
Next month Dame Hon Tariana Turia will receive the Luther L Terry Award in Dubai for her leadership in worldwide tobacco reform.
 
"We're extremely proud of her advocacy which has saved the lives of thousands of New Zealanders. The best way to honour her is to pass this plain packaging bill and keep the pressure on," says Mrs Fox.
 
 


 
 
 
U.S. business leader expects TPP deal to be reached "before June"
Kakumi Kobayashi Kakumi Kobayashi   
28 February 2015
Kyodo News
KYODO
(c) 2015 Kyodo News   
 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 27 -- A senior official of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce said Friday she expects the 12 countries negotiating a Pacific free trade initiative to strike a deal "before June."
 
Tami Overby, the chamber's senior vice president for Asia, told an event that if Congress enacts a bill that grants President Barack Obama fast-track authority to push trade deals, final offers will come together for an agreement on the Trans-Pacific Partnership.
 
On the timing of a deal, Overby said, "I am betting, before June."
 
A bill for so-called Trade Promotion Authority could be introduced in Congress as early as the first week of March, she said.
 
Overby was optimistic about the United States and Japan reaching a bilateral deal under the U.S.-led TPP over Tokyo's exceptional tariffs on some agricultural products -- rice, beef and pork, wheat, dairy products and sugar.
 
"We are making significant progress on commercially meaningful access in those significant products," she said.
 
An agreement between the two largest economies in the TPP framework has been seen as vital to signing a deal.
 
Overby quoted Wendy Cutler, a key U.S. trade negotiator, as saying it was a shock to see how "forward-leaning" Japan was during recent bilateral rounds.
 
Cutler, acting deputy U.S. trade representative, has been involved in working-level negotiations with her Japanese counterparts over the farm produce issue as well as nontariff barriers in Japan's automotive market.
 
Overby joined U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman and Federal Reserve chairwoman Janet Yellen in opposing the idea of including a clause that bans currency manipulation in the TPP and any other trade deals.
 
"At this late stage, to drop something very politically difficult on the table, I think, would have disastrous consequences," Overby said, indicating the marathon talks on the TPP, which have lasted five years already, are nearing an end.
 
Some U.S. lawmakers have requested that trade deals include a provision against currency manipulation as the recent appreciation of the dollar against other major currencies has hurt American exporters.
 
 


 
 
 
finance
Obama promotes benefits of trade deals; Workers and small firms are focus in push for Asia and Europe agreements
 
By JULIE HIRSCHFELD DAVIS   
28 February 2015
International New York Times
© 2015 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved.   
 
President Obama, facing an uphill climb in persuading Congress to grant him the authority to complete significant trade deals, sought to ease concerns on Thursday that such agreements would help corporations at the expense of American workers.
 
The public relations push includes a series of programs to promote exports from rural areas and help more small and medium-size American businesses sell their goods and services overseas.
 
The president also scheduled a series of interviews with local television stations around the country to make the case that American workers and businesses had benefited from previous trade deals and stood to gain substantially from pending agreements with Asia and Europe.
 
‘‘We want to make sure China is not writing the rules,’’ Mr. Obama told KGW in Portland, Ore. ‘‘We have to get this bill done. It’s going to be important for Oregon.’’
 
He also spoke to stations in Fargo, N.D.; Kansas City, Mo.; and Seattle.
 
‘‘That sort of ground-level advocacy is something that I do think will persuade Democrats and Republicans, frankly, to take a close look at some of the trade agreements that the president is trying to broker,’’ said Josh Earnest, the White House press secretary. ‘‘The president continues to be confident that if American workers and American entrepreneurs and American businesses and American farmers are given a level playing field, that they can’t just compete, they’re going to win, and that’s going to be good for our economy.’’
 
Republicans in Congress are putting the finishing touches on legislation that would grant Mr. Obama so-called trade promotion authority to present trade deals for a quick up-or-down vote, shielding the agreements from congressional amendments. The president needs that power, also known as ‘‘fast track,’’ to push through the Trans-Pacific Partnership — a trade agreement involving a dozen countries that is near completion — and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, another sweeping deal that is being negotiated with European nations.
 
‘‘Getting these trade deals done will benefit our businesses and middle-class workers, not just in rural communities, but across the country,’’ Bruce H. Andrews, the deputy secretary of commerce, said Thursday in a conference call with reporters organized by the White House. ‘‘Exports have been a key driver of our economic comeback.’’
 
Still, some members of Congress in both parties — particularly the most liberal Democrats and the most conservative Republicans — oppose granting Mr. Obama the trade power he seeks, worried about how trade agreements will affect American workers and loath to cede their ability to shape such deals.
 
And many lawmakers fear a backlash from their constituents similar to the one after the enactment of the North American Free Trade Agreement in 1993.
 
Democratic senators took to the Senate floor on Thursday to detail how Nafta and agreements like it had killed jobs and depressed wages in their states. They called attention to their opposition on Twitter with the hashtag #NotAnotherNAFTA.
 
‘‘Over the past 20 years, free-trade deals have shipped jobs overseas and cut wages for the jobs that remain,’’ said Senator Bob Casey, Democrat of Pennsylvania. ‘‘Pennsylvania workers know that the rules of free trade are rigged against them.’’
 
In an op-ed article in The Washington Post on Thursday, Senator Elizabeth Warren, Democrat of Massachusetts, argued that a provision of the Trans-Pacific Partnership would undermine American sovereignty by allowing foreign companies to challenge United States laws.
 
Administration officials say the new agreements will help American workers by opening markets for United States products and improving environmental and labor standards around the world.
 
‘‘The president has made a very compelling case for how this benefits American workers,’’ Cecilia Muñoz, the chief of Mr. Obama’s Domestic Policy Council, said Thursday.
 
Mr. Obama’s team is armed with statistics that it says show that the United States has essentially no choice but to strike trade deals to open more markets to American goods.
 
Mr. Andrews and other officials said 95 percent of the world’s consumers live outside the United States, but only 5 percent of American businesses export their goods. Tom Vilsack, the agriculture secretary, said 30 percent of agricultural sales are directly related to exports. Officials have noted that there are 525 million middle-class consumers in Asia, a number that is projected to grow to 3.2 billion over the next 15 years.
 
‘‘We see a tremendous opportunity with T.P.P. to access that expanding middle class,’’ Mr. Vilsack said.
 
Amazon, a technology company obsessed with secrecy, is hiring a former press secretary for President Obama, whose administration has been widely criticized for its aggressive leak investigations, David Streitfeld reported.
 
Jay Carney, who resigned as the president’s chief spokesman last spring, is joining Amazon as senior vice president for global corporate affairs, a new position, the retailer said Thursday.
 
It is an unusual hire for the Seattle-based company, which tends to groom its talent internally, rather than bring in prominent outsiders. Mr. Carney, who begins his new job on Monday, will report to Jeff Bezos, Amazon’s founder and chief executive.
 
Mr. Carney will oversee both public relations and public policy. Amazon generally has disclosed as little as possible about its business activities.
 


 
 
 


 
Obama pushes rural trade efforts, Pacific partnership
 
David Nakamura; The Washington Post   
27 February 2015
Copyright 2015 The Enterprise. Distributed by NewsBank, inc.   
 
WASHINGTON-President Barack Obama promoted his trade agenda in a series of local television interviews Thursday as his administration announced a series of small-scale initiatives aimed at boosting exports in rural communities.
 
The coordinated push comes as the White House is ramping up efforts to win support in Congress for expanded powers to finalize a major free trade deal in the Asia Pacific region, which the president has called a key priority for his final two years in office.
 
Among the television stations Obama spoke with was KGW in Portland, Oregon, the home state of Sen. Ron Wyden, whom the White House views as a key Democratically on trade.
 
"We want to make sure China is not writing the rules," Obama told the station. "We have to get this bill done." The administration has argued that the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) deal would boost U.S. exports in fast-growing Asian markets at a time when the country is facing increased economic competition from China, whose labor and environmental standards are lower.
 
Republican leaders have called on Obama to more aggressively pitch his plans to skeptical Democrats, whose support will be necessary to complete the 12-nation TPP agreement.
 
"That sort of ground-level advocacy is something that I do think will persuade Democrats and Republicans, frankly, to take a close look at some of the trade agreements that the president is trying to broker," White House press secretary Josh Earnest said of Obama's interviews, which also included stations in Fargo, North Dakota, Kansas City, Missouri, and Seattle.
 
In a Washington Post op-ed piece Thursday, Sen. Elizabeth Warren, D-Mass., charged that the trade deal would benefit large companies at the potential expense of taxpayers.
 
On the Senate floor, Warren joined a group of six other Democratic senators in warning against the dangers of unfair trade practices, using a sign reading "Not Another NAFTA" - a reference to the North American Free Trade Agreement struck by the Clinton administration.
 
On Tuesday, AFL-CIO President Richard Trumka rallied union workers in Atlanta against granting Obama fast-track trade powers.
 
"It means lost jobs and lower wages," Trumka said in a video this week.
 


 
 
 
Trade Minister in China for FTA discussion
 
New Zealand Government   
28 February 2015
Copyright 2015, scoop.co.nz   All Rights Reserved.   
 
Trade Minister in China for FTA discussion
 
Trade Minister Tim Groser departs for China tonight to undertake a range of Free Trade Agreement (FTA) related meetings including discussions with his trade counterpart, Minister Gao Hucheng.
 
"Meeting with Minister Gao will be an opportunity to engage following the agreement that was reached between the Prime Minister and President Xi to look at upgrading the NZ-China FTA," Mr Groser says.
 
"The FTA continues to serve us well, with strong bilateral trade flows. The meeting will be the first preliminary discussion to discuss areas where potential improvements can be made."
 
Since the FTA came into force in 2008, two-way trade has doubled and New Zealand exports to China have more than quadrupled. The FTA provides our two countries with the institutional structure and enhanced official relationships to support the broader development of the economic relationship.
 
Total exports to China in 2014 accounted for one fifth of New Zealand's annual global exports. China is New Zealand's largest source of imported goods.
 
 


 
 
 
China,Korea Democratic peoples Republic of : CHINA, SOUTH KOREA signs FTA
 
27 February 2015
The New Dawn
Copyright © 2015 The New Dawn Liberia All Rights Reserved. Provided by Syndigate.info, an Albawaba.com company   
 
As per the Ministry of Commerce (MOC), China and the Republic of Korea (ROK) stated that they have inked free trade agreement (FTA), the end of FTA negotiations.
Previously, in Beijing, President Xi Jinping and his ROK counterpart Park Geun-hye gave the confirmation on a substantive conclusion in negotiations.Incorporating goods and services, investment and trade rules, and topics such as e-commerce and government procurement, the deal would integrate 17 areas.As per MOC, in 2015, deal would be inked and effective by second half of the year.
 


 
Value of trade agreements gets new push
 
Joseph Morton; World-Herald Bureau   
27 February 2015
Omaha World-Herald
Copyright © 2015 Omaha World Herald. Distributed by NewsBank, Inc.   
 
WASHINGTON — Obama administration officials are increasing their push for Congress to support more aggressive trade agreements.
 
To a large extent, it is lawmakers from the president's own party that they have to convince, with wary Democrats concerned that such agreements ultimately cost blue-collar jobs.
 
The administration released a new round of state-by-state statistics on Thursday aimed at highlighting the importance of trade to the economy.
 
"Exports are critical to economic growth and job creation across the country," Commerce Secretary Penny Pritzker said. "From the state of New York to New Mexico, businesses of all sizes are realizing that their customer base is no longer just around the corner. It's all around the world."
 
Pritzker spoke at a briefing alongside Labor Secretary Tom Perez and U.S. trade representative Michael Froman.
 
They pointed to record U.S. exports of $2.4 trillion in 2014, which includes $7.9 billion in merchandise from Nebraska and $15.1 billion worth of products from Iowa.
 
In 2013, the administration said, exports supported 11.3 million American jobs — including 43,000 tied to Nebraska's exports and 81,000 tied to Iowa exports.
 
On average, officials said, jobs in export-related industries pay up to 18 percent more than non-export-related industries.
 
Perez noted that Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack was recently in Minnesota talking to farmers there about the potential for expanded trading opportunities that new trade agreements might bring.
 
Asked about fears that trade agreements could hurt American workers in certain sectors, administration officials said President Barack Obama shares those concerns. But they suggested that new agreements will contain more solid protections for workers than previous pacts such as NAFTA.
 
"Our trade agenda is focused on protecting American workers and American jobs, creating a more fair and level playing field by raising standards abroad and making sure that it's the U.S. and not others who are setting the rules of the road for the global trading system," Froman said.
 
Sen. Deb Fischer, R-Neb., said she appreciates the president's interest in trade, but noted that he called for trade promotion authority in the past and Senate Democrats immediately made clear they wouldn't move on it.
 
Now that Republicans are in control of the Senate, Fischer said the issue will be on the agenda, although she cautioned that Democrats still could block it.
 


  ________________________________  
Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.