Headlines:

Greece Given Until Sunday to Settle Debt Crisis or Face Disaster

China steps up efforts to halt stock market rout

Impasse in agriculture trade reform continues at over benchmarks

India feels the heat in WTO solar dispute with US

Russia must not violate WTO norms, despite geopolitics - Ulyukayev

Indonesian Government Anticipates Singapore Plan on Cigarette Plain Packaging Policy

Russia far from isolated in non-West community

How Much Have Sanctions Really Hurt Russia?

The Brics Are Harming Each Other's Trade, and India Is Largely to Blame

China Voice: BRICS a stabilizer of global economy

Power struggle: China, Russia not on same page over BRICS bank

Rising anticipation: TPP negotiators to gather in Hawaii

India drafting drug quality norms to match US FDA standards

 

Details:

Greece Given Until Sunday to Settle Debt Crisis or Face Disaster

Financial Times.

By HYPERLINK "http://topics.nytimes.com/top/reference/timestopics/people/h/andrew_higgins/index.html"ANDREW HIGGINS and HYPERLINK "http://topics.nytimes.com/top/reference/timestopics/people/k/james_kanter/index.html"JAMES KANTERJULY 7, 2015

BRUSSELS — Frustrated European leaders gave Greece until Sunday to reach an agreement to save its collapsing economy from catastrophe after an emergency summit meeting here on Tuesday ended without the Athens government offering a substantive new proposal to resolve its HYPERLINK "http://topics.nytimes.com/top/reference/timestopics/subjects/e/european_sovereign_debt_crisis/index.html?inline=nyt-classifier"debt crisis.

“The situation is really critical and unfortunately we can’t exclude the black scenarios of no agreement,” said Donald Tusk, the president of the European Council, warning that those possibilities included “the bankruptcy of Greece and the insolvency of its banking system” and great pain for the Greek people. Also looming ever larger was the prospect of Greece leaving the European currency union.

Mr. Tusk said that the government of Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras had until Thursday to deliver a new plan to Greece’s creditors.

“Until now I have avoided talking about deadlines,” Mr. Tusk, a former prime minister of Poland, told reporters after a day of fruitless meetings. “But tonight I have to say it loud and clear — the final deadline ends this week.”

“I have no doubt that this is the most critical moment in our history.”

Deadlines have come and gone without serious consequences, but yet another emergency gathering, this one involving all 28 HYPERLINK "http://topics.nytimes.com/top/reference/timestopics/organizations/e/european_union/index.html?inline=nyt-org"European Union leaders in Brussels on Sunday, might really be a crunch point. “This could be the last meeting about Greece,” Prime Minister Matteo Renzi of Italy told reporters on Tuesday night.

China steps up efforts to halt stock market rout

New York Times

Josh Noble in Hong Kong and Gabriel Wildau in Shanghai

China’s central bank stepped up state support for sinking stocks on Wednesday, as investors rushed to sell what they still could after a fresh wave of HYPERLINK "http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/16ab8386-2456-11e5-9c4e-a775d2b173ca.html"share suspensions that has halted trading in half the market.

The Shanghai Composite was down 3.7 per cent by 1pm local time after falling as much as 8 per cent at the open. The Shenzhen index had fallen 3 per cent. 

As the sell-off continued, Beijing responded with further measures to steady the market. The People’s Bank of China said it was helping state-owned HYPERLINK "http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/c1666694-248b-11e5-9c4e-a775d2b173ca.html"China Securities Finance Corporation access liquidity to help the fund “hold the line against the outbreak of systemic or regional financial risk”.

This is the clearest statement yet about what CSF is doing — buying shares directly using PBoC money, a big departure from its traditional role of lending to brokerages to support margin lending.

The CSF is also providing Rmb260bn ($41.8bn) of credit to brokerages in order to help them buy shares, according the China Securities Regulatory Commission.

In a separate statement the CSRC added that the CSF would continue to buy-blue chips, but would also step up purchases of shares in smaller companies “relieve the problem of strained liquidity”.

In its statement ahead of Wednesday’s open, the CSRC had noted: “There is a mood of panic in the market and a large increase in the irrational dumping of shares, causing a strain of liquidity.”

In a further effort to halt the rout, China’s state-sector administer instructed government-owned companies not to sell shares, while the insurance regulator said it had cleared “qualified insurers” to increase their asset allocation to equities.

The renewed selling followed another round of share suspensions overnight that have now halted trading in 1,476 stocks — or more than 50 per cent of all listed companies on China’s two main exchanges. The suspensions have frozen $2.6tn worth of equity, according to Bloomberg calculations. 

Impasse in agriculture trade reform continues at over benchmarks

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"D Ravi Kanth

8 July 2015

New Delhi, July 8 -- Farmers in India and other developing countries are unlikely to get any relief for competing with heavily subsidized exports from the US and rich countries if a Canadian proposal succeeds in dismantling the existing goalposts for reforming global trade in agriculture.

Canada has circulated a confidential matrix proposal to set aside the previously agreed mandates to conclude the Doha agriculture negotiations. Reform of international trade in agriculture products, which remains distorted due to billions of dollars in farm subsidies, is among the core priorities of the Doha Round.

During the last 14 years of Doha negotiations, members of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization fixed concrete benchmarks for conducting agriculture negotiations. The benchmarks include the 2001 Doha ministerial declaration, the 2004 July framework agreement, the 2005 Hong Kong Ministerial declaration, and the unsettled 2008 revised draft modalities.

But the US and some other rich countries remain opposed to the previous mandates, particularly the 2008 revised draft modalities, because of the difficulties involved in doing away with billions of dollars of their farm support programmes. The 2008 modalities which are referred to as Rev.4 suggested credible, "balanced" and "equitable" landing zones for concluding the negotiations.

Consequently, the existing mandates including Rev.4 are standing in the way of wrapping up the negotiations for the US and other industrialized countries.

The US, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union, and other industrialized countries want to finish the Doha negotiations at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO's 10th ministerial conference in Nairobi.

The US has suggested that there would be a train wreck if the Doha negotiations are not concluded at Nairobi at a meeting with the Kenyan foreign minister Amina Mohamed last week, according to a person familiar with the meeting.

In their hurry to prepare a work programme for concluding the Doha negotiations without following the previous mandates, Canada has prepared a matrix type of chart on what is possible in each area such as agriculture, market access for industrial goods, services, and rules.

In agriculture, Canada says "consensus" is not possible to reform the trade-distorting farm subsidies based on the previous mandates.

At a closed-door meeting last Friday, trade envoys of India, China, Brazil, and South Africa dismissed the Canadian matrix proposal saying they are not prepared to negotiate commitments for reducing subsidies and tariffs outside the existing Doha mandates, said people familiar with the meeting.

"The Canadian proposal aims to frame new thresholds for concluding the Doha trade negotiations without adhering to the previous negotiating mandates," a trade envoy said.

But trade envoys from major industrialized countries such as the US, the EU, Japan, Australia, Norway, and Switzerland among others supported the Canadian proposal.

The Canadian proposal says special exemptions granted to recently acceded members such as China from undertaking reduction commitments in subsidies in the existing mandates are a "major threshold issue".

Under the existing mandates, including the 2008 revised draft modalities, the US, the EU, Japan, Canada, Switzerland, and Norway among others are required to do the heavy lifting by substantially reducing their trade-distorting subsidies.

"Level of ambition foreseen in Rev.4 no longer doable for some members," Canada has argued in its matrix proposal, seen by Mint.

Canada did not indicate who are these "some members" for whom the 2008 modalities are not doable when an overwhelming majority of countries want them to be the basis for concluding Doha trade negotiations.

Canada says a permanent solution for public stockholding programmes for food security, which is one of the core issues of interest for India and 40 other developing countries, is not possible on the basis of the proposals submitted by the G-33 farm coalition.

The G-33 coalition, led by Indonesia, in which India, China, and 43 other countries are members have offered three options which are easily doable if the US and some countries stop their "diversionary" tactics and engage with members.

"Members also concerned with possible trade-distorting "spill-over effect" (including export and import substitution)" because of the permanent solution for public stockholding programmes, Canada has argued.

But India and other G-33 members dismissed this, saying both export and import substitution is part of the trade policy framework of the industrialized countries.

For market access in farm products, Canada has argued "new ideas and proposals generally seen as lowering ambition relative to Rev.4" and "some members favour recalibrated and simplified approaches to reducing tariffs, while other members remain resistant to departures from Rev.4"

The Canadian claim about market access is misleading and factually incorrect as a large majority of countries want Rev.4, according to a developing country trade envoy.

Canada has also argued that there are "sharp divergences among members over the degree to which safeguards and flexibilities are linked to overall ambition. G33 rejects linkage."

A G33 official said Canada's statement on safeguards and flexibilities failed to reflect the overwhelming support for special safeguard mechanism which is not linked with market access.

During the closed-door meeting, major developing countries said the Canadian proposal is inconsistent with existing Doha mandates.

"Without complete clarity on the domestic support pillar, including the aggregate measurement of support (AMS) in which major industrialized countries are required to substantially reduce their current entitlement, there is no way we can move forward," a South American trade envoy said.

At the meeting, China asked the US whether it is going to reduce its AMS which is supposed to be brought down to $14.5 billion as part of the Doha agriculture negotiations.

The four major developing countries insisted that Rev. 4 must remain as the basis for concluding the Doha trade negotiations at the ministerial meeting in Kenya.

Published by HT Syndication with permission from MINT.

For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com 

HT Media Limited

India feels the heat in WTO solar dispute with US

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Nayanima Basu

NAYANIMA BASU New Delhi 

8 July 2015

Business Standard

Verdict expected in August

India might once again face flak at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization’s dispute settlement body over its solar mission programme case against the US even as the verdict is expected by end of August.

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO dispute panel had its last hearing in early May and now the final verdict is awaited. The case was filed by US in 2013 with another follow-up case in 2014 along with the launch of both phases of Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission (NSM), which aims at producing 20,000 mW of solar power by 2022.

In both the petitions filed at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO disputes panel, the US alleged that Indian authorities were asked for mandatory usage of domestically produced solar power panels, which restricted the entry of American imports. The US, in its submission to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO, stated that India has violated Article III:4 of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) by not giving national treatment to imported products. Additionally, it also said India was in violation of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO Agreement on Trade-Related Investment Measures (TRIMs), which prohibits the imposition of local content requirements.

“The panel had its last hearing and we are expecting the verdict soon… We have presented our case strongly, but the chances of having a favourable decision look bleak,” a senior commerce department official told Business Standard.

The US had also complained to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO that solar power producers in the country receive certain benefits and advantages, such as long-term tariffs for electricity, dependent on their purchase and use of solar cells and solar modules of domestic origin.

The first case was filed in February 2013 where the US was miffed with the fact that the government was urging developers of photovoltaic projects to procure solar cells and solar modules from domestic manufacturers only. Subsequently, when the second phase was launched in February 2014, the US stated that India still insisted on domestic content requirement (DCR).

Consequently, the panel on India — Certain Measures Relating to Solar Cells and Solar Modules (WT/DS456) was established by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO DSB on May 23, 2014 and composed on September 24, 2014. The case was later joined by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union (EU), China, Japan, Australia, Russia, Canada, Brazil, Saudi Arabia, Malaysia, Norway, Ecuador and Korea as third-party observers.

According to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Biswajit Dhar, economics professor at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) and trade expert, the stance taken by the US was “pre- emptive and lacked merit” when in reality, their products were used, and DCR was only a statement of intent. In the second phase of NSM, Chinese solar panels were used. Earlier in March this year, the EU also raised questions and sought more details on the government’s plan to set up 1,000 mW and 15,000 mW solar power projects, which were approved by Cabinet in December 2014 and February 2015, respectively.

India recently lost a dispute over poultry imports against US at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO.

Business Standard Limited (India) 

Russia must not violate WTO norms, despite geopolitics - Ulyukayev

7 July 2015

Interfax: Russia & CIS Business and Financial Newswire

MOSCOW. July 7 (Interfax) - The complex geopolitical situation should not be a justification for Russia to breach HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization norms, Economic Development Minister Alexei Ulyukayev said at a meeting of a working group on Russia's HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO participation.

"Perhaps in the realities of today's geopolitical situation, the observance of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO norms does not appear to be a factor that goes a long way towards determining the policy of developing sectors of the economy. However in the context of the global trading system, the active use of banned mechanisms could result in the status of unreliable partners and the subsequent complication of Russia's participation in mechanisms to resolve trade disputes," the Economic Development Ministry's press office quoted Ulyukayev as saying at the meeting.

Three years after Russia joined the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO, "not all expectations have been borne out," Ulyukayev said. But "all commitments taken by Russia and reflected in the implementation schedule, including tariff and non-tariff regulation measures - these we intend to continue to implement in full," he said.

For now, Russia is adopting "more of a defensive position" but it is already "having a shot at trade disputes," he said. 

Indonesian Government Anticipates Singapore Plan on Cigarette Plain Packaging Policy

8 July 2015

ACN Newswire

JAKARTA, July 8, 2015 - (ACN Newswire) - The Indonesian Director General of National Export Development, Nus Nuzulia Ishak, moved quickly to anticipate Singapore's plan to implement a plain packaging policy for cigarettes. A similar policy has been implemented by the Australian government and is currently a subject of dispute at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO).

"Indonesia is the second largest exporter of cigarettes to Singapore. Should this plain packaging policy be implemented by the Singaporean Government, it is predicted to lead to a decline in our exports to Singapore," asserted Nus in Jakarta (25/6).

Indonesian exports of tobacco products to Singapore in 2014 reached USD 139.99 million, a 9.66% drop compared to the previous period, which reached USD 154.96 million. The largest exporter of cigarettes (HS 4 digit 2402) to Singapore is still China with a 20.39% share. Should this new policy go into effect, exports of cigarettes and tobacco products are projected to slide even further.

On 12 March 2015, the Singaporean Government through HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Singapore's Ministry of Health expressed their plan for a policy to standardize cigarette packaging and other tobacco products at a public hearing with the Health Committee in the parliament.

On that occasion, Muhammad Faishal Ibrahim, the Parliamentary Secretary at the Ministry of Health, conveyed the tobacco control measures. One of which is the Announcement: Public Consultation on Standardized Packaging, which asserts that Singapore is about to implement the plain packaging policy.

Nus explained that Singapore plans to hold a public consultation at the end of 2015 that is open to relevant stakeholders. This is done by the Singapore Government to obtain views and feedback from various parties.

"This is an opportunity for us, the Government as well as cigarette and producers of tobacco products in Indonesia, to express our views and provide feedback along with a strong argument before the policy goes into effect in Singapore," said Nus.

The plain packaging policy mandates cigarettes be sold in uniform packaging with a certain color and show health warnings on the cigarette packaging. Besides that, the name of the product must also be written using a predetermined font without the company logo or any trademarks.

In its dispute with Australia at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO, the Government argues that the omission of branding or trademarks has nothing to do with health. That's why the implementation of plain packaging for cigarettes is irrelevant. Besides Singapore, this policy that has been implemented by Australia looks to be followed by other countries such as New Zealand, Ireland, and the United Kingdom.

Source: HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Indonesian Ministry of Trade

Russia far from isolated in non-West community

Dmitri Trenin 

8 July 2015

China Daily-US Edition

Russian President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Vladimir Putin will host two important international summits, one of the BRICS group on July 8-9 and the other of Shanghai Cooperation Organizations members on July 9-10. For public relations, this will allow him to send a message to the world that despite the rupture with Europe and a new "standoff" with the United States, Russia is anything but isolated. With leaders of China, India, Brazil, Pakistan, South Africa, Iran and several other countries in attendance, together representing roughly half of the world's population, Putin will be able to project an image of Russia joining the global "new wave" of non-Western countries raising their profile and expanding their role in the world.

This is a sea change for Russia's foreign policy. Since the disintegration of the Soviet Union, Russia has had two strategies, one official and the other held in reserve. The official strategy was aimed at integrating Russia, on its own terms, into the Euro-Atlantic community, i.e. expanded West. The G8 membership symbolized that. The other was to integrate former Soviet republics into a full-fledged Eurasian Union: an economic, political, and security alliance, a Moscow-led power center in Eurasia.

Today, the first strategy is a complete failure; the second one, limited to economics and without Ukraine, qualifies as only a most moderate success.

Under these circumstances, reaching out pro-actively to the non-West is the only realistic option for Moscow. To exercise it, it will need to reform its traditional Western-centric worldview and pay more attention to its neighbors in Asia, and partners across the global South. For that, Moscow will not only need to learn more about them, and about their ways of doing business, but also to treat them as peers. Expanding economic relations, strengthening cultural ties and deepening understanding among the members of elite groups emerge as clear priorities.

On top of the list is China. The relationship with Beijing is emerging as Moscow's most important one, ahead of those with Washington and Berlin. Getting that relationship right - in the face of the obvious disparities between Russia and China - will be crucial for the future of Russia as a great power. Russia recently joined the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank and has moved to "harmonize" the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Eurasian Economic Union with the Silk Road Economic Belt. The SCO can now serve as both a platform and a vehicle for Sino-Russian economic harmonization.

With India and Pakistan seeking to join the SCO, and Iran drawing closer, the organization is becoming more diverse and will have to have a clear focus in order to become something more than a series of regular meetings. Creating a common Eurasian economic space is one headline goal. Working toward a common security arrangement for Continental Asia - building on the original purpose of the Shanghai Five as it was called in the 1990s - is another. Building lasting partnerships and enhancing trust among its member states is a third strategic objective.

As for BRICS, besides the function of promoting its members' interests in the world of global finance and advancing other elements of the global agenda, it could become a model of the global order writ large. The things that its members are publicly preaching, such as sovereignty and non-interference, equality and justice, and rights rooted in responsibilities, can and should be practiced in relations among these countries themselves. There is nothing more compelling than leading by one's own example.

The new world order will not come through the overthrow of the existing US-dominated system, but by means of the triumph of the global best practices. If the leading countries of the non-West can come up with viable alternatives to established ways of doing business in the world, they will make a difference. To succeed in this, they will need to treat their own institution building as anything but an exercise in anti-Western exploits.

Russia, as the host of the two summits, should view its role as an economic resource base, a diplomatic adviser and a defense arsenal of the emerging community of the non-West. It has to rise to the occasion.

The author is director of the Carnegie Moscow Center.

China Daily Information Company

How Much Have Sanctions Really Hurt Russia?

8 July 2015

The Moscow Times

Next month marks one year since the beginning of the more serious phase of Western sanctions against the Russian economy and Moscow's retaliatory action to ban some imported foods. Recently the Western sanctions were extended, intact, until January so as to align them with the deadline for one of the key provisions of the Minsk II agreement, which is the return of control of all of Ukraine's borders to the Kiev government.

Moscow, in turn, has extended the food import ban for a full 12 months, albeit making it clear that this can be reviewed at any time depending on what happens to the Western sanctions.

As we approach the one-year anniversary, is it possible to say with any degree of accuracy exactly what the impact of the sanctions has been on Russia and the economy? There certainly has been a great deal of hype from both sides, with each side claiming a form of victory from the sanctions.

Cutting back the noise a bit, we can see that the only two sanctions that matter are the ban on Russian banks and some state companies from accessing new Western debt and credits, and, from the Russian side, the ban on some imported food.

The sanctions against individuals do not register at all, while the selective ban on supplying some services and equipment to the oil industry has not yet had any noticeable impact. Longer term it will, or may, but not over the short to medium term.

Despite predictions that the country's oil output would slide by up to 500,000 barrels per day (bpd) this year, the actual data for the first half of the year showed that output rose by 1.2 percent over the same period of last year and averaged 10.7 million bpd.

There is no doubt that the most damaging sanction was the ban on accessing new Western debt and credits because even though that action is directed against a handful of state banks and energy companies, the effect has been an almost total ban by all Western banks and trade organizations on any Russia risk. That has certainly hurt the economy and contributed to the current recession. But by how much? My view is that it is impossible to say.

The reason for that is because that particular sanction was applied almost exactly as the oil price rolled over and started a steep decline. Without the sanctions the economy would today be in recession because of the oil price collapse. If oil had not collapsed then the sanctions alone would not have caused the recession.

What we can also say, however, is that the sanctions accelerated the decline and made worse the problems resulting from the falling oil price. The lower oil price strained the availability of local liquidity which would normally be compensated by accessing foreign debt markets.

The fact that this was not an available option resulted in the more difficult and volatile backdrop we saw in December. The ruble would not have collapsed in mid-December if the oil price was above $100 bpd, regardless of sanctions, and it would not have been so volatile if access to international debt was still open.

What else can we see as a consequence or even a lasting legacy of sanctions? Russia has a new slogan, "import substitution," or perhaps a new buzzword, "localization." Domestic producers have gained from both the weaker ruble and the ban on some food imports since late last year. We can see that in the relatively good manufacturing and agriculture sector data for the past five months and the collapse in the value of imports, which are down by over 25 percent compared to this time last year.

That the Kremlin embraced import substitution as a recovery strategy so quickly is no surprise. President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Vladimir Putin has been complaining about the high level of imported food, medicines and basic machinery ever since the disastrous harvest in 2010. Little has actually changed since then.

To that extent the opportunity to ban some food imports and make local manufacturing a national cause was very welcome. But here also the import ban was not solely as a result of sanctions. Recall, for example, that Russia placed an import ban on pork from some countries in January last year and has been regularly banning some food items for years. The stated reasons have usually been a veterinary or sanitation issue but, in fact, it was part of an effort to try and force investment into domestic production.

That progress has been so slow is also no surprise. Even if government support for import substitution stays strong, realistically it will be at least five years before import substitution starts to have a material impact on the availability of domestic food supply and on the economy.

More than two decades of neglect in such industries as agriculture and machine building will not be reversed with only 12 months of weak currency and sanctions. The evidence so far is very encouraging but it is only the start and needs to be sustained.

Another effect of the sanctions and, in particular, the political reset with the U.S. and EU is the so-called pivot East. There is plenty of evidence of the closer political and trade relationship with China and, as we can see at this week's BRICS summit in Ufa, with other major developing economies.

But if we cut back the geopolitical overlay, what we actually see is less of a shift East but more of a diversification strategy. Pre-sanctions Russia had become very integrated with Western economies and the EU in particular. Just as Brussels complained that 40 percent of the EU's gas imports came from Russia, Moscow woke up to the fact that 80 percent of its gas exports went to one region and over 50 percent of imported consumer goods came from the EU.

It is basic common sense that one should have economic and trade diversification. The longer the sanctions regime remains in place the greater will be the permanent diversification. The political shift away from the West is clearly very real, but the need to keep Western multinational companies engaged in the country and to be a big part of the import-substitution program has also now become much clearer.

That does not conflict with the fact that we will see more meat, fruit and vegetables with country of origin labels from Asia or Africa or South America on the shelves of Russian supermarkets. Hopefully they will be increasingly crowded out with domestically sourced produce in the years ahead.

What else can we say is the impact of sanctions and the political reset? There are plenty of positives to highlight, such as the fact that more Russians will spend their vacations inside the country and that should result in greater investment into the hotel and leisure sectors.

On the other hand, it is very regrettable that so many commentators, on both sides of the divide, have reverted to political and emotional bias, rather than basic facts, in their observations about the economy and the assessment of the future. That's to be expected.

What has come as a big surprise, however, is that Belarus is such a rich source of diverse foods such as salmon, lobsters and mozzarella cheese. Who knew?

Chris Weafer is a senior partner with Macro Advisory, a consultancy advising macro hedge funds and foreign companies looking at investment opportunities in Russia.

United Press LLC

The Brics Are Harming Each Other's Trade, and India Is Largely to Blame

By Raymond Zhong 

8 July 2015

Dow Jones Institutional News

Like most families, the Brics bloc isn't as happy as it looks from the outside.

Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa, whose leaders begin a two-day summit today in Russia, are responsible for a growing share of the world's trade-distorting policies but an even larger portion of trade-liberalizing ones, a new report finds.

However, the temporary nature of some of the market-opening measures means that overall these countries are still discriminating significantly against their trade partners--many of which are fellow emerging markets.

The finding, documented by the Global Trade Alert project of the London-based HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Centre for Economic Policy Research, highlights some of the awkward contradictions in the effort to unite the Brics.

"On the one hand, the Brics have sought to bolster trade between themselves with more generous credit lines for exporters and the like," writes the report's author, Simon Evenett, a professor of economics at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"University of St. Gallen, Switzerland. "On the other hand, the Brics are responsible for a third of the instances of the harm to each other's commercial interests. This cannot make sense."

Global Trade Alert monitors trade-distorting moves such as tariffs, investment restrictions, "buy local" requirements for public procurement and export-promotion tools such as tax incentives and trade finance. GTA says its dataset includes more than 4,500 trade-related policies enacted globally since the financial crisis, more than double the number tracked by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization.

The GTA database documents three major spikes in protectionism since 2008. Over that period, the Brics governments have implemented a total of 1,451 policies that favor domestic commercial interests over foreign ones, or 32% of such measures world-wide. The Brics countries have since unwound just a fifth of these, suggesting that protectionist walls weren't raised merely as temporary crisis-fighting measures. The Brics account for 17% of world trade.

Within the bloc, India stands out as an offender. According to GTA, the country is second only to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union both in the number of discriminatory measures imposed since November 2008--452 against the EU's 604--and in the number of product categories affected by such measures--1,174 against the EU's 1,220, both out of a possible 1,229.

Rich-country protectionism is still alive and kicking, the report shows. Of the 2,733 economic policies that harmed at least one Brics member, a fifth came from a member of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"G-7 group of nations--the U.S., Canada, Japan, Germany, France, U.K. and Italy--or Australia. Nearly a third, however, came from fellow Brics nations.

All told, a greater share of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"G-7 policies were discriminatory, but the Brics' protectionism affected a broader range of products. China was the most-common victim, with 2,153 foreign measures hitting its commercial interests.

The Brics also account for an increasing share of reforms world-wide to lower obstacles to foreign firms and investors, the report finds. But 28% of these liberalizations have already lapsed, compared to the global average of 15%.

Some economists say developing countries, in order to kick-start industrialization, need to shield and nurture local firms until they're ready to compete on world markets. But Mr. Evenett argues that condoning "special and differential treatment" for poor countries doesn't straightforwardly protect them against rich countries' discrimination--it also provides cover for developing countries to step on other developing countries' toes. China is the only one of the Brics whose exports haven't stagnated over the past four years.

Hence, "a less selective approach to tackling crisis-era protectionism would seem to be in order," Mr. Evenett writes. "The frequency with which Brics commercial interests are harmed by beggar-thy-neighbor interests ought to make the Brics champions of the monitoring of protectionism by international organizations."

For breaking news, features and analysis from India, follow WSJ India on HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Facebook . 

(END) Dow Jones Newswires

July 08, 2015 01:08 ET (05:08 GMT)

Dow Jones & Company, Inc. 

China Voice: BRICS a stabilizer of global economy

8 July 2015

Xinhua's China Economic Information Service

BEIJING, July 8 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Xinhua) -- A BRICS group with deepened cooperation will not only serve its five member countries and other developing nations, but also stabilize and even boost the world economy. In upcoming days, leaders of the BRICS countries -- Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa -- will meet in Ufa of Russia for the seventh BRICS leaders meeting. They met for the first time in 2009, launching the bloc's cooperation mechanism. Since then, the BRICS have shown vitality and innovation through cooperation, with deepened participation in global governance. Now these countries will set up the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"New Development Bank (NDB).

The institution's board of governors will hold its first meeting in Moscow to appoint members of the board of directors and the management. The NDB shows that the BRICS bloc has transformed from a political concept to a real force for reform in the international community. With the bank's funding, developing countries, especially the African states, can improve their infrastructure, rather than struggling with the limited funds the current international agencies provide them. The new development bank will cover the shortcomings of the global financial system. It is not intended to overturn the current system, but to encourage investment from developed countries and other developing countries with an open and inclusive mind. The BRICS has become an importance platform for exchanges and cooperation among the world's major emerging economies. It has brought real benefits for the member states, and also earned a good reputation among the international community. This new cooperation mechanism pointed to an important trend: emerging economies are playing bigger roles in global issues. Global economic recovery remains slow. While trade globalization agreements are still being negotiated, the Western countries and Russia are introducing sanctions against each other, and the developed and developing countries have not yet reached agreement on how to balance economic development and climate change. Under such circumstances, the BRICS leaders' meeting in Ufa has critical significance as cooperation among them will not benefit not only themselves but also the world economy. Although the five countries are at very different stages of their development, they will still become new growth poles for the world economy.The five have contributed half the world's economic growth in the past 10 years. They have complementary industrial structures. Sufficient labor, abundant resources and large markets give them great opportunities for development. The five countries are also important players in both their continents and international affairs. In multilateral platforms such as the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"UN and the G20, they are playing bigger roles than ever before, thus their booming economies can drive the whole global economy through their deepened cooperation with other countries and international organizations. Enditem

China Economic Information Service of Xinhua News Agency 

Power struggle: China, Russia not on same page over BRICS bank

8 July 2015

Nikkei Report

WATARU KODAKA, Nikkei staff writer

MOSCOW -- A multilateral bank run by the world's five biggest emerging economies is set to open for business as early as this year, but China and Russia may have different ideas about the new institution's role.

The New Development Bank, the bank of the so-called BRICS nations of Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa, held its inaugural meeting Tuesday in Moscow with India's K. V. Kamath as its first governor. The five founding members are contributing equally to the bank's initial $50 billion in capital.

The bank will become a financial institution leading the world, Russian Minister of Economic Development Alexy Ulyukaev told local media Tuesday.

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Bank and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Asian Development Bank have traditionally provided infrastructure lending for developing nations. But borrowers have complained that terms and conditions are too strict. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"BRICS bank plans to offer quicker funding, apparently in exchange for political support. It intends to open ownership to other countries as well.

In May, Russia invited Greece's beleaguered Tsipras government to join the new bank. Now that Athens' talks with its creditors have gone awry and it is on the brink of financial collapse, there is no chance that the Mediterranean country will join now. But with BRICS leaders meeting in the southern Russian city of Ufa on Wednesday and Thursday, it is possible that Beijing and Moscow -- given their alliance against the U.S. and Europe -- will team up to give a new financial aid deal to Greece as a way to access that country's strategically important geographical position.

The BRICS countries accounted for more than 20% of the world's gross domestic product in 2014, but their voices are limited at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"International Monetary Fund, the ADB and other international organizations set up by industrialized nations after World War II. Emerging countries are unhappy about this, and the BRICS members seek to use their new bank to facilitate a framework that allows emerging economies to support other emerging economies.

Still, Russia and China do not seem to be on the same page when it comes to what they want the new entity to do.

The countries signed an agreement to set up the bank at a March 2013 summit. Just seven months later, Beijing announced the idea of establishing the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, as it wanted an international financial institution that it could influence heavily.

The AIIB has brought aboard a whopping 57 founding members, including the U.K., France and Germany, gaining a huge presence in the international community. Russia and the other BRICS members signed on too, but China boasts the biggest ownership with a stake of about 30%. The fact that China let an Indian official become the first head of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"BRICS bank, which will be headquartered in Shanghai, shows Beijing's growing confidence on the international stage.

Meanwhile, Russia has been hit by U.S.- and Europe-imposed economic sanctions over the Ukraine issue and wants to use the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"BRICS bank to beef up its political sway over emerging economies. The new bank and the AIIB can be complementary to each other, says Gov. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Elvira Nabiullina of the Bank of Russia.

Nikkei Digital Media Inc. 

Rising anticipation: TPP negotiators to gather in Hawaii

8 July 2015

Nikkei Report

TOKYO -- The 12 countries aiming for a broad agreement on the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade pact will meet later this month, with an eye toward the final stage.

Talks among chief negotiators are expected to be held in Hawaii as early as July 23 to prepare the ground for a ministerial-level meeting.

Momentum seems to be rising with the recent signing of legislation granting the U.S. president fast-track authority for trade deals.

TPP negotiators last met this May in Guam. But despite intense talks, they could not bridge gaps over such issues as intellectual property and investment.

The 12 have continued working-level consultations on sticking points like extending the data protection period for pharmaceuticals. With some divisions still deep, it remains unclear whether ministers can reach a political settlement.

One gauge of the prospects of a successful broad agreement is the extent of bilateral progress on tariff elimination and other issues.

Japan and the U.S. will hold a working-level meeting here Thursday and Friday to prepare for a ministerial agreement, weighing the benefits of freer trade in contested items -- autoparts for the U.S. and rice for Japan.

Countries that have made little progress are an issue of concern. Such parties, including Canada and New Zealand, are "far behind," according to a source close to the talks. Whether they can make rapid progress before the high-level meetings is uncertain.

(Nikkei)

Nikkei Digital Media Inc. 

India drafting drug quality norms to match US FDA standards

Himani Chandna 

8 July 2015

Hindustan Times

New Delhi, July 8 -- After facing harsh criticism over drug manufacturing quality in the recent past, government is now set to draft a new set of guidelines to regulate drug quality in India.

Health ministry and Central Drug Standards Control Organisation (CDSCO), jointly, plan to study the guidelines of global health regulators.

While the new set of regulation guidelines will be referred from top global health regulators such as, the government plans to study regulations of lesser developed countries and Brics countries as well.

"Government is worried over the promises made to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"US Food and Drug Administration off late. However, due to the certain quality lapses by Indian drug makers, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"US FDA still continues to take harsh action against India drug-production plants," said a senior bureaucrat from ministry of health and family welfare.

Government is taking several other measures to save brand image of pharmaceuticals industry which majorily includes overhauling of CDSCO, the regulatory body for drug quality standards in India.

"We have floated a cabinet note on revamping CDSCO where it would be upgraded into a world-class health regulator. CDSCO will also be renamed as Central Drug Administration," said an official. "The Cabinet may take up the proposal in this month."

Published by HT Syndication with permission from Hindustan Times.

END 

 

 

cid:image001.png@01CC55E4.A4F90770

 

Josep Bosch, Information Officer

Information and External Relations Division

+41227395681

 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.
