HEADLINES:
India: Tough challenges on the trade front
WTO's TFA has made a reasonable progress so far
Envoys cry foul as US seeks to protect its farm export credits
China, Japan, S Korea agree to boost trade, work for peace
China drives a pragmatic route in new trade push
USTR: TPP's INTERNET FREEDOM TERMS TO BE 'FOUNDATION' FOR FUTURE PACTS
Government initiatives may boost pharma industry in near future in India
‘The future of democracy in the digital age’; Europe challenges Google
 
Details:
India: Tough challenges on the trade front
C. R. L. Narasimhan
2 November 2015
The Hindu
THINDU
BUSINESS Indian policy makers face a number of stiff challenges as they prepare for the 10th ministerial meet of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) to be held in Nairobi, Kenya during the middle of next month. The ministerial meet is the highest policy making body of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO covering 161 members.
First, the news on trade front is nothing to cheer about. The September foreign trade data showed Indian exports declining for 10 straight months in row. The slowing Chinese economy is a significant factor impacting global demand and investment. Other countries, both emerging as well as developed ones are reckoning with the declining Chinese demand and not just for raw materials.
The sad fact is emerging market countries as a group have become a drag on global trade. This is in sharp contrast to just a few years ago when they boosted global trade. It is not clear as to when and what measures will be necessary to reverse the trend.
A serious threat
A more ominous threat is to the orderly conduct of world trade. Less than two months before the Nairobi ministerial, the very relevance of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO and more specifically its Doha development round is once again being called into question. India might be wrongly accused of single-handedly blocking the trade facilitation agreement, which has been the only tangible success of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO’s Doha round so far. India’s persistence in seeking a simultaneous agreement on an extended food stocking might go well with certain domestic constituencies but has done nothing to dispel its image as a tough and often difficult negotiator.
Mega alignments
In days to come, Indian policy makers have to take cognisance of new trade blocs and alignments taking place. These may strike at the very structure of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO and more importantly the multilateral trading it embodies.
The reference is to the emerging mega trade deals involving some, but not even a majority of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members. Referred to as plurilateral deals, to distinguish them from bilateral (two countries) or multilateral these are bound to alter the structure of world trade.
Two important trade blocs are on the anvil — the Trans-pacific Partnership (TPP), which excludes India and Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP), which includes India and ten members of the ASEAN (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Association of Southeast Asian Nations) plus Australia, China, Indonesia, Japan, South Korea and New Zealand.
Very recently, the U.S. concluded negotiations with 12 countries of the Pacific RIM to create what is called a Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP). Although two major economic powers of the region — China and South Korea are not yet in, the TPP includes the U.S., Canada, Australia, New Zealand and Japan among the large economies and Chile, Peru, Mexico, Vietnam, Singapore, Brunei and Malaysia among the smaller economies. Together they account for 40 per cent of global trade. 800 million people live in these countries.
The TPP has not yet been voted into law. Even at this advanced stage it faces opposition within the U.S. as influential politicians stoke the fear of job losses at home in the wake of the mega agreement. But with the U.S. President backing it to the hilt, the TPP might soon become a reality.
The TPP seeks to ease the flow of goods, services and investments among its members and to strengthen the rules on labour standards, environmental issues, origin criteria and intellectual property. Tariff reduction will hardly been an issue as much has been achieved already.
For India, the TPP might signal the erosion of the competitive edge its goods and services enjoy especially in the traditional markets of European union and the U.S. India might also have to meet the challenge of a new rule bound trade architecture.
India must act proactively
The Commerce Ministry has urged Indian exporters to convert the imminent threats into opportunities. But that is going to be easier said than done. Policymakers should adopt a more give and take attitude in trade matters without compromising on India’s needs for food security. The emergence of plurilateral agreements is a warning that the world will simply pass by ignoring India’s interests. It has been reported that China will soon seek membership of the TPP, a move India should emulate, if possible at all.
Setting back multilateralism
At the global level, the TPP, the biggest trade pact in recent times, has been welcomed but with a few qualifications. The fine print of the agreement has not been released but those in the know of things say that it could boost the GDP of its members by one per cent by 2025, with the emerging markets among the signatories gaining more. The biggest loser is multilateral trade and its main sponsor the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO which has been trying and largely failing to negotiate a deal since 2001. Regional deals are the next best thing, but by definition they exclude some countries and so might steer business away from efficient producers.
The 10th ministerial of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO is bound to take note of the perils of plurilateral trade deals.
In days to come, Indian policy makers have to take cognisance
of new trade blocs and alignments taking place
Kasturi & Sons Ltd
WTO's TFA has made a reasonable progress so far
2 November 2015
Business Recorder
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization's (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA) struck at a ministerial conference in Bali in December 2013 to open trade and investment on a global scale has made a reasonable progress so far. As against the understanding that the agreement will come into force when a two-thirds of members have ratified it, fifty out of 161 current HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members have ratified it up to now. The benefits of the TFA are, nonetheless, said to be huge. According to the calculation of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO, the agreement will do more to boost trade if all the world's tariffs are removed, cutting costs 9.6 to 23.1 percent. The treaty would cut red tape at borders, standardise customs procedures and could add dollar 3.6 trillion to annual global exports. Even on a lower side, the simulations confirm that the trade gains from speedy and comprehensive implementation of the TFA are likely to be in the trillion dollar range, contributing up to almost one percent to annual GDP growth in some countries.
The WTO's Director General, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevedo, was so much upbeat about the agreement that he remarked "you could say that it is global trade's equivalent of the shift from dial-up internet to broadband."
The TFA is particularly welcome at a time when international trade growth has been disappointing and its recovery is expected to be slow. According to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO projections, the growth in world merchandise trade will pick up only slightly, rising from 2.8 percent in 2014 to 3.3 percent in 2015 and 4.0 percent in 2016, but well below the annual average growth of 5.1 percent posted since 1990. Besides, in the short run, trade expansion was not expected to outstrip overall economic growth as had been the general pattern for decades. The TFA contains provisions for expediting the movement, release and clearance of goods, including goods in transit. The agreement also sets out measures for effective co-operation between customs and other appropriate authorities besides containing provisions for technical assistance and capacity building in this area. The TFA also stipulates provisions for developing countries for the first time in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO history by linking the implementation of the TFA with the capacity of the country to do so. Besides, a facility has been created in the TFA for the developing members to receive the assistance needed to reap the full benefits of the agreement.
Although benefits of the TFA far exceed the constraints likely to be imposed by the treaty on the member countries, there is no certainty, at least as yet, that the agreement would come into effect anytime soon. It was about two years ago that the treaty was signed but 57 more members still need to ratify it before it could be implemented on the ground. The reason for reluctance to ratify could be the apprehension by certain members that their trade deficit could widen due this measure and they will not be able to resort to protectionism to restrict imports and prop up their external sector accounts. Also, the possibility of dumping due to freer trade could increase once the agreement takes effect. However, we feel that Pakistan has done the right thing to become the 51st member of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO to ratify the agreement. Its ambassador to WTO, Syed Tauqir Shah, presented the country's instrument of acceptance to Director General HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevedo on 27th October, 2015. It was perhaps necessary for Pakistan due to its open economy and certain non-tariff barriers faced by its exports. It needs to be recognised, nonetheless, that the potential for increase in exports would remain constrained in our case till the productivity of the economy is not enhanced which is presently handicapped by factors like severe energy shortages, poor infrastructure and law and order situation. According to latest estimates, Pakistan's global ranking has already slipped 10 places in case of doing business, standing at 138th position among 189 countries, as the country's performance deteriorated in almost all indicators particularly on benchmarks of getting an electricity connection and paying taxes. Obviously, if the economy fails to generate enough exportable surpluses, no amount of incentives is going to help bridge the trade gap and reverse the present falling trend in exports.
Emmay Zed Publications (Private) Ltd
Envoys cry foul as US seeks to protect its farm export credits
D. Ravi Kanth
2 November 2015
Mint
New Delhi, Nov. 2 -- The US has demanded 'safe harbor' protection for its controversial farm export credit programme from the disciplines underpinning the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization's agreement on subsidies and countervailing measures despite denying such a flexibility to India and other developing countries for public stockholding programmes for food security last year.
In October, Washington's trade envoy Ambassador Michael Punke sought the 'safe harbor' protection for export credits for its farm products from legal challenges arising from the disciplines in WTO's agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures (SCM).
Significantly, in the bilateral deal between the Narendra Modi government and the Barack Obama administration signed in November 2014 on public stockholding programmes for food security purposes, Washington had vehemently opposed New Delhi's demand for exempting the public stockholding programmes for food security purposes from legal challenges arising from the SCM disciplines.
The deal on public stockholding programmes says, in paragraph four, that "any developing Member seeking coverage of [public stockholding] programs shall ensure that stocks procured under such programs do not distort trade or adversely affect the food security of other Members".
Effectively, WTO members can challenge the public stockholding programmes if they create an "adverse effect" on other nations in the international markets under the SCM disciplines.
But, when it comes to export credits for farm products, the US wants an exemption from the SCM disciplines because of the underlying distorting impact of these credits, said a Western envoy, who asked not to be quoted.
"The US' position on safe harbor provision amounts to hypocrisy and double standards," said a South American trade envoy.
The export credits provided to the highly subsidized US farmers currently have a repayment period of two years. Punke also demanded substantial changes for continuing with another controversial programme called the international food aid.
Both export credits and food aid along with the elimination of export subsidies and disciplines for state-trading enterprises form part of the so-called Nairobi deliverables for the WTO's 10th ministerial conference star-ting in Nairobi on 15 December.
At a meeting of the Doha agriculture negotiating body on Friday, Norway, along with several developing countries, described the US demand for 'safe harbor' protection for its export credits as a retrograde measure in the wrong direction, according to people present at the meeting.
Except the US, a large majority of countries, including HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union members, have consistently demanded that the deliverables in the export competition pillar of the Doha agriculture negotiations must be squarely based on what are called the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration of 2005 and the revised draft modalities of 2008 or the Rev.4.
According to these mandates, industrialized countries such as the US, Canada, Norway, Switzerland, Japan, Australia and New Zealand as well as the EU can only provide export credits to their farmers with a minimum repayment period of 180 days.
Further, the food aid disciplines have to be sufficiently reformed to avoid monetization as per these mandates.
Both these conditions, particularly on export credits and food aid, are not acceptable to the US as it would tantamount to changing its farm bill, which was passed last year. It provides subsidies for the next five years on a scale that would contravene WTO's subsidy disciplines, especially those crafted in the Doha negotiations over the past 14 years, according to US analysts.
Even in the other two pillars of the Doha package dealing with disciplining the domestic subsidies and reducing market access barriers for agriculture, the US has raised stumbling blocks to ensure that there are no outcomes, said an African envoy, who asked not to be quoted.
Many developing countries, including India, have all along demanded credible outcomes in the domestic support and market access pillars based on the 2004 July framework agreement, the 2005 Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration, and the Rev.4.
At the Friday meeting, India cautioned "cherry-picking" by members while reiterating its demand for "credible" and "balanced" outcomes in all three pillars of the agriculture package at the Nairobi meeting. China said members should not push any issues off the table, according to those present at the meeting.
Several members also demanded written proposals from the so-called proponents who are trying to limit the package of deliverables at the Nairobi meeting to export competition.
WTO director general HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevedo has been silent on demands from many nations who want a written proposal from the US, according to envoys.
Published by HT Syndication with permission from MINT. 
China, Japan, S Korea agree to boost trade, work for peace
2 November 2015
TODAY (Singapore)
SEOUL — In a sign of a thaw in testy relations between Japan and its neighbours China and South Korea, leaders of the three countries yesterday agreed to revive annual trilateral summit talks after a three-and-half year hiatus, as they seek to ease tensions stemming from Japan’s wartime past.
Speaking after a landmark summit between the three countries, South Korean President Park Geun-hye said despite territorial disputes and differing views on wartime history, the three countries are committed to advancing their partnership in the spirit of “facing history squarely and advancing toward the future”.
At the meeting, the leaders agreed to speed up negotiations for a three-way free trade agreement encompassing 20 per cent of the world economy and to boast cooperation on a range of other areas, said Ms Park at a news conference with Japanese Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Shinzo Abe and Chinese Premier HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Li Keqiang at their meeting in Seoul.
“I believe it is significant that the trilateral cooperative system, which is an important framework of peace and prosperity in the North-east Asia region, has revived,” she said.
Along with the economy, the three leaders agreed to strengthen cooperation in nuclear safety, disaster risk reduction, the environment, health, youth exchange, among other areas, according to Ms Park and Mr Abe.
Despite close links of the three economies, strained relations between Japan and its two neighbours have prevented them from integrating in a way that would fully utilise their potential and create synergies.
South Korean and Chinese ties with Japan have been troubled by what they see as repeated failures by leaders in Tokyo to properly atone for wartime atrocities, in particular for Seoul over “comfort women,” as the mostly Korean women forced into prostitution at Japanese military brothels are called. China’s advances into the East and South China seas also continue to complicate Tokyo’s relations with Beijing and Seoul.
“Economic interdependence has rapidly deepened, but cooperation and potentials have not been fully utilised due to conflicts caused by political and security issues, and also due to being unable to resolve issues that have given rise to animosity,” Ms Park told the summit, part of which was open to the media.
In an apparent reference to what many Japanese see as seemingly endless criticism by China and South Korea of Japan’s aggression and colonial rule during and before World War II, Mr Abe said: “It is not productive to focus too much on a certain period of the past.”
“Japan and South Korea and Japan and China have a history of cooperation and development,” a senior Japanese official quoted Mr Abe as saying to Ms Park and Mr Li. “We would like to further weave a forward-looking history of cooperation involving Japan, China and South Korea.”
Japan, China and South Korea have agreed to launch three-way FTA negotiations in their last summit held in May 2012 in Beijing. Referring to the trilateral FTA, Mr Abe said the three countries “should aim for an early conclusion of negotiations for comprehensive and high-level accords for a Japan-China-South Korea FTA.”
Meanwhile, Beijing is also driving a 16-nation Asia-Pacific free trade initiative, the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP), which is seen as a rival to the US-backed Trans-Pacific Partnership that was struck earlier in October between the US and 11 Pacific Rim nations. Japan is already a member country of the TPP, while South Korea has showed interest in joining the free-trade deal.
In yesterday’s talks, the three leaders also reaffirmed their goal of denuclearising North Korea and agreed to continue efforts to resume “meaningful” six-party talks on ending Pyongyang’s nuclear ambitions, Ms Park said. The stalled negotiations aimed at ending Pyongyang’s nuclear ambitions involve China, Japan, South and North Koreas, Russia and the US.
The meeting yesterday was a diplomatic breakthrough for Mr Abe, who had long sought a one-on-one meeting with Ms Park and the resumption of the trilateral summit. The two will hold a bilateral meeting today, the first since both took office.
Yesterday’s meeting also highlighted a balancing act Ms Park faced between her country’s rapidly developing ties with Beijing and US pressure to mend relations with Tokyo, Washington’s key Asian ally in the face of an increasingly assertive China.
There was no mention by the leaders of tensions in the South China Sea where a US destroyer sailed close to one of Beijing’s man-made islands in the most significant US challenge yet to territorial claims by China in the Spratly archipelago.
Japan will host the trilateral summit next year. 
MediaCorp Press Ltd
China drives a pragmatic route in new trade push
Wendy Wu wendy.wu@scmp.com
2 November 2015
South China Morning Post
China will pursue “pragmatic” overseas cooperation through its “One Belt, One Road” initiatives over the next five years in a quest to find new growth engines for its economy.
After a four-day policy-setting meeting in Beijing last week, the Communist Party said China would work with relevant countries and regions to advance construction of the schemes’ projects. Beijing would also improve partnerships in equipment manufacturing and industry.
The goals are part of the 13th five-year plan, which runs from 2016 to 2020. It aims to double GDP by 2020 from 2010 levels and develop a more open economy.
The initiatives refer to the Silk Road Economic Belt and the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road. They were proposed by President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xi Jinping in 2013 to boost investment and capacity by linking 18 provinces and more than 60 countries in Asia, Europe and Africa.
Economists said the strategy would help China to retire outdated capacity, overcome the middle-income trap and give a push to the yuan’s globalisation.
Trade between China and countries along the routes reached US$570 billion in the first seven months of this year. Chinese businesses put a total of US$8.6 billion into 48 countries along the route, up 30 per cent from a year earlier.
The initiatives involve the construction of six “economic corridors” with Mongolia, Russia, Pakistan and other western and central Asian countries. China has also simplified customs clearance procedures and built logistics gateways.
Xi said the strategy was a key component of the five-year plan and the initiatives were “gradually reaping an early harvest”.
Foreign Minister Wang Yi has defended the initiative in the past amid criticism Beijing was trying to exert hegemony.
The links were “not a tool of geopolitics”, Wang said.
China Merchants Securities chief economist Xie Yaxuan said the vision was being translated into a reality. “The effects won’t be quick but we can observe that the government is proactively making progress,” Xie said.
There does appear to be huge demand for infrastructure investment in countries along the routes. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Asian Development Bank estimated that US$8 trillion in funding would be needed between 2010 and 2020 to support infrastructure construction in the region, but the ADB and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Bank could only offer US$400 billion over that period.
The China-led HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank is set to make up for some of that shortfall when it begins operation by the end of the year.
Funding slack will also be taken up by the US$40 billion Silk Road Fund launched in January, and the BRICS-backed New Development Bank, which opened its doors in July.
Zhu Yunlai, former head of leading brokerage firm HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" China International Capital Corporation and the son of former premier Zhu Rongji , said China was heading in the right direction with its plans to explore new markets.
He said the initiatives would encompass a territory and population twice the size of China’s and link the mainland to economies which, when combined, would be 1.5 times China’s GDP.
“From that perspective, it’s possible that China can increase its economy and market by twofold,” Zhu said.
South China Morning Post Publishers Limited
USTR: TPP's INTERNET FREEDOM TERMS TO BE 'FOUNDATION' FOR FUTURE PACTS
2 November 2015
IP Network Policy Report
The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) trade agreement will provide a "foundation" for future agreements on the digital economy with its Internet freedom provisions, the United States Trade Representative said this week.
In a speech to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" the Atlantic Council in Washington, Michael Froman said the TPP, which negotiators agreed upon earlier this month, will protect the "right to free flows of data and prevent forced localization."
"TPP is the highest-standard trade agreement in history, and it will establish rules of the road to ensure that tomorrow's global trading system is consistent with American values and American interests. The choice is not between the status quo and TPP," Mr. Froman said. "It's between TPP and a more statist, mercantilist approach -- one in which there are no labor or environmental protections, no emphasis on intellectual property rights enforcement, no disciplines on state-owned enterprises, no commitment to a free and open Internet."
"It is very much in our interest that the global trading system be open and rules-based; that it reflect our interests and our values; and that we lead, rather than sit on the side-lines and leave that role to others," he added. -- Brian Hammond, brian.hammond@wolterkluwer.com
Aspen Publishers, Inc. 
Government initiatives may boost pharma industry in near future in India
31 October 2015
Accord Fintech
India, Oct. 31 -- Indian pharmaceutical industry, a major supplier of affordable generics to the world, is growing at very fast pace over the past few years and India is among the top six global pharmaceutical producers in the world. This industry has increased life spans and fostered hope to people who have given up on everything. The industry has witnessed terrific progress in terms of infrastructure development, technology base creation and a wide range of production. Even while undergoing restructuring, it has established its presence and determination to flourish in the changing environment. India is among the fastest-growing pharmaceutical markets in the world and has established itself as a global manufacturing and research hub. A large raw material base and the availability of a skilled workforce gives the industry a definite competitive advantage.
India produces 40-70 per cent of the WHO demand for DPT & BCG and 90 per cent of measles vaccine. Around 70 per cent of the patients in developing countries receive Indian medicines through NGOs like The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Clinton Foundation, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Doctors without Borders, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UNCTAD etc.
Current scenario
Indian pharmaceutical industry companies can be classified as domestic companies and foreign companies (MNCs). Indian pharmaceutical industry in term of export has been witnessing a good growth for last many years. The US is the largest importer of Indian products. India has the highest number of plants approved by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" United States Food and Drug Administration (USFDA) outside the US. Around 584 Indian companies/sites are registered with the USFDA. Several plants have also obtained regulatory approvals from HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) in the UK; the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Medicines Control Council (MCC) in South Africa; and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) in Australia. India has one of the lowest manufacturing cost in the world. Manufacturing cost in India is approximately 35-40 per cent of that in the US as installation and workforce costs are low.
Market Segment
Branded Generics -: Any non-patented molecule with a brand name other than the innovator's name is termed as a branded generic.
Generic Generics-: Market share is very low- Lack of proper regulations and guidelines and doctor's comfort. Government of India generic generics drug programme 'Jan Aushadi'
Over-The-Counter Products-: Drugs legally allowed to be sold 'Over The  Counter'by pharmacists, i.e. without the prescription of a Registered Medical Practitioner. All the drugs not included in the list of 'prescription-only drugs' are considered to be OTC drugs.
Patented Products -: Market share is very small. MNcs unwilling to introduce patented products (IPR not providing adequate protection in the past and presence of inexpensive generic produce).
Increasing revenue of Indian pharmaceutical industry
Indian pharmaceutical market is expected to grow at a CAGR of 18 per cent by 2020. The growth will be driven by the aging and growing population, rising income levels, emerging medical conditions and new diseases. The industry is in middle of big changes and not only the Industry is expected to accommodate Demographic, Epidemiological, and economic shifts in the world, but also has to upgrade manufacturing practices and match rigid standards from time to time in order to produce world-class medicines. India's cost of production is significantly lower than that of the US and almost half of that of Europe. It gives a competitive edge to India over others.
Research and development by top pharma giant
In the financial year 2015, most of the leading pharma players spent anywhere between $58-289 million on research & development (R&D), which represented an increase both in absolute term as well as in proportion to net revenues.
Government initiatives in the industry
The government has taken various policy initiatives for this industry: The government is planning to set up Rs 500 crore venture capital fund to boost domestic pharma industry and provide cheaper loans to entities looking to establish or upgrade manufacturing facilities. The government is working on various proposals, including single window clearance for drug approvals, to rejuvenate the local pharma sector and make medicines more affordable. In order to promote the pharmaceuticals manufacturing, the government is set to approve six pharma parks this year at an estimated investment of Rs 180 crore, which will have sufficient infrastructure and facilities for testing and treatment of drugs and also for imparting training to industry professionals. These parks will go a long way in ensuring health security for the country. The government broad objective is the availability of quality medicines at affordable prices. The government has deferred proposed talks on a bilateral trade pact with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU) as it suspended sale of 700 pharmaceutical products that were clinically tested in India.
Outlook
Indian Pharmaceutical Industry has come a long way and made significant progress in infrastructure development and technical and R&D capabilities. Outlook for the industry appears positive for short and middle term on account of revenues, and exports are expected to increase in coming future. Further, government initiatives including plan to set up Rs 500 crore venture capital fund and set up to pharma parks, will also support the industry. The growth of Indian pharma companies will also be driven by the fast growing molecules in the diabetes, skincare and eye care segment. Pharma manufacturers are likely to benefit from rise in demand for generic products. Additionally, there are the many factors that drive growth in the industry such as low cost operation, research based operation, availability of skilled manpower. Though, India is not a partner of Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) so it can directly impact the export revenue of certain Indian generic pharma companies that may not have the financial backing to play under the new rules of engagement.
Published by HT Syndication with permission from Accord Fintech. 
END
‘The future of democracy in the digital age’; Europe challenges Google
Marie Bénilde
1 November 2015
Le Monde Diplomatique
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Commission has accused ubiquitous HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Google of misusing its dominant web position and is investigating its many online services.
2013 may have been a turning point in the digital economy. Before then the Internet was seen as a jungle with ample room (if dominated by a few big beasts), but that illusion was dispelled by the year’s revelations — mass state surveillance of citizens, as revealed by Edward Snowden; multinationals’ data capture; the tax avoidance and other sharp practices of Silicon Valley giants; large-scale destruction of jobs and their replacement by algorithms. Now the Internet is not seen as a world apart, but as the technological manifestation of contemporary neoliberal capitalism.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Google, Amazon, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Facebook and Apple (GAFA) — also Uber and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Airbnb — are now widely criticised, and this backlash, provoked by their exceptional power, is not just a reflection of the frustration of users and the activities of campaign groups. Employers’ organisations in traditional industries and their political supporters have joined in. The divide between the inheritors of traditional capitalism and digital capitalists is like the 19th-century clash between the factions of the aristocratic order under the French Restoration (1815-30) — the conservative, legitimist Bourbons versus the liberal Orléanists, more favourably disposed to the world of business.
The current French economy minister, Emmanuel Macron is, roughly speaking, an Orléanist who believes “it would be a crass error to try to protect existing jobs and businesses,” as he said to a sympathetic audience of digerati at the Le Web conference in 2014. He echoed Louis-Philippe’s minister François Guizot by telling them to “succeed and get rich”, and gave out his email address (hosted by Gmail).
Despite European governments’ varied views on web multinationals, the overall attitude to them has toughened because of the debate over their tax avoidance, worsened by the collusion of some with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" US National Security Agency (NSA) in spying on political leaders and institutions. As web gatekeepers, these giants can dictate their terms of business and capture personal data, but they redistribute little of their enormous and increasing profits. According to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Google’s corporate accounts, it had a turnover of €1.7bn in France in 2014, but paid only €5m in tax (down from €7.7m in 2013). HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Facebook paid €240,000 in tax in 2014 on an estimated turnover of €200m in France.
The March 2015 UK budget introduced a 25% “diverted profits tax” (the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Google tax) on all companies, not just digital businesses, which move profits generated in the UK out of the country. Yet the French government is still waiting for tax harmonisation proposals from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD, and justifies its inaction: “Everyone knows there is a problem, but we have not managed to resolve it because of its complexity,” the culture minister, Fleur Pellerin, said in July, after trying to impose a bandwidth tax to fund investment in French culture.
Uberisation
Companies that dominate the digital economy are also eroding the existing economy and replacing it with an ecosystem dependent on them. This “Uberisation” (after the Californian company that recruits freelance taxi drivers causes resistance in endangered sectors, especially the media, where declining oligopolies now beg for competition. Under the Open Internet Project (OIP), Germany’s HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Axel Springer group (including Bild, Die Welt, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Seloger.com and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Aufeminin.com) and France’s Lagardère group (Europe 1, Paris Match, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Leguide.com) have joined 30 other organisations in accusing HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Google of anti-competitive practices. After a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Commission inquiry into the abuse of dominant market positions, this Franco-German pressure group filed an action in 2014 against HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Google’s promotion of its own services at the expense of competitors. According to OIP, this favouritism has no parallel in the physical world — it would be like a store that stocked most of it departments with only own-brand goods.
“In Germany, when you enter the names of two cities you want to travel between, Google Maps always comes up with its own train service first,” said Axel Springer executive vice-president Christoph Keese, and “when you search for the name of a rock group, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" YouTube [owned by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Google] will always be at the top of the search results.” HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Google, founded by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Larry Page and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Sergey Brin, is a recent entrant in the GPS navigation market (Waze) and is developing insurance services (Compare car insurance), fibre optics (Fiber), automobiles (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Google car), health and the networked home (Nest). Its shopping business already offers price comparisons and influences buying decisions. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Google set up a new holding company, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Alphabet Inc, in August, possibly to disguise its ubiquity.
The Financial Times may be right to see a connection between HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Axel Springer publications backing Jean-Claude Juncker’s appointment as European Commission president and the outcome of the Commission’s inquiry into abuse of dominant position (1). The inquiry had dragged on since 2010, but speeded up with the appointment of a new Commission in 2014 and of Denmark’s Margrethe Vestager as commissioner for competition; this April, the Commission formally accused HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Google’s price comparator of anti-competitive practices, and is investigating its other services. The EU parliament and the German economy minister Sigmar Gabriel respect these actions.
‘We have owned the Internet’ 
In 2014 the commissioner for digital economy and society, Neelie Kroes, had no qualms about organising a symposium with Google’s executive vice-president as a guest. Her colleague, the then commissioner for competition, Joaqín Almunia, was still trying to push through an agreement favourable to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Google. The mobilisation of the European media and telecom lobby has encouraged the EC’s sharp change of approach.
The confrontation is now transatlantic. In 2014 the EU parliament passed a non-executive motion calling for the break-up of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Google, and in an interview this February on the Re/code website, President Obama said: “We have owned the Internet. Our companies have created it, expanded it, perfected it in ways that they [European companies] can’t compete. Oftentimes what is portrayed as high-minded positions on issues, sometimes is just designed to carve out some of their commercial interests.” Obama’s clear support for a business which contributed to his campaign — HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Google’s donation of $804,000 (2) was the third largest to his 2102 re-election campaign — and collaborated with the NSA, according to intercepts revealed by Snowden, came right in the middle of negotiations of an EU-US trade treaty.
Obama knows that in Europe GAFA faces a coalition of industrial interests. In France the president and CEO of the Orange telecom group, Stéphane Richard, has spoken of a “return to American imperialism and colonialism in the digital sphere” (3) — but does not mention that Orange is regularly accused of similar behaviour in Africa. European operators are afraid they will be limited to being fixed-price broadband distributors just when the principle of net neutrality recently guaranteed by the French government allows US platforms, such as HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" YouTube and Netflix, to benefit from infrastructure networks (4G, fibre optics) by distributing their videos over the Internet, for which they pay nothing.
“We’re afraid of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Google,” said HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Mathias Döpfner, head of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Axel Springer group. “I need to state this clearly and frankly since few of my colleagues dare to do so” (4). HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Google is more frequently challenged as it dominates online searches, runs its Android operating system on 75% of all smartphones, and owns the world’s most popular browser and its most widely used email system. Germany’s giant car manufacturers are worried — Mercedes, Audi and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" BMW recently formed a consortium to take on Google Maps by acquiring HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Nokia’s navigation service, Here, and retaining control of drivers’ data. They can count on Sigmar Gabriel’s support, as he believes the battle is about “the future of democracy in the digital age” and “the freedom, participation and self-determination of 500 million people in Europe” (5). He does not rule out dismantling HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Google as a last resort to prevent it from “systematically eliminating its competitors”. Heiko Maas, of the German justice department, thinks “dismantling it would have to be considered” if HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Google were proved to have abused its position.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Google may not yet be facing the successful antitrust legislation that broke up Standard Oil a century ago and the US telecom operator AT&T in 1982. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Commission under Juncker seems determined to see the rules of a single digital market prevail. But according to a Commission spokesperson, “regulation should make it easier for non-EU companies to access the single market. It is in [US companies’] interest that things are enforced in a uniform manner” (6). HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Google bosses know they need a lobbying team up to the challenge; in the first half of 2015, its lobbyists had 29 meetings with EU commissioners and, with a €3.5m annual budget, flexed significant muscle.
Organising the world’s information
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Google’s dominance is evident from its news site, which aggregates media content. In 2013 French newspaper publishers agreed to relinquish all rights to their articles which appeared as brief summaries on this site in return for a €60m donation over three years to support innovative press projects (including Le Monde Afrique). HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Google now wants to extend this to other European daily papers for an extra €150m. But HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Google pays nothing for the traffic it attracts to its news site, on the grounds that the site does not generate advertising revenue.
Germany, however, brought in a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Google law in 2014 obliging the company to remunerate rights holders for German articles aggregated on the site. This law was meant to force HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Google to pay rights holders, but instead HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Google delisted the articles and images, leaving only headlines. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Mathias Döpfner, head of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Axel Springer press group, who instigated an action againstHYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Google through Germany’s anti-trust office, eventually backed down, having lost 40% of traffic on his main sites.
Spanish legislators thought they had got round the problem in 2014 by insisting that the aggregators remunerate the press, but HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Google, despite a global net profit of $14.4bn in 2014, decided it would not pay and closed its Spanish news site. Organising the world’s information is HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Google’s stated objective — it’s cheaper to organise than to originate that information.
Marie Bénilde is a journalist.
(1) Financial Times, London, 16 January 2015.
(2) According to data from the federal electoral commission; HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" www.opensecrets.org
(3) Les Echos, Paris, 17 February 2015.
(4) HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, Frankfurt, 17 April 2014.
(5) The Guardian, London, 6 July 2014.
(6) Financial Times, 16 February 2015.
7925
Société Editrice du Monde
END
 
Josep Bosch, Information Officer
Information and External Relations Division
+41227395681
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.