Paris carnage adds urgency to G-20 summit in Turkey
G20 host Turkey says stands with France in fight against terrorism
Hollande cancels trip to G20 summit in Turkey over terrorist attacks in Paris
Le G20 cherche des parades au ralentissement de la croissance
China's yuan takes leap towards joining IMF currency basket
What the Chinese G-20 presidency should do differently
TPP Unlikely to See New Members During APEC Summit
Editorial: We need to get TPP deal right
Free trade talks set to gain momentum at APEC after TPP agreement
Ukraine’s trade with Russia drops to 16% - President Poroshenko
Europe mislabels Israel
Argentina: Governments works on new plan to halt certain imports
Donald Trump Is Upset; The candidate says we were unfair to him on trade.
 
Paris carnage adds urgency to G-20 summit in Turkey 
David Nakamura Karen DeYoung 
14 November 2015
The Washington Post
 
President Obama vowed Friday "to go after any terrorist networks that go after our people" after gruesome attacks in Paris jolted the White House just as Obama was preparing to rally world leaders behind his latest plans to combat radical Islamist fighters.
In a hastily arranged appearance before reporters, Obama called the attacks that killed more than 140 people an "outrageous attempt to terrorize innocent civilians" and said the murders represented "an attack on all of humanity and the universal values that we share."
It was not immediately clear whether the events in Paris would alter Obama's plans to depart Washington on Saturday afternoon for a nine-day trip to Turkey, the Philippines and Malaysia for global security and economic summits.
But the violence on the streets of Paris added new urgency ahead of the two-day Group of 20 summit in Antalya, Turkey, where Obama was hoping to build support for his administration's strategy to defeat the Islamic State in the Middle East and bring a negotiated end to the civil war in Syria.
Coincidentally, Obama had spoken with French President François Hollande by phone before the attacks Friday to discuss the summit's agenda. Obama called France an "extraordinary counterterrorism partner" and pledged that the United States would offer similar succor in the wake of the Paris killings.
"We want to be very clear that we stand together with them in the fight against terrorism and extremism," Obama said.
The events of the past two weeks, including the downing of a Russian airliner in the Sinai Peninsula that killed all 224 people on board, have highlighted the immense challenge facing international leaders who have struggled to coalesce around a coordinated strategy to respond to terrorist attacks in the Middle East and elsewhere.
Obama's aims to consolidate support under American leadership have been tested by a newly empowered Vladimir Putin of Russia, who is also scheduled to attend the summit. Although Obama has scheduled no formal meetings with Putin, both the White House and the Kremlin said they expected them to meet informally on the sidelines.
The Obama administration in recent weeks has escalated its efforts on the diplomatic and military fronts in Syria, including an initiative to enlist Russia and Iran - both backers of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad - in a negotiated political transition that would replace Assad with a transitional government formed of regime remnants and opponents who have been battling for more than four years to oust him.
Putin, whose warplanes began bombing the Syrian opposition last month just as Iran sent forces to bolster Assad's military, has his own ideas about how to settle the conflict. Putin has cast himself in competition with Obama for a leadership role in resolving Syria's problems.
In an interview Friday with Russian and Turkish media, Putin said other nations have "no right" to demand that Assad leave office or to fashion a political solution for Syria from the outside.
"Only those who believe in their exceptionality allow themselves to act in such a shameless manner and impose their will on others," he said, according to the Russian news agency Interfax, in a clear reference to the United States.
The interplay between the two, how other leaders respond to them, and whether there is any agreement on a way forward in Syria will be a focus of summit attention. The Obama administration has not signaled a potential major breakthrough.
The last meeting between Obama and Putin, during the U.N. General Assembly meetings in New York two months ago, produced an awkward handshake and little cooperation. A day later, Putin stunned the administration by sending troops into Syria and launching airstrikes, mostly aimed at the rebel force trying to oust Assad.
"The Russians certainly have their ideas; we have ours; other players have theirs," said Susan Rice, Obama's national security adviser, noting that discussions this weekend among foreign ministers in Vienna will set the stage for the G-20 talks.
Asked whether the United States could accept a plan that allows Assad to remain in power, Rice said: "We do not believe so. Our strong view is that Assad has lost all legitimacy; that the fact that he has been directly responsible for the deaths of so many of his own people means that a transition ultimately will have to result in a legitimate government coming to power in the context of a transition. And it's very hard to envision how that could be accomplished with Assad still in power."
The gathering in Antalya, a Mediterranean resort city under an extreme security lockdown in southern Turkey, represents high stakes for Obama. The president is running out of time to make headway against the Islamic State militants who have exploited the bloody Syrian civil war to win control of broad expanses of territory in Syria and Iraq.
Putin's aggressive moves in trying to shape events inside Syria have complicated Obama's challenge. The Russian leader enters the summit at a stronger position than a year ago, when he went home early from the G-20 meetings in Brisbane, Australia, after being criticized over Russia's occupation of the Crimea region in Ukraine.
"What a difference a year makes. Mr. Putin will be far from isolated," said Heather Conley, a Eurasia expert at the Center for Strategic and International Studies. "Ukraine will not be discussed, and Russia now plays an increasing role in how to resolve the political transition in Syria."
The White House has left open the possibility of reaching common ground with Putin, and the downing of a Russian airliner over the Sinai Peninsula two weeks ago could change the Kremlin's calculus. Investigators believe the plane may have been brought down by a bomb planted on board by the Islamic State.
Aides said earlier this week that Obama would participate in a meeting with key European allies to discuss the security situation in both Syria and Ukraine, sending a unified signal to Putin.
"I expect Putin will be on the defensive," said Derek Chollet, who served as assistant secretary of defense for international security affairs from 2012 to 2014. "I can't think of a single country that's pleased with his intervention in Syria. It's a testing moment for him to see how he responds. The onus is on him to deliver Assad."
Yet Putin is not the only one whose goals in the region differ from the Obama administration's.
For Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the summit is an opportunity for prominence on the world stage, just weeks after his party consolidated its control by winning a surprising majority in national elections. His bid to exclude Turkish journalists from the summit has prompted protests from human rights groups.
Obama will meet with Erdogan on Sunday.
In speeches and interviews this week, Erdogan repeated his call for a U.S.-protected safe zone in Syria, along at least part of its border with Turkey, where anti-Assad fighters could regroup and be resupplied and refugees could return to a protected area of their own country. Anticipation of such a zone was part of the reason Turkey agreed last summer to allow U.S. strikes against the Islamic State to be flown out of its Incirlik Air Base, and is now participating in the strikes with its own jets.
The administration has long rejected establishing such a zone, because it has not wanted to become directly involved in the civil war and because the Pentagon argued that it would take too many resources away from airstrikes against the Islamic State elsewhere in the country.
"We're all very realistic that for the conflict in Syria to be resolved, which it must, it's going to require all the relevant players to come to a common understanding," Rice said.
 
G20 host Turkey says stands with France in fight against terrorism 
14 November 2015
Reuters News
 
ISTANBUL, Nov 14 (Reuters) - Turkey, which hosts a summit of world leaders this weekend, condemned attacks by gunmen and bombers in Paris as a crime against humanity, vowing full cooperation with France and its allies in the fight against terrorism.
"These attacks are not only against the French people but all humanity, democracy, freedoms and universal values," Prime Minister Ahmet Davutoglu's office said in a statement after the attacks in the French capital that killed at least 120 people.
"Turkey is in full cooperation with France and other allied countries in the fight against terrorism ... and we will fight with full determination," the statement added.
Leaders of the Group of 20 major economies (G20), including the United States, China, Japan, Russia, Canada, Australia and Brazil, meet on Sunday and Monday in the Mediterranean resort region of Antalya, where the war in neighbouring Syria and global security will be major topics.
President Tayyip Erdogan condemned the Paris attacks on Twitter and sent condolences to his French counterpart Francois Hollande and the French people.
Turkey, which shares a 900-km (560-mile) border with Syria, opened its air bases in July to the U.S.-led coalition against Islamic State and is no stranger to threats from the group.
Two suicide bombers with suspected links to Islamic State attacked a pro-Kurdish rally in the capital Ankara in October, killing around 100 people in the worst attack of its kind on Turkish soil.
Critics say Turkey woke up late to the threat. The NATO member country has come under criticism for failing to do more in the earlier stages of Syria's war to stop foreign jihadists crossing its territory and joining the ranks of Islamic State, a charge Ankara denies. 
 
Hollande cancels trip to G20 summit in Turkey over terrorist attacks in Paris 
14 November 2015
Kazinform International News Agency
PARIS. KAZINFORM - French President Francois Hollande decided to cancel his participation in the Group of 20 summit, due November 16 in Turkey, over the terrorist attacks in Paris, the Elysee Palace reported Saturday.
France will instead be represented by the foreign and finance ministers.
Francois Hollande will hold Defense Council meeting, the Palace informed.
At least 100 people were killed as a result of a terrorist attack on the Bataclan concert hall in Paris, media reported.
Another 60 people were killed in explosions and shooting in Paris.
 
 
Le G20 cherche des parades au ralentissement de la croissance 
RICHARD HIAULT 
13 November 2015
Les Echos
Les chefs d'Etat et de gouvernement, réunis, ce dimanche, vont aussi aborder la crise des migrants.
Croissance mondiale, crise des réfugiés, lutte contre le financement du terrorisme seront parmi les thèmes centraux au sommet des chef d'Etat et de gouvernement du G20, réunis dans la station balnéaire turque d'Antalya à partir de dimanche midi.
Alors que le Fonds monétaire international (FMI) et l'Organisation de coopération et de développement économiques (OCDE) ont revu à la baisse leurs prévisions de croissance mondiale à 3,1 % et 2,9 % respectivement, les leaders du G20 auront fort à faire pour atteindre l'objectif qu'ils s'étaient fixé un an plus tôt en Australie. Le plan d'action de Brisbane prévoyait en effet d'accroître de 2 points de pourcentage le PIB mondial d'ici à cinq ans. C'est mal parti. « Le sommet de 2015 devrait promettre de nouvelles mesures sur le plan des investissements en infrastructure, du commerce et des réformes structurelles », prévoit John Kirton, codirecteur du centre de réflexion G20 Research Group de l'université de Toronto. A ce titre, les chefs d'Etat devraient souligner l'importance de mettre en oeuvre l'accord conclu à Bali lors de la ministérielle de l'Organisation mondiale du commerce (OMC) sur la facilitation des échanges commerciaux. A cet égard, le 18e rapport de Global Trade Alert, publié jeudi, en amont de ce sommet du G20, tire la sonnette d'alarme en constatant que les exportations des pays du G20, en moyenne, sont en net recul. Par rapport à leur pic d'octobre 2014, la chute, en valeur, s'élève déjà à 4,5 %.
Un langage politique fort
Mais, à la demande de la Turquie, qui présidait cette année le forum du G20 avant de céder son fauteuil à la Chine, c'est bien la crise des réfugiés qui sera l'autre dossier chaud du sommet. Ce thème, au centre des débats du dîner de travail des leaders du G20 de dimanche soir, fera d'ailleurs l'objet d'un communiqué à part du G20. L'attentat, perpétré à Ankara le 10 octobre dernier et qui a fait plus d'une centaine de morts, ainsi que l'accueil, par la Turquie, de plus de 2 millions de réfugiés syriens sur son territoire ont motivé cette demande d'Ankara. Reste que les débats risquent d'être difficiles entre les reproches adressés par les Occidentaux à la Turquie quant à son attitude envers les djihadistes de l'Etat islamique ou les interventions militaires musclées de la Russie sur le territoire syrien également mal perçues par l'Europe et les Etats-Unis. Aucun consensus n'est à attendre sur ce sujet épineux. Sur le plan des réfugiés, la directrice du FMI, Christine Lagarde, a appelé mercredi les pays riches à « élargir leur approche » pour accueillir plus de réfugiés, dont l'afflux en Europe pourrait, selon elle, être bénéfique pour la croissance économique. « Les calculs préliminaires du FMI montrent un impact positif modéré des migrants sur la croissance dans les pays de l'Union européenne », a-t-elle assuré. La chancelière allemande, Angela Merkel, insistera pour que des solutions globales soient trouvées à la crise migratoire en Europe.
Si la lutte contre le financement du terrorisme avec le renforcement du rôle du Gafi et le combat contre les trafiquants seront abordés, les leaders du G20 vont aussi endosser le plan d'action de l'OCDE contre l'optimisation fiscale des multinationales, en adoptant l'initiative BEPS élaborée ces deux dernières années.
A près de deux semaines de l'ouverture de la COP21, à Paris, le chef de l'Etat français, François Hollande, ne manquera pas de pousser les feux dans ce domaine. L'Elysée souhaite un langage politique fort sur le sujet à Antalya.
 
China's yuan takes leap towards joining IMF currency basket 
14 November 2015
Reuters News
 
* IMF staff say renminbi meets criteria to join SDR basket
* IMF's Lagarde backs staff recommendation
* Final say rests with board; discussion on Nov. 30 (Updates with context on yuan appetite)
 
By Krista Hughes
WASHINGTON, Nov 13 (Reuters) - China's yuan moved closer to joining other top global currencies in the International Monetary Fund's benchmark foreign exchange basket on Friday after Fund staff and IMF chief Christine Lagarde gave the move the thumbs up.
The recommendation paves the way for the Fund's executive board, which has the final say, to place the yuan on a par with the U.S. dollar, Japanese yen , British pound and euro at a meeting scheduled for Nov. 30.
Joining the Special Drawing Rights (SDR) basket would be a victory for Beijing, which has campaigned hard for the move, and could increase demand for the yuan among reserve managers as well as marking a symbolic coming of age for the world's second-largest economy.
Staff had found the yuan, also known as the renminbi (RMB), met the criteria of being "freely usable," or widely used for international transactions and widely traded in major foreign exchange markets, Lagarde said.
"I support the staff's findings," she said in a statement immediately welcomed by China's central bank, which said it hoped the international community would also back the yuan's inclusion.
Staff also gave the green light to Beijing's efforts to address operational issues identified in a report in July, Lagarde said.
The executive board, which represents the Fund's 188 members, is seen as unlikely to go against a staff recommendation and countries including France and Britain have already pledged their support for the change. This would take effect in October 2016, during China's leadership of the Group of 20 bloc of advanced and emerging economies.
China has rolled out a flurry of reforms recently to liberalize its markets and also help the yuan meet the IMF's checklist, including scrapping a ceiling on deposit rates, issuing three-month Treasury bills weekly and improving the transparency of Chinese data.
Economists said with the yuan's inclusion in the IMF basket as a reserve currency now looking like a formality, China should step up efforts to build trust between global investors and its policy makers.
China's heavy-handed intervention to stem a stock market rout over the summer, and an unexpected devaluation of the yuan in August, had raised some doubts about Beijing's commitment to reforms.
Singapore-based Commerzbank economist Zhou Hao said China needs to further accelerate domestic reforms and improve policy transparency.
"The PBOC should reduce the frequency of market intervention, allowing market forces to really play a critical role."
The United States, the Fund's biggest shareholder, has said it would back the yuan's inclusion if it met the IMF's criteria, a U.S. Treasury spokesperson said, adding: "We will review the IMF's paper in that light."
If the yuan's addition wins 70 percent or more of IMF board votes, it will be the first time the number of currencies in the SDR basket - which determines the composition of loans made to countries such as Greece - has been expanded.
"I would say that the likelihood of China's yuan joining the IMF currency basket this year is very high," said Hong Kong-based Shen Jianguang, chief economist at Mizuho Securities Asia.
"The only thing that could deter this is if the U.S. led a group rejecting the yuan's inclusion, which could complicate things. But the United States' current official stance doesn't reflect such an attitude," he said.
Some currency analysts say making the yuan the fifth currency in the basket could eventually lead to global demand for the currency worth more than $500 billion.
But China's extensive capital controls mean it would take a while before the yuan rivals the dollar's dominant role in international trade and finance, analysts say.
Its closed capital account still limits foreigners from buying yuan-denominated assets and places caps on how much cash residents can take out of the country. These restrictions, along with concerns that the yuan is set to come under steady depreciation pressure, may cause corporates to back off from holding yuan.
Nonetheless, the People's Bank of China said the IMF statement was an acknowledgment of the progress China had made in reforms and opening up its economy.
"The inclusion of the RMB in the SDR basket would increase the representativeness and attractiveness of the SDR, and help improve the current international monetary system, which would benefit both China and the rest of the world," the PBOC said in a statement.
China would respect the board's decision and continue to deepen economic reforms, the PBOC said.
 
What the Chinese G-20 presidency should do differently 
Arvind Mayaram 
14 November 2015
Financial Express
 
China's presidency of G-20 will commence with the Summit of the Leaders in Turkey later this month. This presents a great opportunity to recalibrate the discourse within the group on the key issues that are threatening the global economy with disruption. Despite the best pronouncements about growth strategies that are expected to add cumulatively an additional 2% to the global economy, the results on the ground are dismal, and the collective failure of G-20 to take credible and effective steps is now widely accepted. It is also becoming increasingly clear that since the 2008 crisis when G-20 acted as a collective to deal with the meltdown in the US and eurozone, in the current crisis in which emerging market economies have been witnessing a slowdown, the discourse has consistently been pushed towards domestic reforms without any collective action.
Even though India has been pointing this out, the competition to 'prove' more reformist than the others is allowing advanced economies to push the collective agenda towards domestic reforms. China and India must studiously guard against it.
Considering continuing slowdown in the global economy, there is a need to urgently focus on bringing back the investment cycle. To do this, consumption must increase and that can only happen if there is demand. The big consumption demand which remains intact is in the area of infrastructure services. This includes electricity, water and sanitation, urban public transport, ports and airports. Large unmet demand is also in housing. Whereas each presidency makes an effort to leave a legacy, this is largely in the form of symbolism rather than concrete steps. Australia's initiative in setting up Global Infrastructure Hub as an information interchange in response to the demand for greater investment flows for infrastructure development is a good example of this.
Therefore, the first recommendation to the Chinese presidency is to add "Sustainable Infrastructure" to the agenda of G-20. The focus should be on creating a framework that would allow infrastructure deficit countries to access both technology and finance at affordable cost. The irony is that the poor of the world, with little access to services, are now burdened with bearing the cost of clean environment, as the "cost" of additional "sustainable" infrastructure assets must be serviced through the user charges paid by them. There is a deliberate push to introduce climate smart projects in the discourse through the recent World Bank paper. This should be resisted. Collective institutional arrangements should also be considered for technology transfer at affordable cost. For one, the Green Climate Fund (GCF) could provide viability gap grant funding to high-cost green technologies. The advanced economies should also fully meet quickly the commitment to raise $100 billion to finance GCF. Cost-reducing measures and designing of new appropriate pass-through vehicles should be examined and adopted. The role of private investment, especially through PPPs, should be highlighted.
The second issue that China should bring at the table is on the role of multilateral finance institutions in funding development projects, resulting in investment, job-creation and inclusive development. It is perhaps the time for G-20 to discuss structural changes in the multilateral and regional development banks to reflect the changed global economic realities since the Bretton Woods. The effort to make lending conditions increasingly more stringent serves the purpose of the advanced economies. More stringent lending conditions result in lesser demand for multilateral development bank (MDB) funding, as the cost of borrowing becomes equal to or more than market rates. This makes loans from MDBs less attractive and dampens the demand for recapitalisation, which the advanced economies are reluctant to contribute to. There have been attempts by countries such as India to push for change in the equity structure through induction of higher equity by the emerging market economies but the advanced economies are completely opposed to it. China could bring the issue of "reforms in MDBs/RDBs for more balanced decision-making" as one of the focus areas.
The third issue relates to global trade. Looking at the world where the rate of growth of global trade has become much lower than its pre-crisis levels, China would perhaps focus on measures to boost trade, which ultimately will have a positive impact on growth. Unfortunately, the bypassing of the multilateral trade arrangement through the WTO is increasing, with advanced economies such as the US and members of the EU resorting to regional trade blocs that are not subject to either the 'consensus' clause of the WTO nor the inconvenient rules that treat all nations as equal. The growing tendency to use economic might by unilateral domestic legislative actions, such as FATCA enacted by the US which have extra territorial reach, is also threatening to upset the carefully-crafted GATT agreements signed after decades of deliberations. It would be of immense value to bring at the G-20 table "measures to rebalance world trade in favour of multilateralism."
The fourth recommendation relates to jobs, very critical for a large number of persons in the productive age-group and also necessary for global economic growth. The hiatus between the skills available in the markets and the skills required by the national economies is increasing. The decline in population in advanced economies and in many other large emerging economies such as China is also a cause of concern, as this requires review of the existing policy relating to movement of labour across national boundaries. Consider what would be the fate of the US economy if they did not have knowledge workers from all over the world supporting it. Would there be a Silicon Valley or companies like Google without knowledge workers from countries like China, India and Korea? According to the Wall Street Journal, the knowledge workers coming into the US are not taking away American jobs, because there aren't enough Americans skilled to take those jobs.
Finally, skill development-closely related to jobs-also requires concerted action by the G-20 countries. According to a report by McKinsey Global Institute, based on current trends in population, education and labour demand, by 2020 the global economy could face the following hurdles: 38-40 million fewer workers with tertiary education than employers will need; deficit of 45 million workers with secondary education in developing economies; and 90-95 million more low-skill workers for whom there shall be little demand.
While domestic efforts would largely drive these developments, new instruments for raising finance from global money markets, new methods of credit rating for skill providers etc are some of the measures that require global consensus. Expansion of credit and credit enhancement by the MDBs to the private sector for skill development infrastructure are other areas which require G-20 push.
The author is former finance secretary
 
TPP Unlikely to See New Members During APEC Summit
 - Pacific Economic Cooperation Council 
13 November 2015
Sputnik News Service
 
MANILA, November 13 (Sputnik), Anastasia Levchenko - The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) agreement is unlikely to receive new members during the APEC summit in Manila, Secretary General of the Pacific Economic Cooperation Council (PECC) Eduardo Pedrosa told Sputnik on Friday.
During the APEC leaders' summit next Wednesday, the Indonesian president was expected to confirm the country's desire to join the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) trade pact after voicing his intent during talks with US President Barack Obama on October 26. However, on Thursday, the Philippine Foreign Ministry announced that Widodo would not attend the annual summit due to domestic issues in Jakarta.
“Senior APEC officials have been doing the legal [reviewing] of the TPP text. I don’t think any members will join the TPP during this meeting, but I am sure they will present the interest again to the TPP, as they want to understand what the implications are, and where their own domestic agendas come,” Pedrosa said.
On October 5, the TPP negotiating countries reached an agreement on the wording and subject matter of the hotly-debated deal. The TPP would deregulate trade among the signatories, which together make up 40 percent of the world economy.
The unusual secrecy surrounding the TPP negotiations, and the uncertain implications of the deal for workers’ rights, national sovereignty, employment, copyright and the environment have drawn strong criticism from lawmakers, economics experts and the public.
PECC is an international organization for promoting cooperation and dialogue in the Asia-Pacific region. Comprising 26 member committees, it is the only non-governmental official observer of APEC, providing business and research advice for regional policy-makers.
 
Editorial: We need to get TPP deal right 
13 November 2015
Postmedia Breaking News
 
As details of the new Trans-Pacific Partnership trade agreement emerge, one thing seems clear: This deal will significantly increase the cost of prescription drugs in Canada.
On a per capita basis, we already have the second-highest pharmaceutical bills in the world. By some estimates, the new treaty will add $1.8 billion to that burden. And it will do so by weakening, or in some cases disabling entirely, our price-control mechanisms.
Some of this was inevitable. Any treaty that reduces trade barriers always intrudes on sovereign powers.
But this agreement goes further. It leans decidedly toward the corporate sector in potential conflicts with government. This preference is clearest in the sections on pharmaceuticals.
One reservation: The language of the agreement, all 6,000 pages of it, is often obscure. That makes any interpretation, at this stage, open to debate.
The pharmaceutical section begins by stipulating that licensing agencies must include industry representatives in their deliberations. To some extent, that already happens.
However, those agencies, such as Health Canada, are now told they must award equal weight to their industry partners. Some might think this is giving the fox joint management of the chicken coop.
Next, pharmaceutical companies are allowed to extend patents by making successive small changes in their drug formulas. Called "ever-greening," this provision allows manufacturers to lengthen their patent rights well beyond the usual 20-year term.
That will make it much more difficult for generic drug firms to market cheaper versions once a patent expires. But substituting generics for brand-name products has been, by far, the most effective way provincial drug plans have held down their costs.
The treaty also stipulates that licensing agencies may not consider the price a drug will sell for, when deciding whether to approve it. But Canada's Patent Act explicitly gives Ottawa the power to do just that. Under the legislation, a price-review board may roll back charges it deems excessive.
Because this section of the treaty is badly written, it is uncertain how much of this cost-control mechanism, if any, will survive. But though the wording is unclear, the intent shines through.
Pharmaceutical companies are being relieved of the need to reveal pricing information when seeking markets for their products. This cannot help but push up drug costs.
Finally, and this is not unique to the Trans-Pacific deal, the treaty places dispute resolution in the hands of an arbitration board.
At present, companies that disagree with licensing or patent rulings may take their case through federal court. While arbitration is allowed in some circumstances, this is usually a last resort.
The concern here is that the Trans-Pacific treaty places much more emphasis on the use of arbitration. And the process would give equal representation to government and industry, with a neutral third party holding the deciding vote. This effectively takes price-management out of our hands.
The treaty is not yet binding. It only takes force after all 12 member countries ratify it.
That means Parliament has its work cut out. It is essential to understand exactly what this agreement entails.
Of course, every trade deal has winners and losers. It might be that overall, this one is a net gain for Canada, drug costs notwithstanding.
It would also be prudent to wait for the U.S. Congress to reach a decision before choosing our own course. If the deal fails there, we can do as we wish. If it passes, we might find it more difficult to step out, since the U.S. is by far our largest trading partner.
In the life of the current Parliament, there will be no more vital issue to deal with. We must get this deal right.
 
Free trade talks set to gain momentum at APEC after TPP agreement 
Yoshio Takahashi 
Kyodo News
 
TOKYO, Nov. 14 -- The 21 members of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum will gather in the Philippines with talks on a region-wide free trade initiative set to take center stage following the recent agreement on the Trans-Pacific Partnership pact.
A series of high-level meetings in Manila, including that of ministers from Monday, will be their first gatherings since 12 nations, all part of the 21 economies, reached a broad agreement on the TPP last month after years of intensive negotiations.
U.S. President Barack Obama, Chinese President Xi Jinping and Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe along with other world leaders will attend a two-day summit starting from Wednesday.
The conclusion of the TPP deal, which covers 40 percent of the global economy, is expected to spark discussions on a far broader regional free trade pact known as the Free Trade Area of the Asia-Pacific or FTAAP. The 12-nation accord has been considered as a necessary step for the APEC members accounting for about 60 percent of the world's economy to move toward their ultimate goal of establishing the FTAAP.
"We will discuss how we can cooperate in realizing the FTAAP that will be a comprehensive and high-standard deal," Japanese trade minister Motoo Hayashi said Friday at a press conference before he leaves for Manila on the weekend.
The United States, Japan, Canada, Australia, Mexico, Vietnam, Malaysia and five other APEC members agreed in principle on Oct. 5 to eliminate tariffs on nearly all imported products and set rules on international trade, investment and the handling of intellectual property. The TPP also covers environmental conservation and labor protection.
The leaders of the 12 countries, also including Singapore, New Zealand, Peru, Chile and Brunei, will meet on Wednesday on the sidelines of the APEC summit, according to government sources.
They will welcome the agreement and ensure early implementation of the pact at their first meeting after the agreement, the sources said.
Other APEC members such as South Korea, Indonesia and the Philippines -- the host of this year's APEC forum meetings -- have said that they are interested in joining the TPP.
A major focus will be on what China, not a TPP negotiating member, has to say about the deal at a delicate time when momentum is building for the U.S.-led trade pact and tensions have risen recently between the world's two biggest economies over the sailing of a U.S. warship within a South China Sea area claimed by China.
At last year's APEC summit in Beijing, APEC leaders vowed to carry out "a collective strategic study" to look at the viability of the FTAAP and realize it "as early as possible".
But reflecting U.S. and Japan's concern that China was attempting to make the FTAAP a separate platform to expand its economic influence in the region, they also agreed that the FTAAP should be created on the basis of smaller trade schemes under negotiation such as the TPP. The common recognition provides little reason for any APEC member to downplay the significance of the TPP.
"It will be interesting to see what response China will show," a negotiation source said.
It is not clear whether or how the 21 members will hail the long-awaited conclusion of the TPP in joint statements to be released when ministers and leaders wrap up their respective meetings. The initial draft of the statement for the ministerial meeting did not have any mention of the TPP, according to a source familiar with the matter.
The 21 economies, also including Russia, Thailand, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Papua New Guinea, will examine progress in the collective strategic study that will be completed by the end of 2016.
At the meetings, measures to promote more small firms to tap into overseas markets and establishing a supply chain network resilient to natural disasters will also be on the agenda.
Bolstering women's empowerment and lowering lifetime costs of infrastructure by building quality facilities will also be discussed.
 
Ukraine’s trade with Russia drops to 16% - President Poroshenko 
13 November 2015
ITAR-TASS World Service
 
KIEV, November 13. /TASS/. Ukraine’s trade with Russia has dropped to 16 percent, Ukrainian President Pyotr Poroshenko said on Friday and expressed concern over Russia’s plans to enhance measures of customs tariff protection in respect of Ukraine.
According to the presidential press service, Poroshenko said at a meeting with European Commissioner for Trade Cecilia Malmstrom that European Union countries accounted for more than 37 percent of Ukraine’s foreign trade.
At the same time, the Ukrainian president expressed concern over Russia’s plans to impose a ban on imports of Ukrainian farming and food products, as well as customs tariffs on Ukrainian-made goods from January 1, 2016.
Ukraine’s association and free trade agreement with the European Union comes into effect from January 1, 2016. Poroshenko said he hoped the free trade zone with the European Union would bring his country’s trade and economic relations with EU countries to a new level and would encourage further development of Ukraine’s economy.
He also asked the European trade commissioner to help Ukraine’s exports to the European Union countries through wider access to the EU market for Ukrainian commodity.
Earlier, Ukraine’s Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk also met with the European trade commissioner. The meeting yielded an agreement to hold a Ukraine-European Union business forum in February 2016. The sides agreed that the forum would encourage direct contacts between Ukrainian and European manufacturers.
On October 30, Russian Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev said Ukraine could not be a member of two free trade zones - with the European Union and with the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) - concurrently. "It may create a threat of re-export of goods from third [European] countries under the disguise of Ukrainian-made ones," he said.
Medvedev said certain measures were needed to remove such risks. "The level of customs tariff protection in respect of Ukraine will be enhanced from January 1, 2016," he said. "Ukraine will enjoy the most favoured nation regime instead of zero customs taxes."
"Our response economic measures will be extended to Ukraine as a country joining the anti-Russian sanctions," the Russian prime minister noted. "It is done in conformity with the norms of the World Trade Organization (WTO) and the CIS Free Trade Zone Agreement."
ITAR-TASS Information Telegraph Agency of Russia
 
Europe mislabels Israel 
By EUGENE KONTOROVICH 
is a professor at Northwestern Pritzker School of Law.
14 November 2015
International New York Times
 
This week the European Commission announced guidelines suggesting that Israeli products from areas that came under its control in 1967 be labeled ‘‘Israeli Settlement’’ products and not ‘‘Made in Israel’’ as they have been until now. The policy carves out a special legal rule for Israel, not only contradicting the European Union’s own official positions on these issues, but also going against rulings of European national courts, and violating basic tenets of the World Trade Organization.
Faced with criticism from both the right and the left in Israel and the United States, the European Union claims its action is merely ‘‘technical,’’ rather than politically motivated or punitive. Yet this is belied by the fact that the measure comes in response to explicitly political demands for labeling by some member states’ foreign ministers, as well as anti-Israel NGOs.
In fact, the labeling controversy must be viewed as just one step in a broader, purposeful and gradual escalation of anti-Israel measures by the European Union. Two years ago, the commission promulgated a regulation that barred spending money on Israeli academic, scientific or cultural projects in the West Bank or Golan Heights. Then the union began refusing to allow imports of certain Israeli agricultural products. Last year, 15 European states issued warnings, alerting people to unspecified legal dangers of interacting with Israeli settlements. These steps, while supposedly motivated by what the European Union sees as Israel’s occupation of territory, have been applied only to Israel, and not to other countries regarded as occupiers in international law, such as Morocco or Turkey.
Having warned about settlement products, the European Union is now labeling them. Diplomats in Brussels and NGOs have made clear that more coercive measures will follow. In this context, labeling is important not in its immediate economic effects but as a highly visible step in a process of building a legal ghetto around Israel, within which a special set of rules applies.
The commission primarily justifies labeling as a necessary tool to provide consumers with the information that it does not regard the territories ‘‘as part of Israel.’’ However, European Union and national authorities that have addressed the issue have clearly ruled that special labeling is not required in such situations — neither for consumer protection nor to reflect the European Union’s view of the underlying sovereign status of territories.
Thus the European Union allows Morocco — which has extensive trade ties with Europe, but has occupied Western Sahara since 1975, and populated it heavily with settlers — to export products from its occupied territory labeled ‘‘Made in Morocco.’’ When challenged, the commission declared that labeling such goods as ‘‘made in’’ Morocco is not misleading, and is consistent with European trade agreements.
Also, European courts have considered the consumer protection rationale specifically in the context of Israeli products, and rejected it. Just last year, the Britain’s Supreme Court ruled, in a case involving Ahava beauty products produced in the West Bank, that ‘‘there was no basis for saying that the average consumer would be misled’’ by a ‘‘Made in Israel’’ label. The court held that such labeling was not deceptive as a matter of both British and European Union law.
The problem is not that the European Union fails to live up to its standards in some cases, like that of Morocco. Rather, in these other cases the union explicitly denies the existence of these standards. Such inconsistency is not just hypocrisy. It is a legal violation in its own right. The European Union’s foundational treaties require regulatory ‘‘consistency.’’ And discrimination against trading partners represents a core violation of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and other treaties of the World Trade Organization. The union’s labeling guidelines are manifestly discriminatory, as they apply only to Israel.
The World Trade Organization treaties establish the legal framework for international commerce. Under the W.T.O.’s nondiscrimination requirement, it is impermissible to apply trade rules and restrictions to some member countries and not to others. And the W.T.O.’s protections apply not just to a country’s sovereign territory, but also to areas of its ‘‘international responsibility,’’ such as occupied territories. There is nothing novel about a country’s receiving full trade rights for nonsovereign areas under its administration.
The United States has a great deal riding on the integrity of the international trading system. But the European Union labeling threatens to establish a precedent that would allow politicization of the system, undermining United States economic interests in broad and unpredictable ways. Thus it is not surprising that earlier this year, the United States passed a law opposing such European Union measures against Israel.
Making special rules for Israel has the undesired effect of reducing Israel’s incentives to take international law seriously: If the goal posts can be moved, there is less reason to play the game. As a putative role model for international law, the European Union’s greatest weapon is its probity and consistency. By damaging that, it harms its ability to set the global agenda.
International Herald Tribune
 
Argentina: Governments works on new plan to halt certain imports 
13 November 2015
Esmerk Latin American News
 
Clarin (Argentina), 13 Nov 2015, online:- The Argentine government, through the Ministry of Industry, is currently drawing up new measures to halt imports of certain products, encompassing the metal manufacturing, clothing, footwear and medical device sectors, amongst others, in conjunction with local business chambers, who have been impacted by imports, especially those from China. This proposal have been sent to other government departments for appraisal, including the national food, medicine and medical technology authority (ANMAT), the Secretariat of Commerce and the Ministry of Health. As well as safeguarding national manufacturing, these measures will protect consumers from products that do not meet safety and quality standards, through seven technical regulations for safety and quality that have been created by the Ministry of Industry and the National Institute for Industrial Technology (INTI).
Products affected by these technical norms include steel cables, pipelines for fluids, medical devices, baby clothing and paints, as well as a host of others, whilst there are demands for product manuals in Spanish and a local legal representative for customer complaints. Sources have stated that Argentina is taking such new protectionist measures because it has been ordered to scrap Advanced Import Affidavits (DJAI), starting from January 2016, following a ruling by the World Trade Organisation (WTO).
 
Donald Trump Is Upset; The candidate says we were unfair to him on trade. 
13 November 2015
The Wall Street Journal Online
 
Being attacked by Donald Trump is one of journalism's more exhilarating experiences. We got the treatment on Thursday when he took to various TV shows and Twitter with his usual soft sell and demanded corrections, apologies and resignations after our editorial reference to his trade policy. We haven't had this much fun since Eliot Spitzer left office.
Mr. Trump isn't upset that we called him potentially the Republican Party's “most protectionist nominee since Hoover." Perhaps he took that as a compliment. He's mad because he says we said that he didn't know that China isn't part of the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP).
But we didn't say that. We wrote that judging from his debate remarks Tuesday “it wasn't obvious that he has any idea what's in" TPP. It still isn't. Here's the debate transcript after Mr. Trump was asked by moderator Gerard Baker about the candidate's opposition to TPP and why he would “reverse more than 50 years of U.S. trade policy"?
Mr. Trump: “The TPP is a horrible deal. It is a deal that is going to lead to nothing but trouble. It's a deal that was designed for China to come in, as they always do, through the back door and totally take advantage of everyone. It's 5,600 pages long, so complex that nobody's read it. It's like ObamaCare; nobody ever read it. They passed it; nobody read it. And look at the mess we have right now. And it will be repealed.
“But this is one of the worst trade deals. And I would, yes, rather not have it. With all of these countries, and all of the bad ones getting advantage and taking advantage of what the good ones would normally get, I'd rather make individual deals with individual countries. We will do much better.
“We lose a fortune on trade. The United States loses with everybody. We're losing now over $500 billion in terms of imbalance with China, $75 billion a year imbalance with Japan. By the way, Mexico, $50 billion a year imbalance. So I must say, Gerard, I just think it's a terrible deal. I love trade. I'm a free trader, 100%. But we need smart people making the deals, and we don't have smart people making the deals."
Mr. Baker then noted that the deal's 5,000 pages had only been published last week: “Are there particular parts of the deal that you think were badly negotiated?"
Mr. Trump: “Yes. Well, the currency manipulation they don't discuss in the agreement, which is a disaster. If you look at the way China and India and almost everybody takes advantage of the United States—China in particular, because they're so good. It's the number-one abuser of this country. And if you look at the way they take advantage, it's through currency manipulation. It's not even discussed in the almost 6,000-page agreement. It's not even discussed."
So when he is asked about TPP, Mr. Trump's first reference is to China, which isn't in TPP, and he now says the world should have known that he knows China isn't part of it because amid his word salad he said that the deal “was designed for China to come in, as they always do, through the back door." Mr. Trump's meaning wasn't clear to Rand Paul, who interjected for the audience's clarification that China isn't part of the deal, as we reported.
Our editorial point was what everyone who understands East Asian security knows, which is that China would be delighted to see TPP fail. China is putting together its own Asian trade bloc, and those rules will be written to its advantage. TPP sets a standard for trade under freer Western rules. China could seek to join TPP in the future, but it would have to do so on TPP's terms, not vice versa.
TPP would help China's competitors by giving them greater access on better terms to the U.S. market. Production is likely to shift from China to Vietnam and other countries. In October the Financial Times quoted Sheng Laiyun, the spokesman for China's National Bureau of Statistics, as saying that, “If the TPP agreement is finally implemented, zero tariffs will be imposed on close to 20,000 kinds of products. . . . That will create some pressure on our foreign trade." Some back door.
***
As for currency manipulation, we gave Mr. Trump a forum for his views in our pages on Tuesday. He doesn't understand currencies any better than he does TPP. Currency values are largely determined by central banks and capital flows. If China made the yuan convertible and let it float, the initial result would probably be a falling yuan as capital left the country. A trade deal with a binding currency provision could also subject the U.S. Federal Reserve to sanctions as a “manipulator" every time it eased money in a recession.
All of this bears on Mr. Trump's candidacy because he is running as a shrewd deal-maker who can get the economy moving again. Starting a global currency and trade war “on day one" would get America moving toward recession—or worse.
