WTO procurement agreement opens up the world for Kiwi companies
U.S. Chicken Wings Set to Land in India
Addis: UN talks resume on financing framework for global development
Argentina agrees to lift trade restrictions with EU on Dec. 31
Argentina's removal of trade barriers improves operational environment, but US dollar restrictions will remain key hurdle
IATA appeals to exempt int'l air ticket from service tax
UK: 'Ignore scaremongers and back free trade treaty with America'
Canada, New Zealand refuse to budge, cloud TPP talks
TPP talks may conclude end-July
Japan minister says TPP deal without some nations possible
Putin says Russia has all possibilities to outstrip rivals on IT market
Steel groups urge action against Chinese imports 
EIF aims to mobilise $320m in next phase 

 
WTO procurement agreement opens up the world for Kiwi companies

14 July 2015

M2 Presswire

Economic Development Minister Steven Joyce and Trade Minister Tim Groser today announced that New Zealand has finalised its accession to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organisation’s Agreement on Government Procurement (GPA), and it will come into effect next month.

New Zealand businesses will have guaranteed access to bid for an estimated US$1.7 trillion in annual overseas government contracts through joining the GPA, which creates new opportunities for Kiwi businesses to export more products and services to more destinations, Mr Joyce says.

“Formal procedures in Geneva have now been completed which means that from mid-August, New Zealand companies will be able to do business freely across 43 HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO member countries, including the US, Canada, Japan and 28 countries of the EU.”

The GPA covers the purchase of a broad range of goods and services that government agencies buy from the private sector, including construction, and will help achieve the Business Growth Agenda goal of increasing exports to 40% of GDP by 2025, Mr Joyce says.

“Selling to international governments without having to set up offshore branches or other ‘work arounds’ is a key area of opportunity for New Zealand exporters. Governments worldwide are looking for the types of products and services that New Zealand offers.”

New Zealand’s accession follows two years of negotiations. From next month, New Zealand exporters seeking to access the government procurement markets of the other GPA member countries will be able to compete on equal terms with their international counterparts, Mr Groser says.

Member countries are not allowed to discriminate against businesses from another GPA member country in respect of government procurement opportunities covered by the agreement. They must also follow rules relating to competition and openness.

“Joining will not have a big impact on New Zealand government agencies because they already conduct their procurement in line with the agreement’s fundamental principles.

“We already follow the rules, but until now have not had the same opportunity for our New Zealand exporters. Joining up to the GPA will improve all access and reduce costs for exporters.

“This is a significant step in opening up large overseas markets to our Kiwi suppliers.”

Normans Media Ltd

U.S. Chicken Wings Set to Land in India

By Rajesh Roy 

15 July 2015

The Wall Street Journal

Indians could be enjoying an abundance of cheap American chicken legs and wings within a year.

After losing an appeal against the U.S. at a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization appellate body last month, Indian authorities are gearing up to start negotiations with their U.S. counterparts to resume the import of poultry products, banned for several years over avian influenza, or bird flu, fears.

The U.S. is one of the world's largest exporters of chicken meat, and lifting the ban will throw open a huge business opportunity for exporters to India.

India's local industry bodies estimate that the value of U.S. exports of chicken meat, mainly leg pieces, could exceed $300 million a year once India removes its restrictions. The number would grow substantially in the future as India's demand for high-quality protein rises.

Indian poultry farmers and breeders are objecting to the move as they fear their businesses could be hit. In India, chicken legs cost around 250 rupees ($3.90) a kilogram.

The same imported American product would cost less than half the price as the U.S. has huge frozen stocks for export, domestic chicken breeders said.

U.S. chicken legs could grab around 15% of India's poultry market, which is worth about 800 billion rupees a year, said Jagbir Singh Dhull, chairman of the Poultry Federation of India's Working Group. Branded food chains like HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"McDonald's and KFC would likely be the main buyers of the imported chicken, he added.

Consumption of the meat in India is still relatively low however. India's per capita chicken consumption is estimated to be around 4 kilograms (about 9 pounds) a person every year, compared with the world's average of 15 to 18 kilograms, according to Mr. Dhull.

"American chicken legs would be sold at dirt cheap prices here," Mr. Dhull said.

India banned imports of various agricultural products from the U.S. in 2007 to prevent outbreaks of bird flu in the country. The U.S. took India to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO dispute-settlement body in March 2012. Both the panel appointed by that body and an appellate arm of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO recently ruled in favor of the U.S., stating that India's measures restricted international trade.

The South Asian nation will inform the dispute-settlement body of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO next week of its intention to resume chicken and egg imports from the U.S., a senior official at India's trade ministry said.

The maximum timeline that India could get from the U.S. to resume imports is 15 months from July, according to the official. Dow Jones & Company, Inc. 

Addis: UN talks resume on financing framework for global development

India Blooms News Service 

Distributed by Contify.com

15 July 2015

India Blooms News Service

New York, Jul 15 (IBNS): Negotiations on a comprehensive financing framework for sustainable development resumed on Tuesday in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, where Member States have gathered for a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"United Nations conference aimed at securing the resources necessary for the well-being of all people and the health of the planet.

Deliberations are being held in the Main Committee established by the Third International Conference on Financing for Development with a view to finalizing the outcome document, which will be known as the Addis Ababa Action Agenda once it is adopted. Chaired by Ethiopias Foreign Minister, Tedros Adhanom, the committee has before it the task of bridging differences on three main areas of contention in the 35-page draft outcome document. The final text, once adopted, will support the implementation of the post-2015 development agenda, including the set of Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) that world leaders are expected to adopt this September. In an interview with the UN News Centre, Alexander Trepelkov, Director of the Financing for Development Office in the Department of Economic and Social Affairs (DESA), highlighted the unresolved issues, which include the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities. He said, In view of the fact that the Addis Action Agenda goes beyond the Monterrey Consensus [the outcome of the first development financing conference, held in Mexico in 2002] to address all the three dimensions of sustainable development, developing countries propose to make explicit reference to the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities as it applies to financing sustainable development as a whole. Currently, the reference to this principle is contained in the paragraph dealing with climate finance. The second area of contention relates to the area of international cooperation on tax matters. In general, developing countries, as a precondition to agreeing to the universal financing agenda, are asking for a more inclusive mode of discussion and a seat at the table in policy decision-making on financing for development, Trepelkov explained. In that context, developing countries are proposing upgrading the UN Committee of Experts on International Cooperation in Tax Matters to an intergovernmental body, or at least to strengthen the Committee vis--vis the role of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD) on tax cooperation. The exact relationship between the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"UN work on tax matters and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD work in the same area remains to be clarified, Trepelkov stated. Thirdly, the precise relationship of the Addis outcome document and the post-2015 development agenda still needs to be agreed. Developed countries see the Addis outcome as the means of implementation of the post-2015 development agenda, while developing countries believe that Addis should of course support the implementation of the SDGs but should not preclude additional efforts in this area, said Trepelkov. The conference that began on Monday includes plenary sessions, round tables and side events held all around Addis Ababa. It is being held at the highest political level, with 28 heads of State, vice presidents and heads of government; six deputy prime ministers; and 95 ministers and vice-ministers attending. In addition, some 1,000 representatives from civil society and the business sector are expected to be in Addis for the conference, which concludes on Thursday. Photo: ECA

India Blooms News Service

Argentina agrees to lift trade restrictions with EU on Dec. 31

14 July 2015

Buenos Aires Herald

Argentina will have until the new year to comply with a ruling from the Dispute Settlement Body of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization (WTO) against import restrictions, after the country agreed with European representatives that December 31 was a “reasonable time frame” to solve the dispute.

The 11-months period comfirmed yesterday creates a time frame that could ultimately place the issue in the lap of the next government.

Earlier this year the WTO had rejected an Argentine appeal against an August ruling that said the country's DJAI import permits and other non-tariff barriers (including national licensing rules) breached international trade rules.

President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner thus remains free to continue her policies of protecting local industry and shoring up the trade surplus via import controls until her term ends.

The United States, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union and Japan have been the main driving-forces behind the WTO complaints against the import restrictions.

Argentina has in turn complained about protectionist measures by the US and the EU against the country's agricultural exports.

In the last few months the government has significantly reduced the delays in DJAI import authorizations, although new local disputes have emerged about Central Bank's greenlighting of the currency purchases needed to complete those transactions.

Once the WTO ruling kicks in, trading partners could be entitled to retaliatory action or seeking financial compensation in direct negotiations with Argentina.

Herald staff

Argentina's removal of trade barriers improves operational environment, but US dollar restrictions will remain key hurdle

Laurence Allan 

14 July 2015

IHS Global Insight Daily Analysis

The Argentine government yesterday (13 July) made public its agreement to adhere to a judgment made by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO) that will see it remove a key bureaucratic obstacle to Argentine importers. Jorge D'Alotto, Argentina's representative to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO, said the country would phase out the system of Declaraciones Juradas Anticipadas de Importaciones (DJAI) on 31 December this year, three weeks after current president Cristina Fernández de Kirchner hands over power to a new president on 10 December. The DJAI was introduced in 2011 and stipulates that all Argentine imports be authorised on a case-by-case basis by the Ministry of Commerce, then under the direction of the ultra-Kirchnerist government minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Guillermo Moreno, and by Argentina's tax authority, the Administración Federal de Ingresos Públicos (AFIP). It also requires that businesses match the dollar value of their imports with exports.

Argentine importers complained bitterly of lengthy and unpredictable delays to goods clearing Argentine customs procedures as a result. The DJAI was established primarily to reduce Argentina's trade deficit and protect its US dollar reserves.

Risks: Regulatory burden

Sectors or assets affected: Automotive; Mining; Oil and gas

Global Insight Limited| 

IATA appeals to exempt int'l air ticket from service tax

FPJ Bureau 

Distributed by Contify.com

15 July 2015

Free Press Journal

New Delhi : Global airlines body HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"IATA made an appeal to the government, among others, to exempt international air ticket from service tax, for ease of doing business here, even as the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Civil Aviation Ministry said there were different laws and regulations in different countries, reports PTI.

"The application of Service Tax should be aligned with a principle that it does not apply to services rendered outside of India including those for overflight charges, global distribution systems, extra baggage fees and international tickets," IATA Director General and CEO, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Tony Tyler said. He was delivering a keynote address at the Aviation Day conference organised by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"International Air Transport Association (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"IATA), business umbrella body HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Confederation of Indian Industries (CII) and the Ministry of Civil Aviation.

Union Civil Aviation Minister Ashok Gajapathi Raju said there were different laws and regulations in different countries and India would have to develop its own, keeping in mind the prevailing circumstances.

Observing that there was a need to follow international treaties that protect airlines from double-taxation on income, Tyler suggested that the incoming GST regime should also "zero-rate international air transport services in line with HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development) guidelines."

Onerous regulation and processes, debilitating taxes and expensive infrastructure are holding back the industry's ability to deliver greater economic benefits to India, Tyler said. He said the need to avoid double-taxation within India "in situations where airlines are effectively taxed on taxes collected."

In a bid to slash airport charges, Tyler also urged the government to "overcome legal challenges which prevent AERA's recommendation for a 78 per cent reduction in Delhi's airport charges from being implemented."

rewriting aviation policy After being in the works for a long time, the government is "completely rewriting" the civil aviation policy to address concerns of the stakeholders.

The issue of easing norms for international operations by new domestic airlines would also be part of the policy, a senior official said.

While assuring that the new policy was in advanced stages, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Civil Aviation Ministry today said the revised draft would soon be put up to invite comments from public and other stakeholders.

"We are completely rewriting the draft aviation policy "We are working on a sensible policy," Secretary Civil Aviation, R N Choubey said. The policy, he said, would look at certain major areas like reducing cost of acquisition of aircraft and at airports. The Ministry is also looking at the possible scrapping of 5/20 norms - whereby only those domestic carriers that have been operating for five years and have at least 20 aircraft are allowed to fly overseas.

Besides, the Ministry was working with states to bring down taxes on ATF (Aviation Turbine Fuel), which is about 40-50% of an airline's operating cost.

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"SpiceJet offers Re 1 fare on mobile app

New Delhi : No-frills carrier HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"SpiceJet put on sale 1 lakh seats on its select domestic flights for just Re 1 excluding taxes and fees under a limited offer period that allows the customers to undertake travel from July 15 to March 31 next year.

The three-day offer, for which the bookings start from today, however, comes with a rider, the airline said. "HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"SpiceJet announces the return of its Re 1/- airfare sale! More than 1,00,000 one-way tickets are available at just Re 1 (excluding taxes and fees). Round-trip purchase is required, wherein the other leg of the journey is at regular fares," the release said.

The sale offer - Red Hot Spicy - is only purchasable on HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"SpiceJet's new Mobile App for Apple iOS and Android, it said adding the sale is not available through other channels.

The bookings for the three-day sale will be open from tomorrow at 10 am and go up to midnight of July 17, it said adding under this promotion, only two round-trip tickets can be booked at the sale fare on a single mobile phone handset.

Indian National Press Bombay Inc. 

UK: 'Ignore scaremongers and back free trade treaty with America'


James Hurley 

15 July 2015

The Times

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"David Cameron has dismissed concerns about a controversial free trade agreement between Europe and the United States, warning that Britain will "rue the day" if the treaty is not signed.

The prime minister accused critics of the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) of making arguments that "fall apart" when they are examined.

Mr Cameron said that TTIP, which is intended to create the world's biggest free trade zone by removing tariffs and regulatory barriers, would deliver "billions of pounds [of] extra trade and additional jobs".

Critics of the treaty claim that it could undermine national sovereignty, democracy and public services and leave Britain vulnerable to legal action from multinationals.

"We have got a big fight to win," Mr Cameron said. "The left across Europe is mobilising, often through NGOs, to find all sorts of reasons why this is a bad idea.

"Whether it is the idea we are all going to be force-fed chlorinated chickens, or have American banks buy up our health service, as soon as you examine these questions, they all fall apart."

Mr Cameron, who was speaking at The Times CEO Summit, was referring to campaigners' claims that chlorinated chicken will be sold in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union as a result of TTIP.

American food processors routinely wash chicken carcasses to disinfect them with the chemical but the practice and products treated this way are banned in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union. Differing transatlantic food safety standards are among regulations that could be eased as part of the treaty negotiations.

The prime minister also promised that the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"NHS would not be opened up to US investors as a result of the deal, and he dismissed claims that TTIP could result in national governments being sued by companies.

"The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"NHS will remain a national health service," he said. "There is no question. In terms of our investor dispute resolution mechanisms, we've signed them in to every trade deal we've ever done and we've never lost a single case."

The government has estimated that TTIP would add £10 billion a year to the British economy, while the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Commission said it would boost the size of the EU economy by about £94 billion.

Vince Cable, the former business secretary, is among politicians from the left and right who have raised concerns over the deal. In February, he attacked the "level of secrecy" surrounding the negotiations.

Mr Cameron said: "If we don't sign deals like this, there will be people in business who will look at the New Zealands, the Australias, the countries who are able very rapidly to sign trade deals with India and China and say, 'Look, we are being held back by Europe when Europe should be bashing down the doors and signing these deals.'"

News UK & Ireland Limited

Canada, New Zealand refuse to budge, cloud TPP talks

15 July 2015

Nikkei Report

TOKYO -- Inflexible positions held by Canada and New Zealand at the Trans-Pacific Partnership negotiations have been raising concerns among negotiators trying to finalize the trade pact.

While a total of 12 nations have been working to reach a broad agreement by the end of the month, tough issues linger not just among core countries such as Japan and the U.S. but others as well.

"For countries unable to meet the deadline, the option to participate later is not zero," Japanese Economic and Fiscal Policy Minister Akira Amari told a press conference Tuesday in veiled criticism of the foot-dragging by nations including Canada.

The negotiating partners have been discussing rules and systems for a region affecting all of the 12, while simultaneously holding bilateral talks on tariff cuts and other issues.

Canada "has made scant progress" in bilateral talks with the U.S. and Japan, a negotiating source said. The Reuters news service reported last Friday that the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"U.S. government was weighing "contingencies" that could include completing the pact without Canada.

The third-largest economy among the negotiating countries, Canada is protective of its supply management structure for five industries, including dairy and poultry.

Canadian Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Stephen Harper highlights the need for the TPP, but refuses to open markets for the protected items, concerned that the pact might create headwinds in general elections expected this fall.

Dairy powerhouse New Zealand presents a problem as well. The most competitive dairy producer among the 12 maintains that the country sees no point in participating in the TPP unless it can boost exports of items such as butter and powdered milk. Negotiators in Japan, Canada and the U.S. are warily assessing the hard-line position.

The U.S. seems open about accepting imports from New Zealand provided that the U.S. can increase exports to Canada. Even if a greater quantity of New Zealand cheese and other dairy products arrives at the U.S. market, farmers will be more understanding if they can boost exports to Canada.

Japan believes that the problem should be solved first among the U.S., Canada and New Zealand.

Meanwhile, in the area of intellectual property, problems persist over how long to protect drug data. The U.S., home of many international pharmaceutical companies, insists on protection spanning at least 10 years to fully recover development costs, but emerging Asian countries and Australia strongly call for five years, hoping to produce generic drugs as soon as possible.

Other sticking points include the Malaysian policy of Bumiputera, giving preferential treatment to the native Malay companies on grounds that they are less economically competitive than ethnic Chinese and other entities. The U.S. has been critical of the system but Malaysia is poised to keep it as an exception. (Nikkei) 

TPP talks may conclude end-July

15 July 2015

Business Times

KUALA LUMPUR: TOP United States trade officials have told Malaysian leaders and lawmakers that the Trans Pacific Partnership (TPP) talks would be concluded by the end of this month.

The United States Trade Representative (USTR) Michael Froman, who met up with members of the parliamentary caucus group on Monday, told them that talks would be substantially wrapped up during a ministerial meeting in Maui, Hawaii, from July 28 till 31.

Yesterday, he met Prime Minister Datuk Seri Najib Razak after meetings with his counterpart International Trade and Industry Minister Datuk Seri Mustapa Mohamed, Minister in the Prime Minister's Department Datuk Seri Wahid Omar and Treasury officials.

Froman, who was accompanied by US chief negotiator Barbara Weisel during the two-day visit, here, also held met officials from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Federation of Malaysian Manufacturers (FMM) and national oil firm HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Petroliam Nasional Bhd (Petronas).

He met with representatives from the Institute of Strategic and International Studies and PriceWaterhouseCoopers, which will be undertaking the cost-benefit analyses on Malaysia's participation in TPP.

The US and Malaysia are part of the Pacific Rim economic bloc, which also includes Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, Japan, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore and Vietnam - which collectively contribute 40 per cent of global gross domestic product (GDP).

His brief visit, here, comes on the heels of the approval of the Trade Promotion Authority (TPA), the fast track instrument by the US lawmakers, which could also mean a final vote in December.

The ministerial meeting was earlier scheduled to be held in Guam in May but was rescheduled as it was uncertain whether President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Barack Obama was able to obtain the fast track authority for trade negotiation deals.

Chief negotiators from the 12 countries will be meeting in Maui from July 24 to 27.

According to the USTR office, there has b een considerable progress in closing gaps on remaining issues and work has continued "intensively" to address specific issues bilaterally.

"The upcoming ministerial provides an important opportunity to build on this progress as we work to conclude the negotiation," it said.

To Malaysia, the red lines have been drawn to mark political issues versus the technical issues and they range from Investor State Dispute Settlement, government procurement, intellectual property rights and environment.

New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad

Japan minister says TPP deal without some nations possible

14 July 2015

Kyodo News

TOKYO, July 14 -- Japan's minister in charge of a 12-country Pacific Rim free trade initiative said Tuesday one possible option is to reach a broad agreement without some members that are unwilling to end negotiations at the next ministerial meeting later this month in Hawaii.

Economic and Fiscal Policy Minister Akira Amari did not name the countries he thinks could be excluded from a Trans-Pacific Partnership deal, but Canada and New Zealand are said to be lagging behind in their negotiations with other members.

"If there are countries that are...not willing to reach an agreement at the Hawaii meeting, we can't afford to let the TPP go adrift for their sake," Amari told a press conference.

"It is an option for those countries to join (the TPP) later," Amari said.

Negotiation sources said Canada remains reluctant to open up its poultry and dairy markets to foreign competition under the free trade initiative that would cover around 40 percent of global gross domestic product, while New Zealand has called for further liberalization of dairy products.

Amari said the four-day ministerial session starting from July 28 "needs to be the last ministerial meeting."

"I hope (the negotiating members) will play their last cards so all the 12 countries can reach an agreement," he said.

Reuters news service has reported that the United States is weighing completing a TPP pact that excludes Canada, citing two sources familiar with the matter.

The United States, Australia, Brunei, Chile, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore and Vietnam launched negotiations for the TPP in 2010. Malaysia, Mexico, Canada and Japan joined the dialogue later. Kyodo News

Putin says Russia has all possibilities to outstrip rivals on IT market

14 July 2015

ITAR-TASS World Service

DVORIKI VILLAGE /Vladimir region/, July 14. /TASS/. Russian President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Vladimir Putin said on Tuesday Russia should do its best to outstrip its rivals on the IT market using its best national experience.

"We will take the best and move faster than our rivals," Putin said at a meeting with participants in the Russian Educational Youth Forum Terra Scientia on Klyazma.

He said that in the IT sector Russia should cooperate closer with BRICS countries, in particular China and India. "We have all the possibilities to reach a world level. We don’t have to create any alternatives to anyone… We know what we can. And we must move ahead on the basis of what we have," the president stressed.

The Russian president said Russia had always boasted its national mathematical school. "But first of all, we must never rest on the laurels. We must objectively analyze everything which is going on in the most important and promising areas of knowledge, science, education, economy," Putin underscored. He warned the young men against "getting a swelled head about having the best IT brains." "Nonetheless, we evidently have competitive edge in this sector. And we must make use of it," he added.

ITAR-TASS Information Telegraph Agency of Russia

Steel groups urge action against Chinese imports 

Business News Americas

13 July 2015, 

Business News Americas (BNamericas.com) 

WBNA Logo

155 words, 

English, 

WBNA, 

(c) 2015 Business News Americas (BNamericas.com) 

Six Latin American steel associations have called on regional countries to take action against imports of subsidized steel from China.

Regional steel group Alacero said that associations in Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Chile, Mexico and Peru have called on their governments to defend fair competition in their steel markets, arguing that Chinese production is heavily subsidized and does not met WTO standards.

The associations said that Chinese steel account for 13% of total consumption in the region, up from 6% five years ago. Latin America is the second-largest destination for Chinese exports, totaling 8.3Mt in 2014. The region is forecast to receive 9.7Mt this year.

The groups are calling for increased customs oversight to prevent contraband and ensure payment of antidumping duties, as well as requiring that imports meet the same quality of standards as the local production, the Alacero statement said.

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"http://www.bnamericas.com

Business News Americas, S.A 

Document WBNA000020150714eb7d00008

Himalayan Times

13-Jul-2015
, 

EIF aims to mobilise $320m in next phase 

Pushpa Raj Acharya, 

Himalayan Times

Pushpa Raj Acharya, 

Distributed by Contify.com , 

13 July 2015, 

KATHMANDU, July 13: The Enhanced Integrated Framework (EIF) - a multi-donor programme to support trade-related capacity development of least developed countries (LDCs) - plans to mobilise $320 million in the next phase, from 2016 to 2022.

EIF - initiated by the World Trade Organisation (WTO), the World Bank, International Monetary Fund (IMF), United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), International Trade Centre (ITC) and United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) - has mobilised $195 million till date since 2009. By the end of the first phase of the programme (2009 to 2015) the mobilised amount from its 23 donors is expected to reach $202 million, according to EIF Executive Director Ratnakar Adhikari.

As its board has decided to extend the programme for another six years, EIF has scheduled a pledging conference on December 14, in Nairobi of Kenya. EIF's board includes three representatives from aid recipient countries and rest from the donors.

As per Adhikari, Norway is the only donor that has already pledged $20 million for the next phase of the programme. India, Saudi Arabia and other newly emerged donor countries have also been extended invitations to participate in the pledging conference.

Currently, 48 LDCs and three recently graduated countries have been enjoying EIF's support as a catalytic resource to boost trade competitiveness of their respective countries. EIF can extend its support for up to five years after a country graduates from the LDC status.

Nepal is one of the beneficiaries of EIF. It has enjoyed EIF's support of $1.5 million for the capacity enhancement of trade-related institutions under Nepal Enhanced Capacities for Trade and Development (NECTRADE) project in two phases - $0.9 million (2010 to 2014) and $0.6 million (2015).

EIF has been extending support to boost capacity of trade-related institutions, which is called tier 1 support and development of niche products under tier 2 programme. Nepal is also enjoying support for three products under tier 2 programme, namely, ginger, pashmina, and medicinal and aromatic plants (MAPs). These products are identified as the products with comparative and competitive advantages under Nepal Trade Integration Strategy (NTIS), 2010.

Quality enhancement of ginger is being implemented by Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) utilising EIF's support worth $0.7 million. Likewise, pashmina which is being promoted by International Trade Centre through Pashmina Enhancement and Trade Support project (PETS) has been mobilising EIF's support worth $1.86 million. Similarly, EIF has been extending $3.9 million for product development of MAPs that is being implemented by GIZ Nepal, German International Cooperation Agency.

The government has been also reviewing the NTIS document to make it more contextual and add other products and services that have niche advantages. NTIS, 2010 has incorporated 12 products and seven services of competitive and comparative advantages.

The country receives EIF's support based on NTIS document.

International Media Network Nepal (Pvt) Ltd 

