HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO Chief to ‘Intensify’ Multilateral Negotiations as Agriculture Talks Flounder
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO chief reports progress in Doha work program negotiations
·         HYPERLINK \l "Differentiation among developing nations at WTO unacceptable: India
·         HYPERLINK \l "Doha round still having trouble getting off ground
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO welcomes Seychelles as its 161st member
·         HYPERLINK \l "Kazakhstan to join WTO in 2015 - Nazarbayev
·         HYPERLINK \l "Nepal Earthquake's Economic Toll Expected to Be Massive
·         HYPERLINK \l "Food embargo Russia's chance as WTO member to free own market for national producers - Putin
·         HYPERLINK \l "Revoking additional imports duty not appropriate now - Ukrainian economy minister
·         HYPERLINK \l "Tensions Between Gulf, US Airlines Seen as Overblown -- Market Talk
·         HYPERLINK \l "Indonesia plans to trim CPO export tax rates to offset burden of levies
·         HYPERLINK \l "Obama says U.S.-Japan getting closer but no deal this week
 
WTO Chief to ‘Intensify’ Multilateral Negotiations as Agriculture Talks Flounder
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, April 28, 2015
 
April 27 — World Trade Organization members should broaden their negotiating options and increase discussions with their capitals to advance a detailed work program by July, said WTO Director-General Roberto Azevedo.
 
WTO members “still have a long way to go” in their efforts to address the remaining elements of the 2001 Doha round, Azevedo said at an April 27 Trade Negotiations Committee meeting. “Members are still at odds on some major issues, and some big gaps remain.”
 
Negotiations have stalled in recent week because members cannot agree to reduce agricultural tariffs and farm subsidies in line with the goals of the Doha Development Agenda.
 
Azevedo said he would now “increase the intensity” of his involvement and suggested members should concurrently address the three primary negotiating “pillars”—agriculture, non-agricultural market access (NAMA), and services. He said members will “need to engage capitals to an even greater degree, as we are approaching the stage where political calls will need to be made.”
 
Intensive Consultations
 
Members have been engaged in consultations aimed at liberalizing trade rules ahead of their Dec. 15–18 ministerial conference in Nairobi, Kenya. However, the U.S. and large emerging economies like China disagree on several issues, including how to limit their levels of overall trade-distorting support.
 
The U.S. has asked emerging economies to increase their commitment to curb policies that harm global trade, while China has adamantly opposed any terms that deviate from the text of the December 2008 draft modalities (Rev. 4), which are formulas for reducing trade-distorting measures.
 
‘Uncomfortable for Everyone.’
 
Azevedo said that, as chairman of the WTO's Trade Negotiations Committee, he would soon increase discussions of cross-sectoral negotiating terms among the areas of agriculture, NAMA and services.
 
“We need to put more focus on identifying the trade-offs within pillars and between them,” Azevedo said. “These trade-offs are not clearly on the table yet. And I think that, once we begin to take a more careful look at them, things may change considerably.”
 
Meanwhile, Azevedo urged members to be realistic about their positions and recognize the sacrifices it will take to reach a successful accord. “Whatever outcome we have, there's no doubt that it will be uncomfortable for everyone,” he said.
 
Members Remain Committed
 
Though delegates expressed their frustration with the state of the agriculture negotiations, few were willing to say that the July work program deadline will not be met, according to interviews with Bloomberg BNA.
 
“All of the majors are committed to finalizing a work program by July,” said one delegate who attended the meeting. “That was never going to be easy, but I don't hear anyone moving away from that objective.”
 
“On the substance of the discussions, there is still a long way to go but I am not calling it yet,” the delegate said. “I see increased efforts at different levels trying to explore what a work program might look like.”
 
Urgency Needed
 
“To me, the issue is more about what is the format and ingredient of the work program that we can arrive at by July,” said one member of the G-33 group.
 
“Some issues might be stabilized by then to move to the next stage of offer-and-request by the second half of the year, while some other issues may be dealt with by agreeing on the path or roadmap to define them further before MC10.”
 
“[It is] true that negotiations on agriculture pose a great challenge to us now,” the G-33 delegate told Bloomberg BNA. “The proposals and draft texts tabled since 2008 until last year are on the table. However, in the name of recalibration, simplicity and do-ability, new ideas have been proposed and seems to me that this has caused what others call ‘off track.’ ”
 
“I wouldn't agree that we are off track,” said a member of the African, Caribbean and Pacific group of countries. “Although I would share the concern that we need to move to see tangible steps forward fairly soon.”
 
 
WTO chief reports progress in Doha work program negotiations 
 
GENEVA, April 27 (Xinhua) -- World Trade Organization (WTO) director-general Roberto Azevedo Monday stressed that progress had been made in the negotiation process of the Doha work program.

Azevedo told the WTO Trade Negotiations Committee that "while it is clear we still have a long way to go, and that some areas are proving very problematic, there is no doubt in my mind that we are making progress" on concluding a work program on the remaining Doha Round issues by July.

"After many years of deadlock, we are genuinely breaking new ground," he added. 
 
He noted while some members are still taking a cautious approach, others are being more proactive, by putting forward fresh thinking, making proposals and putting forward papers.

Azevedo thought it encouraging that participation had been at a high level and that the engagement had been overwhelmingly constructive.

He emphasized it's time to move "from a finger-pointing mode to a solution-pointing mode, to maintain our focus on what is doable and to be prepared to leave our comfort zones."

In December 2013, after more than a decade of negotiations and missed deadlines, WTO achieved a breakthrough in its marathon trade-liberalization negotiations as trade ministers clinched a deal after a prolonged meeting on the Indonesia resort island of Bali.

The Bali package marked a concrete step forward in the Doha Round talks, which were launched in 2001 with an aim to help poor economies overcome barriers in global trade and prosper through the free flow of goods.

Last November, all WTO members made a consensus to seal the trade facilitation agreement (TFA), the first-ever multilateral pact in WTO's nearly two-decade history, which kicked off the ratification process of the related protocol.

WTO members have set July 2015 as the target for agreeing on a work program for concluding the Doha Round talks. Enditem
 
 
Differentiation among developing nations at WTO unacceptable: India 
D. Ravi Kanth 
28 April 2015
Mint
 
Geneva, April 28 -- India on Monday warned against continued attempts to force "differentiation" among developing countries at the World Trade Organization (WTO) for securing higher contributions on the pretext of making progress in the stalled Doha trade negotiations.

"Differentiations among developing countries in this manner is unacceptable to India," New Delhi's trade envoy Anjali Prasad told a meeting of the trade negotiations committee.

Over the last 10 days, the US has repeatedly insisted that major developing countries undertake commitments to reduce the support they currently provide to their farmers.

The US, for example, is targeting the input subsidies provided to low and resource-poor farmers as well as market price support to procure produce from farmers for public stockholding programmes.

US trade envoy Michael Punke said large emerging economies have to undertake commitments because of changed realities.

Without mentioning the US by name, India said "such arguments and conditionalities undermine the very basis of the negotiating function of the WTO which is based on certain accepted principles, which do not allow for such differentiation".

Contributions, said Prasad, "have to be benchmarked to levels of development rather than some vague sense of the world having changed".

She said any discussion on "doability", "recalibration" or "simplification" should not result in the dilution of "development quotient" of the Doha Round of trade negotiations.

China also denounced attempts to change goalposts in the negotiations on the pretext of "recalibration". China's trade envoy Yu Jianhua said his country will not accept attempts to undermine the previous mandates such as the Doha declaration of 2001, the 2004 July work programme, the 2005 Hong Kong Ministerial declaration, and the 2008 revised draft modalities.

WTO chief Roberto Azevedo, however, presented an upbeat assessment claiming all is well with the ongoing negotiations for drawing-up the post-Bali work programme on how to conclude the Doha trade talks.

But China and India along with several other countries remain concerned at attempts to impose new commitments on developing countries, including moves to undermine what are called the special and differential flexibilities in agriculture.

During a closed-door meeting of trade envoys of six major countries-the US, the European Union (EU), China, India, Brazil and Australia-last Wednesday, there were sharp differences over issues concerning the flexibilities accorded to developing countries under the WTO rules.

China and India insisted that Azevedo must state unambiguously whether there is an attempt to dilute Article 6.2 of the Agreement on Agriculture (AoA) to deny the special and differential flexibilities that are crucial for poor farmers to continue farming, according to people familiar with the meeting.

Developing countries are currently exempted from reduction commitments from agricultural input subsidies under Article 6.2 of the AoA.

Therefore, when the US says input subsidies and MPS (market price support) are more trade-distorting than area payments and partially decoupled support, clearly it is aimed at undermining Article 6.2.

Despite these halting developments in the negotiations, Azevedo claimed that "we (members) are getting close to July now", implying that there is forward movement in cobbling together a work programme that stipulates specific and modalities-like benchmarks to finalize negotiations.

He said: "Whatever the nature of work programme we get by July, clearly I will have to fulfil certain criteria"-that the work programme must be substantive and meaningful; that it would provide guidance to conclude the negotiations; and that it must be a springboard for a successful 10th Ministerial Conference in Nairobi in December.

But a large majority of developing countries, including China and India, have sharply differed with Azevedo's assessment. The countries expressed grave concern over what they see as sustained attempts to undermine the previous mandates of the Doha trade negotiations under the pretext of "recalibration".

However, the industrialized countries, particularly the US and the EU, are comfortable with "recalibration" as a strategy towards realistic progress by the end of this year.

 
Doha round still having trouble getting off ground
POLITICO
4/27/15 4:09 PM EDT
 
Although TPP and TPA might finally be moving along, the 14-year-old Doha round of negotiations at the World Trade Organization is still sputtering, despite renewed efforts by members to rekindle the talks.
"My overall assessment of the situation in the agriculture negotiations is a sombre one," said New Zealand Ambassador John Adank, who chairs the ag talks, at a meeting of WTO ambassadors today. "In key areas we are, as of yet, far from convergence on certain threshold issues." WTO economies are attempting to chart a path forward for the Doha round by the end of July.
Director-General Roberto Azevedo, however, remains optimistic. “I think that this solution-finding mode is proving to be tough,” he said in a speech. “This is to be expected, and I would urge you not to be discouraged by it.” He also argued that while negotiations are progressing on industrial tariffs and agriculture, the services piece of the talks cannot be left behind.
Deputy U.S. Trade Representative Michael Punke, Washington’s ambassador to the WTO, at the meeting today continued to emphasize that emerging economies need to be taking on a bigger role.
“We know that our insistence that all major agricultural subsidizers participate in taking on new disciplines for trade-distorting support is difficult for certain other members,” he said. “We know, as well, that some other Members do not want to hear that it cannot be acceptable for only some Members to contribute cuts in applied tariffs while others contribute only policy space.”
He said the WTO "just barely" has enough time to adapt work to make enough progress by the end of July, and by the WTO ministerial scheduled for December in Kenya.
— Victoria Guida
 
 
WTO welcomes Seychelles as its 161st member 
 
GENEVA, April 27 (Xinhua) -- The World Trade Organization (WTO) on Monday welcomed Seychelles as its 161st member, ending 20 years of negotiating its accession terms.

"I am delighted to welcome the Republic of Seychelles as the 161st member of the WTO," said WTO director-general Roberto Azevedo.

"This is great news for Seychelles' economy and, therefore, for the people of Seychelles. It is also a boost for the WTO and a vote of confidence in the Organization, as we redouble our efforts to complete the Doha Round of negotiations," said Azevedo.

Seychelles on Sunday officially became a WTO member after the 30-day countdown to its WTO membership was activated on March 27.

On March 25, President of Seychelles James Michel signed the "instrument of acceptance" of Seychelles' accession protocol, confirming its membership terms, at a plenary meeting of the cabinet of ministers in Victoria, Seychelles.

"This is a major step forward in the trade integration of Seychelles into the rules-based multilateral trading system and the global economy," said Seychelles Minister of Finance, Trade and the Blue Economy Jean Paul Adam. Enditem
 
 
Kazakhstan to join WTO in 2015 - Nazarbayev   
27 April 2015
Central Asia News
Kazakhstan will join the World Trade Organization (WTO) in 2015, President of Kazakhstan Nursultan Nazarbayev told a press conference on Monday.

"This year we hope to join the World Trade Organization,” said Nazarbayev.

Earlier, representatives of the economic bloc of the government of Kazakhstan said the country is to join the organization in May-June 2015.

WTO negotiations are at final stage now. The main outcome of 2014 was the completion of bilateral talks on Kazakhstan's accession to the WTO with one of the key negotiators - the European Union. In addition, the agreement on the main issues of the negotiation process with the United States was also reached in 2014.
 
 
Nepal Earthquake's Economic Toll Expected to Be Massive 
By Gabriele Parussini 
27 April 2015
Dow Jones Institutional News
DJDN
 
Foreign aid flowing into Nepal, which was hit by a devastating earthquake over the weekend that killed at least 3,200 people, will be put to work to rebuild one of the world's poorest nations.

The economic toll of the 7.8-magnitude quake, which struck on Saturday and has been followed by myriad aftershocks, is likely to be immense.

The U.S. Geological Survey estimates losses could exceed the landlocked mountain state's $20 billion annual gross domestic product. Rajiv Biswas, the chief economist for the Asia-Pacific region at U.S.-based consultancy IHS, puts the rebuilding cost at $5 billion over the next five years.

The disaster wiped out buildings in the capital, Katmandu, and transportation infrastructure across the country has been laid to waste. There are fears the quake may have wrought damage on hydroelectric power projects in the Himalayas, close to the epicenter.

Power outages hit Katmandu on Monday. Crucial foreign investment, including plans for a $1.6 billion hydroelectric dam in the Himalayas involving Chinese money, could be put on hold, experts said.

Tourism, which accounts for about 8% of the economy and employs more than a million people, or about 7% of the workforce, is set to take a near-term hit as high-end hikers and backpackers cancel vacations.

But the role of foreign aid could have an outsize impact on such a small country, some observers say. Aid pledges started pouring in on Monday, with the Asian Development Bank, a regional multilateral lender, pledging $200 million to fund the first phase of rehabilitation.

It was unclear how much the United Nations will seek in aid during the emergency phase, but donations are likely to total in the hundreds of millions. So far, foreign aid to help rebuild after Typhoon Haiyan in the Philippines in 2013 has reached $844 million, according to the U.N. Such funds could go a long way in Nepal.

"The only advantage they have is that the size of their economy is small relative to donors' capacity," Mr. Biswas said.

The question now is whether Nepal's government is in a position to oversee a complex reconstruction process. The country has been riven for years by political discord, as factions fight over the drawing up of a new constitution, nearly a decade after a peace deal ended a decadeslong Maoist insurgency.

Some economists said they believe reconstruction after natural disasters can usher in a period of better economic growth, as infrastructure is built back better in developing countries. Chinese authorities claimed this outcome after the Sichuan earthquake in 2008.

Others say there is little empirical evidence to support such claims, as any positive impact from aid is negated by destruction of factories, private property and other infrastructure. In Haiti, another small economy which suffered a devastating earthquake five years ago, some $3.5 billion in aid has failed to turn the country around; political violence and disease is still common.

"It's not only money that you need for reconstruction, but also human knowledge and a functioning government," said Ilan Noy, an expert on the economics of disasters at the Victoria University of Wellington in New Zealand. "Nepal belongs to a category of countries where it's unclear whether the ability to execute reconstruction will be sufficient."

Nepal's GDP per capita was only $694 in 2013, making it poorer than Mali and Burkina Faso. The economy, which grew only about 4% last year, much slower than neighboring India's 7% rate, relies on its overseas workers, whose remittances account for about a third of the economy. Unemployment is 40%, with many people eking out a living in agriculture and trading.

It is too early to total the damages from the earthquake, said Hun Kim, head of the South Asian department at the Asian Development Bank. "If this was a flood or a tsunami, it would be over by now. But as long as the aftershocks continue, we can't start the damage assessment," Mr. Kim said. The bank, he added, is relying on other donor agencies like the World Bank and U.N. for information, because the government in Katmandu is unable to provide any.

The International Monetary Fund stands ready to give Nepal balance-of-payment support to underpin the country's economic stability, said Thomas Richardson, the fund's representative in New Delhi. That could be crucial as Nepal runs a large trade deficit and relies on tourism and remittances for foreign exchange. The Nepalese rupee, which is pegged to India's currency, was under pressure even before the earthquake, sparking inflation.

Multinational companies with units in Nepal have broadly halted their operations as they try to account for staff and help out the local relief effort.

Coca-Cola Co., which operates two company-owned bottling plants in Katmandu and Bharatpur, said that while its factories hadn't been affected, it had put its operations on hold and was working to provide water to the worst-hit areas.

Standard Chartered PLC, the only major multinational to run a bank in Nepal, said it is trying to keep part of its business open, to enable locals to withdraw cash and do basic banking.

Politics is likely to continue to hamper the nation's progress. Some observers say Nepal's failure to agree on a new constitution in recent years, due to its long-running political crisis, is likely to complicate post-disaster management.

"The earthquake will bring negotiations to a standstill," said Nihar Nayak, an associate fellow with the Institute for Defence Studies and Analyses in New Delhi. "Reconstruction can only be more difficult with a broken political system."

Shefali Anand and Biman Mukherji contributed to this article.

 
Food embargo Russia's chance as WTO member to free own market for national producers - Putin

ST. PETERSBURG. April 27 (Interfax) - Russia's embargo on imports of selected Western foods is the country's chance to develop its domestic market, Russian President Vladimir Putin said.

"Of course it was clear from the outset that this would result in a certain price spike, but at the same time this is our chance, in the context of our presence in the WTO, to free our domestic market for national producers," Putin said at a meeting of the Legislators' Council in St. Petersburg.

"Of course we need to look very closely at abuses on the market, and I urge you and your colleagues from the administrative bodies to monitor this very closely," he said, addressing the legislators.

Putin said he regretted that many of those operating in this sphere were taking advantage of the situation and raising prices without justification.

"But that, too, will pass as our own production grows. We must not forget that 40 million people, a third of our population, are one way or another linked with agriculture. So in any case we are moving in the right direction," he said.
 
 
Revoking additional imports duty not appropriate now - Ukrainian economy minister
 
KYIV. April 27 (Interfax-Ukraine) - Revoking the additional imports duty of 5-10% is not appropriate under present circumstances, Economic Development and Trade Minister of Ukraine Aivaras Abromavicius said in an interview with Interfax-Ukraine.

"I don't think that it will be canceled right now, as those problems that we tried to settle using the duty, have not yet disappeared in full," he said on the sidelines of the "Ukraine: Escape from Post-Soviet Legacy?" symposium held by VoxUkraine platform in Kyiv on April 24-26.

Abromavicius said that the additional duty was imposed as one of the measures to restrain imports to improve the balance of trade and ease pressure on the national currency.

"Over the past months we [have] seen positive trends, but it is early to relax," he said.

Abromavicius said that at upcoming negotiations with the World Trade Organization (WTO), the consequences of the introduction of the additional imports duty will be discussed and Ukraine will defend its position.

Abromavicius said that the additional imports duty affected some enterprises - they had previously imported spare parts and exported finished products with higher added value, but after the introduction of the duty they transferred production facilities to other countries and Ukrainian exports suffered.

"We will study, hold consultations with the Finance Ministry and the National Bank of Ukraine, and if the course will please us with its stability and predictability, finally we would like to decide to lift [the duty]," he said.

 
Tensions Between Gulf, US Airlines Seen as Overblown -- Market Talk 
27 April 2015
Dow Jones Institutional News
 
 
16:00 EDT - There is so little route overlap between the three big Persian Gulf carriers and the three large US carriers that have lodged a trade complaint against them that "logic will prevail," says Peter Harbison, chief of Centre for Aviation, an Australian think tank, at a conference today near Las Vegas. "I bet within two years, one of the three big US airlines, at least, will be in partnership with a Gulf carrier," he says, because their route maps are highly complementary. The claims brought by American Airlines (AAL), United Continental (UAL) and Delta (DAL) that the rapid growth of their Gulf rivals is made possible by unfair government subsidies "is not leading anywhere," he says. "The Gulf story is a 2015 phenomenon. I don't think it will last much longer." (susan.carey@wsj.com)

 
Indonesia plans to trim CPO export tax rates to offset burden of levies
 
JAKARTA, April 27 (Reuters) - Indonesia, the world's top palm grower, plans to reduce its crude palm oil (CPO) export tax to help offset the cost to companies of a plan to impose separate export levies, a senior Finance Ministry official said on Monday.

Earlier this month, the government said it would issue a regulation requiring exporters to pay $50 on every tonne of CPO and $30 for processed palm oil product exported to fund new biodiesel subsidies. The regulation hinges on President Joko Widodo's signature to become law.

The government now intends to cut the export tax rate, which currently begins at 7.5 percent and can go to a maximum of 22.5 percent, depending on a monthly calculation of palm oil prices.

"The current tariff will be adjusted so that the sum that companies pay wouldn't be too big," Suahasil Nazara, the acting head of fiscal policy office at the finance ministry, told local media in Jakarta. The price threshold for the tax would remain unchanged at $750 a tonne.

No date was given for the reduction in the rate.

"It will stay like this for awhile, and our focus is forming the agency to manage CPO fund first," Finance Minister Bambang Brodjonegoro told Reuters.

The government has kept the palm oil export tax at zero since October, based on the average price from several global commodity markets. CPO shipments for May will remain duty free, its trade ministry said on Monday.

No further details on which companies would be most affected by the palm oil levy or the reasoning behind the plan was given.

However, it would be helpful to plantation firms and overall make Indonesia more competitive against rival exporter Malaysia, while helping draw in more demand from major palm customers China and India.

Neighbouring Malaysia, the world's No. 2 producer, also manages its export tax regime for the crude grade with a monthly tax structure, in which a 4.5 percent levy kicks in once average free-on-board prices cross a threshold of 2,250 ringgit.

The benchmark July contract on the Bursa Malaysia Derivatives exchange closed near a two-week low of 2,109 ringgit ($592) a tonne on Monday, with prices heading for their second straight monthly decline. ($1 = 3.5655 ringgit) (Reporting by Gayatri Suroyo and Adriana Nina Kusuma in Jakarta,; Anuradha Raghu in Kuala Lumpur; Editing by Richard Pullin and Mark Heinrich) 
 
 
Obama says U.S.-Japan getting closer but no deal this week
POLITICO
4/27/15 4:15 PM EDT
 
President Barack Obama said today the United States and Japan were getting closer to a deal on agriculture and automotive market access issues holding up an Asia-Pacific free trade agreement, but he did not expect a deal to be announced while Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe is in town this week.
"Negotiations are tough on both sides because he's got his own politics and interests," Obama said in an interview with the Wall Street Journal. "I don't expect that we will complete all negotiations" while Abe is in Washington, but "I will say that the engagement has brought the parties much closer together."  
Obama also continued to press the case for his trade agenda in the face of stiff opposition from fellow Democrats in Congress. He warned China will write the rules of trade in the region if talks on the proposed Trans-Pacific Partnership fails.
"We will be shut out — American businesses and American agriculture. That will mean a loss of new jobs," he said.
Obama admitted to being annoyed by some of the criticism of himself and the proposed TPP agreement from the left.
"What I take personally is this notion  ... that after all the work I have done and we have done together to make sure middle-class families have greater stability — that to believe some of the rhetoric that has been coming out of the opponents that I'm just trying to destroy the middle class is a little unrealistic," Obama said. "And they know it."
He declined to criticize former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton for not endorsing more authoritatively the agreement as she begins her run for president, even though she was an advocate for the pact during her service in the Obama administration.
"I think she said what she should be saying, which is that she is going to want to see a trade agreement that is strong on labor, strong on the environment, helps U.S. workers, helps the U.S. economy. That's my standard as well, and I'm confident that standard can be met," he said.
— Doug Palmer
END
 
 