HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S. Restates Case for COOL Rules at WTO Appellate Hearing
·         HYPERLINK \l "Japan Tobacco threatens legal action against Ireland over cigarette packaging
·         HYPERLINK \l "Businesses Call On G-20 Leaders To Ratify WTO TFA
·         HYPERLINK \l "Steel import situation in 2015 growing dire: SMA
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S. cracks open door for some Cuban imports
·         HYPERLINK \l "Delta Airlines boss blames Arabian Peninsula 9/11 terrorists for bankruptcy
·         HYPERLINK \l "USTR report touts ‘unprecedented’ labor efforts back
·         HYPERLINK \l "Kenya urges EAC to promote indigenous entrepreneurship
·         HYPERLINK \l "India, Myanmar to remove bottlenecks to boost trade
·         HYPERLINK \l "Remittances to developing nations to hit $500 billion in 2015 - U.N. official
·         HYPERLINK \l "India’s first textile university to come up in Diamond City
·         HYPERLINK \l "EU patience frays as Greek PM refuses "blackmail"
 
 
U.S. Restates Case for COOL Rules at WTO Appellate Hearing
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, February 18, 2015
 
Feb. 17 — The U.S., during two lengthy Appellate Body hearings Feb. 16 and 17, sought to overturn a 2014 World Trade Organization decision that its Country of Origin Labeling (COOL) requirements violated international standards.
 
U.S. trade officials said its amended COOL regulations—which require meat producers to specify on retail packaging where each animal was born, raised and slaughtered—do not unfairly discriminate against or burden other export countries and serve a legitimate purpose by helping consumers understand where their meat comes from.
 
Mexico and Canada said the U.S. COOL rules have harmed their pork and beef industries by imposing undue burdens and costs exceeding $1 billion per year.
 
“COOL does not provide any information useful for health, safety, quality or any other benefits,” Mexico told the Appellate Body. Canada claimed the regulations amounted to a “de facto closing of the border to foreign origin livestock.”
 
Retaliatory Tariffs Loom
 
The U.S. has lost one WTO appeal of its COOL rules and was forced to amend the regulations in 2013. Last year, a WTO Dispute Settlement Body (DSB) panel determined the amended rules imposed a greater “detrimental impact” on competition for Mexican and Canadian livestock than the original rules.
 
The U.S. hopes to prevent Mexico and Canada from seeking billions of dollars in retaliatory trade measures if the WTO again finds the U.S. rules to be in non-compliance with international standards.
 
Canadian officials have said they will target nearly 40 U.S. products—such as beef, pork, poultry, cherries, chocolate and frozen orange juice—if the U.S. fails to comply with the decision.
 
Canada's Minister of Agriculture and Agri-Food, Gerry Ritz, recently said Canada is a primary export market for 35 U.S. states, which have reported $2 billion in beef and pork sales to Canada (25 WTO, 2/6/15). Ritz said any retaliatory tariffs on U.S. products would have a big impact on states like California, with $600 million in trade, and Texas, with $300 million in trade.
 
TBT Article 2.1
 
The U.S. argued that its revised labeling rules are consistent with Article 2.1 of the WTO's Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT) Agreement because they provide a “legitimate, nondiscriminatory basis” for its importing partners to keep records of where livestock is born, raised and slaughtered.
 
WTO compliance panels previously ruled that the amended COOL rules entailed an “increased record keeping burden,” had “a potential for label inaccuracy” and continued to “exempt a large proportion of muscle cuts.” The U.S. contested each point and said the panels failed to conduct the proper analysis, relied on “fictional hypotheticals,” and contradicted their own findings.
 
Canada said the WTO compliance panels conducted a “thorough analysis” in their findings that the COOL measures may lead to label inaccuracies and record keeping burdens. Canada also noted, with respect to label inaccuracies, that 84 percent of the beef and pork consumed in the U.S. are not subject to point of production labeling.
 
The U.S. has “failed to present any ‘cogent reasons' that warrant a departure from the analysis that the Appellate Body applied in the original proceedings,” Canada said.
 
Since the U.S. livestock industry is subject to less restrictive standards than other importers, the “primary beneficiaries of the measures are not U.S. consumers but, rather, U.S. cattle producers,” Mexican trade officials said at the hearing.
 
TBT Article 2.2
 
Canada and Mexico contested the earlier panels' decision that they had failed to make a prima facie case that the amended rules were more trade-restrictive than necessary under the Article 2.2 of the TBT Agreement.
 
Mexico called the rules “a classic example of a discriminatory measure and an unnecessary obstacle to international trade.”
 
Canada said the measures provided a “very heavy evidentiary burden” on its imports. “Canada considers that Article 2.2 prohibits members from applying technical regulations having a level of trade restrictiveness that is out of all proportion to the risks non-fulfillment would create.”
 
The U.S. urged the Appellate Panel to reverse the earlier panels' interpretation of the phrase “taking account of the risks non-fulfillment would create” with respect to being less trade-restrictive than necessary to fulfill a legitimate objective.
 
Canada objected to the U.S. request, saying its interpretation “finds no support in the text, context, object and purpose of the TBT Agreement, or previous findings of the Appellate Body.”
 
GATT Article III:4
 
The U.S. argued that the earlier panels erred in finding that the amended COOL measure was inconsistent with Article III:4 of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) 1994 because their analysis was “contrary to customary rules of interpretation of public international law.”
 
The U.S. said the panels failed to accurately interpret Article IX of the GATT 1994, which outlines general rules regarding marks of origin, in their determination regarding unreasonable increases to the cost of imported products.
 
The U.S. said the panels further erred in ignoring Article XX of the GATT 1994, which outlines general exceptions to the agreement, in its determination that the amended COOL measures violated Article III:4.
 
Canada said GATT Article IX was not relevant to the proceedings and warned the Appellate Body not to entertain the U.S.’s “ambiguous defensive claim under GATT Article XX,” which Canada said is unrelated to the previous panel reports.
 
“Since the United States did not invoke, let alone establish, a defense under Article XX of the GATT 1994, the panel correctly found that the measure violates Article III:4,” Mexico said.
 
Report Timeline Pending
 
The Appellate Body previously determined it would not be able to circulate its reports in the appeal within a 90-day timeframe and it remains unclear when the final reports will be issued.
 
Although the U.S. notified the DSB on Nov. 28 that it would appeal the earlier panel's decision, participants requested an extension of the DSB requirement to issue an appellate report within 90 days of the initial notification.
 
Participants cited “serious resource constraints due to concurrent work on other pending proceedings, as well as the constraints imposed by the contemporaneous holiday period, the multiple complex issues at stake in these disputes, and the present workload of the Appellate Body” in their request to extend the timeline.
 
The Appellate Body said it would notify participants of the circulation date of its reports “shortly after” the oral hearing. The case is being reviewed by a three-member appellate panel that includes: Peter Van den Bossche of Belgium, Ricardo Ramirez-Hernandez of Mexico, and Seung Wha Chang of Korea.
 
 
Japan Tobacco threatens legal action against Ireland over cigarette packaging
By Conor Humphries
DUBLIN Tue Feb 17, 2015 9:48am EST
 
(Reuters) — Ireland is to proceed with plans for a law requiring tobacco companies to sell cigarettes in plain packets, legislation that has prompted a threat of legal action from Japan Tobacco International.
Ireland said in 2013 it wanted to become the first country in the European Union to ban branding on cigarette packages. Australia introduced a ban a few years ago as a way to reduce smoking and is facing challenges at the World Trade Organisation over complaints the laws create illegal obstacles to commerce.
Japan Tobacco, whose cigarette brands include Camel and Winston, has now threatened legal action against Ireland’s plans.
“We have informed the government that we stand ready to file legal proceedings should it continue pushing for a ‘cut and paste’ policy that has failed in Australia,” Japan Tobacco International Ireland general manager Igor Dzaja said in an emailed statement.
“Plain packaging puts politics before evidence,” he said.
The company said the move would cast doubt on Ireland’s reputation for protecting intellectual property rights and would undermine its ability to attract foreign direct investment.
The minister who designed the legislation, James Reilly, said the government would proceed. He said tobacco branding was not something that anyone who had any regard for public health could possibly fail to address.
“The government have been advised by the Attorney General that there is no reason to delay the bill,” Reilly, the minister for children and former minister for health said in an interview with RTE radio. He said the legislation would be ready within weeks.
The Irish parliament’s health committee is due to debate the legislation on Tuesday.
The British government has said it plans to introduce a similar law before May.
 
 
Businesses Call On G-20 Leaders To Ratify WTO TFA
by Ulrika Lomas, Tax-News.com, Brussels
17 February 2015
Business leaders have called on the Group of Twenty (G-20) nations to ratify and quickly implement the World Trade Organization's Trade Facilitation Agreement. 
During a meeting in Istanbul on February 9, 2015, the Business-20 (B-20) trade task force, comprising 68 company executives from 25 countries, urged the G-20 leaders to implement all elements of the WTO ministerial decisions adopted at the Bali Ministerial Conference on December 7, 2013.
"The world's leading corporations are deeply invested in helping to shape a trade agenda that will deliver economic growth and millions of new jobs," said Güler Guler Sabanci, Chairman of Turkey's Sabanci Holdings, who co-chaired the task force meeting with International Chamber of Commerce Chairman Harold McGraw. "Trade is key to meeting the G-20's growth targets over the next five years, and the G-20 plays a critical role in driving the negotiations forward," she said.
"G20 Leaders in Brisbane pledged to implement all elements of the Bali package and to swiftly define a WTO work program on the remaining issues of the Doha Development Agenda, [towards a global free trade agreement]," said McGraw. "The time is now for government leaders to deliver progress on the trade agenda, and business stands ready to ensure that these pledges are fulfilled," he said.
The TFA will create binding commitments across all WTO members to expedite the movement, release, and clearance of goods, improve cooperation among WTO members in customs matters, and help developing countries fully implement the Agreement's terms. It is estimated that the agreement can cut trade costs by almost 14.5 percent for low-income countries, and by 10 percent for high-income countries, forming part of international efforts to cut tax barriers to trade on a global basis under the Doha Round.
 
 
Steel import situation in 2015 growing dire: SMA 
Nat Rudarakanchana 
18 February 2015
American Metal Market
 
With domestic demand falling, U.S. steel imports have reached alarming heights in early 2015, and steelmakers are weighing several trade remedy measures to protect their markets, according to the Steel Manufacturers Association (SMA).

NEW YORK — With domestic demand falling, U.S. steel imports have reached alarming heights in early 2015, and steelmakers are weighing several trade remedy measures to protect their markets, according to the Steel Manufacturers Association (SMA).

"We are approaching a crisis situation," SMA president Philip K. Bell told AMM Feb. 9. "You have less demand, but more imports. . . . This is particularly the case for the OCTG (oil country tubular goods) market, with oil prices half of what they were last year and demand significantly down."

Bell said that current market conditions "are some of the worst we've seen in 15 years."

Steel imports in 2014 touched historic levels in terms of market penetration (amm.com, Jan. 20 [http://www.amm.com/Article/3419103/Import-penetration-at-record-level-AISI.html]) and in volumes handled at major steel ports such as Houston (amm.com, Jan. 29 [http://www.amm.com/Article/3422668/Houston-ports-steel-volume-sets-record.html]).

U.S. imports of OCTG last month were the highest in five years despite weak domestic demand, according to Bell. He said that the surge could have been driven by a World Trade Organization (WTO) appeal by South Korean exporters in December seeking to overturn anti-dumping duties imposed in July (amm.com, Dec. 22 [http://www.amm.com/Article/3412674/S-Korea-seeks-WTO-talks-on-OCTG-duties.html]).

U.S. imports of OCTG were slated to total 478,905 tonnes in January, including 215,342 tonnes from Korea, according to license data updated Feb. 10 by the Commerce Department's Enforcement and Compliance division. Monthly OCTG imports from Korea—the largest OCTG exporter to the United States—never exceeded 200,000 tonnes in 2014, averaging 120,028 tonnes per month, data show. The January U.S. license data is preliminary, with final Census Bureau import data due in coming weeks.

A "tsunami of imports" coupled with weaker demand requires a comprehensive and coordinated response from U.S. steel producers, labor groups and the federal government, Bell said.

The U.S. steel industry is mulling a number of trade cases on a broad range of flat and long products, including rebar, wire rod, beams, merchant bar and cold-rolled sheet, according to a Jan. 29 presentation to SMA board members by Alan H. Price, a partner at Washington-based law firm Wiley Rein LLP.

So-called Section 201 safeguard cases also are an option for U.S. steelmakers, according to the presentation, although such safeguards have not been seen in the U.S. steel sector for more than a decade.

However, Section 201 cases typically take two to three years to litigate and carry a higher burden of proof for showing injury to the domestic industry. Relief for domestic steelmakers also lasts only for two to three years, even though a Section 201 case is a "potential option" to address some imports of flat-rolled steel, wire rod and rebar, according to the presentation.

China's WTO status as a non-market economy also could expire in 2016, which is another concern on the horizon for the SMA, which represents electric-arc furnace (EF) steelmakers. China's non-market economy status in trade disputes allows the United States and other countries to pursue tougher trade protection, such as significantly higher anti-dumping and countervailing margins.

"If it (China) graduates to a market economy status in 2016, a lot of those (trade) remedies go away, and it makes a bad situation even worse," Bell said.

 
U.S. cracks open door for some Cuban imports
By Doug Palmer | 2/13/15 6:03 PM EST
POLITICO
 
The State Department opened the door for Cuba’s small private-sector business community to export goods and services to the United States but excluded rum, cigars, food, machinery and a broad swath of other products from the historic change.
“This is more good news on Cuba policy,” said Jake Colvin, vice president for global trade issues at the National Foreign Trade Council, a U.S. business group that has pushed for normalized relations with the communist-run island. “In theory, Cubans can now export everything from artwork to graphic design services.”
The list of approved imports excludes many broad categories, such as food and agricultural products, alcohol, tobacco, minerals, vehicles and other modes of transportation, arms and ammunition, and some chemicals and textiles. But that still leaves many other items that could be exported to the United States, including shoes, hats, umbrellas, carpets, some clothing items, perfume, soap, candles, jewelry, musical instruments, toys, artwork and furniture.
The action stems from President Barack Obama’s decision in December to reestablish diplomatic relations with Cuba and ease some elements of the five-decade-old economic embargo. Last month, the U.S. Treasury and Commerce Departments published new rules making it easier to travel to the island and for U.S. companies to export some goods.
The rules announced on Friday deal with the other side of the equation: allowing Cuban entrepreneurs operating outside the control of the government to sell their goods to customers in the United States.
“I think it’s historic because its creating the architecture by which Americans can now look at Cuba and see what the business opportunities are,” said Augusto Maxwell, a lawyer who heads Akerman LLP’s Cuba practice in Miami. “American capitalists can now go there and decide whether it makes economic sense to import things.”
In its announcement, the State Department indicated the list of approved goods could grow over time. Also, there are no restrictions on imports of services, creating a potential new business opportunity for Cuba’s well-educated population, which includes many underemployed doctors, architects and engineers.
“This points to a possibility where Americans can tap into Cuba’s human capital on the service side,” Maxwell said. “So it will be interesting to see what the Cuban government allows.”
The U.S. business community is closely watching how Cuban President Raúl Castro and his brother Fidel respond.
“It’s an open question as to how many Cubans will be able to access the U.S. marketplace, and that depends in part on decision making in Cuba,” Colvin said.
Cuban entrepreneurs or businesses that want to export to the United States must provide their customers some documentary evidence that they are not controlled or owned by the Cuban government, such as a copy of license to be self-employed or the equivalent for a company.
A number of lawmakers have followed up on Obama’s initial move in December by offering legislation to completely lift the longtime economic embargo. But that still faces stiff opposition from Cuban-American members of Congress.
 
 
Delta Airlines boss blames Arabian Peninsula 9/11 terrorists for bankruptcy 
Courtney Trenwith 
17 February 2015
ArabianBusiness.com
 
A major American airline CEO embroiled in a heated dispute against three Gulf airlines has blamed 9/11 terrorists from the Arabian Peninsula” for his company’s bankruptcy bailout in 2005.Delta Airlines’ Richard Anderson is one of three US carriers that claim they have evidence Dubai's UAE-based Emirates Airline and Etihad Airways and Qatar Airways have received a total of more than $40 billion in government subsidies that breach the Gulf states’ open skies agreements with the US.
Denying the cash hand outs, Emirates CEO Tim Clark said Delta and United Airlines’ had benefited from US bankruptcy laws that allowed them to forgo debt and cut operating costs to continue flying in what amounted to arguably the biggest subsidy of all”.
Speaking on CNN on Monday, Anderson inferred the Gulf states were responsible for those bankruptcies.
It’s a great irony to have the UAE from the Arabian Peninsula talk about that given the fact that our industry was really shocked by the terrorism of 9/11, which came from terrorists from the Arabian Peninsula, which caused us to go through a massive restructuring,” he said.
Numerous airlines globally were forced to undertake unprecedented restructuring programs in the mid-2000s, including retrenching thousands of staff and cutting services when flight bookings plummeted following the New York City attacks in 2001.Two of the 19 9/11 hijackers were from the UAE, while 15 were from Saudi Arabia and the others were from Egypt and Lebanon.
Anderson said although the restructured airlines had been allowed to forgo billions of dollars in debt, it was categorically false” that they had received bailouts.And in the US our restructuring process is transparent and there is no government subsidy, and in fact there were billions of dollars of equity and unsecured debt that were wiped out through that process,” he said.Anderson claimed Emirates, Etihad and Qatar Airways were not airlines, they are governments”.
Delta, United and American Airlines have collaborated to call on the US government to review the open skies agreement with the Gulf airlines.[We want] our government to go in and request negotiations and negotiate a way to level the playing field to set off against $40 billion in subsides, most of which is just direct subsidies,” Anderson said.
We have spent two years analysing their financials and we have found evidence of their actual financial statements from other places in the world that provide documented evidence that can’t be refuted of tens of billions of dollars of direct government subsidies.
The Middle East carriers, the UAE and Qatar cannot deny huge government subsidies. They’re a violation of the WTO [World Trade Organization] definition of subsidy and they’re a violation of US open skies agreements.
So let’s not be detracted by the huffing arguments that the UAE make.”In a rare public rebuke of criticism of Emirates, Clark said in a statement last week that the complaining airlines’ call for political protection makes absolutely no sense” and made a mockery of the country’s liberalist stance.
As far as the airline industry is concerned, aero-political protection for airlines is arguably the biggest subsidy of all,” Clark said in a statement sent to Arabian Business.
Therefore, it would be ironic, and a shame, if the US, who have been the forerunners of liberalisation and deregulation, would now contemplate a U-turn on its successful international aviation policies for the benefit of a narrow few, based on sweeping and unfounded subsidy allegations.
”The Gulf carriers have rapidly expanded globally but service a maximum of nine US cities and Clark said there was virtually no” overlap with flights offered by the complaining US airlines.Those services also allowed passengers one-stop connectivity to 60 other cities in the Middle East, Africa and Asia Pacific - destinations he said were not currently served by American carriers, except perhaps via their alliance partners where routings are often relatively convoluted or inconvenient”, Clark said
.Meanwhile the Gulf carriers provided billions of dollars annually to the US economy by providing consumer and business connections.
 
 
USTR report touts ‘unprecedented’ labor efforts back
By Matthew Korade | 2/13/15 5:45 PM EST
POLITICO
 
The Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, in a new report, is touting its efforts to create the strongest labor protections in history, affecting as many as 650 million workers around the globe in a pair of Asia-Pacific and European Union trade deals it’s negotiating.
But labor groups aren’t expressing much confidence in the claim.
The USTR’s pushing for commitments in the 12-country Trans-Pacific Partnership that would discourage forced labor, adopt laws on acceptable working conditions, including minimum wages, maximum hours and occupational health and safety, and not weaken labor protections in export processing zones, the report says.
In the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, the agency is seeking to maintain each side’s high labor standards while strengthening their ability to address labor concerns in developing countries with which they trade, says the report, which highlights the agency’s labor efforts in Guatemala, Bahrain, Colombia, Jordan, Myanmar, Bangladesh, Swaziland and Haiti.
In a joint blog post, Labor Secretary Tom Perez and U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman called the combined effort “unprecedented.”
“The benefits of trade for the global economy are vast, but it takes strong leadership and sustained effort to ensure that these benefits are broadly shared and support a growing and vibrant middle class around the world and here at home,” they said.
“As a starting point, these agreements [TPP and TTIP] must include the groundbreaking provisions from the ‘May 10, 2007’ bipartisan Congressional-Executive Agreement, including that countries ‘adopt and maintain’ in their laws and practices the fundamental labor rights as stated in the ILO Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work,” the blog added.
Those standards require the countries to uphold the right to organize, bargain collectively and be free from forced labor, child labor and discrimination in employment, or face possible litigation under the dispute settlement processes outlined in the trade agreements.
Labor groups have been highly critical of past trade deals, such as the North American Free Trade Agreement, for not including labor provisions within the pacts or, as in the case of the free trade deal with Jordan, not making them strong and enforceable.
“In short, we have a fundamental difference of opinion with the administration on the effectiveness of the U.S. labor provisions in trade agreements,” said Celeste Drake, a trade and globalization policy specialist at AFL-CIO. “Yes, they have gotten better over time, but from such a low starting point that ‘better’ is hardly a useful measure."
Drake pointed to U.S. litigation against Guatemala and steps to accelerate labor protections in Colombia as just two examples of Washington’s foot-dragging and ineffectual efforts to ensure protections in countries where reforms are needed.
While the Guatemala case, which the labor group petitioned for, was indeed the first time the United States pursued a labor dispute through a trade agreement, as the USTR touted, the more than six-year wait for that to happen was far too long, Drake said.
“During that time, even more workers were fired, threatened, and subject to violence — nothing has meaningfully improved for workers there in the six-plus years since the case was filed,” Drake said in an email. “[S]o it is hard to argue that ‘the system is working’ if by ‘working’ one means that workers have a ‘decent living, safe and healthy workplaces where workers’ rights are respected, and a fair share in growing prosperity."
Similarly, an action plan that the U.S. and Colombia agreed to in April 2011 to force the South American country’s compliance with labor standards under their bilateral trade deal also has failed, Drake said.
Workers there “tell us that in many sectors labor repression has actually increased since the ‘Action Plan’ went into effect — and I would recommend reviewing the labor action plan, which in fact contained no requirements that Colombia establish a meaningful record of enforcement of the plan prior to the ratification or implementation of this agreement,” she said.
“U.S. workers and our counterparts in trading partner nations are living under a regime of stagnating wages, growing inequality, and diminishing rights driven by competition between firms seeking to maximize profits at our expense instead of in cooperation with workers,” Drake said. “There is a better way in which we can all prosper together. But the USTR has not yet adopted that model.”
USTR acknowledged in its report that Guatemala must do more to ensure labor protections, including enacting legislation to expedite the sanctioning of employers that violate labor laws and issuing and publicizing standardized time frames for labor inspections.
But the agency touted “important steps” that the country has taken to implement a labor enforcement plan, including the hiring of 100 new inspectors, the issuance of legal instruments to ensure police assistance for those inspectors on worksites, and the review of labor courts in an effort to hold judges who fail to take measures to enforce court orders accountable.
Colombia, too, has taken several enforcement steps, including increasing the budget of its National Protection Unit — which protects citizens against targeted violence — by more than 30 percent and that of its Independent Prosecutor General’s Office, USTR said. It has also hired more labor inspectors and enacted legislation to strengthen its criminal code, among other things.
The USTR is currently seeking public comment on the Guatemala labor dispute.
 
 
Kenya urges EAC to promote indigenous entrepreneurship 
Ding Xiaoxi 
 
NAIROBI, Feb. 17 (Xinhua) -- Kenyan President Uhuru Kenyatta on Tuesday called on East Africa Community (EAC) to promote

indigenous entrepreneurships in a bid to reduce dumping of cheap products in the East Africa region.

Speaking in Nairobi during a meeting with officials of the East Africa Confederation of Informal Sector Organisation (EA-CISO) in Nairobi, Kenyatta said local products will convert the EAC region from a consumer of imports to producer of locally available products.

The president said it is not acceptable for the region to continue exporting raw materials only to import the same as finished products at higher prices.

"The government recognized the role of the informal sector in youth employment and is supporting artisans through soft loans to make quality products that meet global standards to remain competitive in the market," Kenyatta said in a statement issued after the meeting.

CISO is the apex EA regional body representing the informal economic sector and draws representation from Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, Burundi, Rwanda and Uganda.

"The programmes in place include 30 percent of all government tenders to empower youth, women and the disabled to manufacture quality products and create employment," he added.

He said his government has also put in place programmes to empower youth and other vulnerable groups to raise their standards of living.

The Kenyan leader lauded the EA-CISO for bringing together artisans and other micro-small and medium enterprises operators, saying the move promoted EA integration.

He observed that the informal sector is a source of livelihood to a large population and utilizes raw materials available in the region, assuring CISO of his support in the formulation of a standard training and certification for artisans at the regional level which, he said, would boost the recognition of their products in the market.

CISO representatives, in a memorandum, recommended the establishment of one-stop shops where residents in member countries can showcase and sell their products.

"Ordinary citizens are already trading in one-stop shops especially at Malaba, Namanga among other border points and ours is to just formalize," he said.

CISO representatives also recommended establishment of MSEs in all EAC member states, similar to the MSE Authority of Kenya which is already in place, to provide trade linkages.

They also rooted for introduction of a policy to promote the informal sector by ensuring that each partner state promotes "Buy East Africa" to "Build East Africa" by procuring 40 percent of goods and service from the MSEs.
 
 
India, Myanmar to remove bottlenecks to boost trade 
 
New Delhi, Feb 17 (PTI) India and Myanmar today agreed to enhance trade and investment between the countries by removing bottlenecks such as lack of good connectivity and banking arrangements.

The issues came up for discussion during the 5th India-Myanmar Joint Trade Committee (JTC) meeting, which was held in Nay Pyi Taw today.

The meeting was co-Chaired by Commerce and Industry Minister Nirmala Sitharaman and Myanmar's Commerce Minister U Win Myint.

"Both sides agreed to work together to remove the bottlenecks hampering the bilateral trade and investment such as lack of good connectivity, lack of banking arrangement both for regular and border trade," an official statement said.

It said that India has offered to support Myanmar to develop infrastructure at the border trade points, upgrade trade training institutes in Yangon and also provide training to Myanmar officials on WTO and international trade related issues.

Besides, New Delhi would support in establishing direct shipping links between the countries to promote bilateral trade, it added.

The two ministers also reiterated their commitment to increase cooperation in the field of promoting two-ways investment, infrastructure development particularly to promote border trade, connectivity, agriculture, energy, skill and entrepreneurial development, pharmaceutical and people-to-people contacts.

Both sides agreed to hold the next Joint Trade and Investment Forum meeting in Chennai during which Myanmar would organize a roadshow showcasing investment opportunities in Myanmar especially in the special economic zones.

The two ministers also agreed to jointly inaugurate the land custom station in Zawkhatar, Mizoram shortly at a mutually convenient date.

The bilateral trade stood at USD 2.18 billion in 2013-14. PTI RR KSR

 
Remittances to developing nations to hit $500 billion in 2015 - U.N. official 
By Chris Arsenault 
 
ROME, Feb 17 (Thomson Reuters Foundation) - An estimated 230 million migrants will send $500 billion in remittances to developing countries in 2015, a flow of capital expected to do more to reduce poverty than all development aid combined, a senior official of the U.N. agricultural bank said.

Ten percent of the world's people are directly affected by this money, Pedro De Vasconcelos, programme coordinator for remittances with the International Fund for Agricultural Development, told a conference on Tuesday.

"Migrants are investing back into poor regions," Vasconcelos said, adding that about $200 billion is expected to go directly to rural areas.

This money could play a key role in boosting food production and eliminating the hunger faced by 805 million people by allowing families to invest in land, seeds, livestock and equipment.

The United Nations estimates that is the number of people - one ninth of the global population - who have too little to eat.

An estimated 80 percent of the rural people receiving remittances do not have access to traditional banking services, Vasconcelos said.

Harnessing mobile technology and other new approaches to banking could help link rural residents to financial systems when they collect their remittances, giving them better access to savings, insurance and other financial products which could help them improve farm productivity, he said.

The projection of $500 billion in remittances going to poor countries in 2015 is a significant jump from the $404 billion in such remittances the World Bank recorded in 2013.

Remittances are worth four times as much as all overseas development aid provided by wealthy countries, Vasconcelos said.

(Reporting By Chris Arsenault; Editing by Tim Pearce) 
 
 
India’s first textile university to come up in Diamond City 
Himansshu Bhatt 
18 February 2015
The Times of India
 
SURAT: After laying the foundation stone for Surat Diamond Bourse (SDB) at Khajod, now wheels are set in motion to set up country’s first textile university at the upcoming Dream city here.

Chief minister Anandiben Patel made an announcement in this regard during her address at the foundation stone laying ceremony of SDB on Sunday.

The university is likely to come up on 100 acres of land and will act as catalyst for growth of the textile industry in the city. India’s nearest competitors Pakistan has a textile university since 1959 while Bangladesh got one in 2010. According to sources, India’s share in the global textile market is about 3 per cent.

Sources said that a bill in this regard will be passed in the state assembly and after the formal procedure is complete the project would be announced by the state government.

“If we want to increase our market share rapidly and compete with others, we need a university that will establish multi-disciplinary institutional mechanism for formulation of policy measures and specific action plans, including those relating to World Trade Organization (WTO),” said a top official from Surat collector’s office.

“We need such institution to review and revitalize the working of Textile Research Associations (TRAs),” he added.

“If such a university comes up in Surat, it will help the city’s textile industry to transform itself,” said Kamal Tulsiyan, president, Pandesara Industrial Association and a dying mill owner.

The concept note says today India lacks in technology. For example, in weaving, India has only 2 per cent shuttle-less looms as against the world average of 16 per cent. Our competitors China, Pakistan and Indonesia have 15 per cent, 9 per cent and 9 per cent respectively of shuttle-less looms.

India’s nearest competitor Pakistan has had a textile university since 1959, while Bangladesh got one in 2010.
 
 
EU patience frays as Greek PM refuses "blackmail" 
 
* EU ministers insist Greek request bailout extension
* Greek PM rejects "blackmail", plans to reverse reforms
* Markets largely hold nerve, betting on 11th-hour compromise
* Germany's Schaeuble says up to Greece to act fast

By Renee Maltezou and Karolina Tagaris

BRUSSELS/ATHENS, Feb 17 (Reuters) - A war of words between Greece and EU paymaster Germany escalated on Tuesday with Athens' new leftist prime minister rejecting what he called "blackmail" to extend an international bailout and vowing to rush through laws to reverse labour reforms.

A source close to the government said Greece intends to ask on Wednesday for an extension for up to six months of a loan agreement with the euro zone, on conditions to be negotiated. The source drew a distinction between a loan agreement and the full bailout programme which the government insists is dead.

However hardline German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schaeuble dismissed the Greek gambit, telling broadcaster ZDF: "It's not about extending a credit programme but about whether this bailout programme will be fulfilled, yes or no."

Financial markets held their nerve after the latest talks among euro zone finance ministers broke down late on Monday and EU partners gave Greece until the end of the week to request an extension or lose financial assistance.

Many investors believe that whatever the rhetoric, both sides will find a face-saving formula before Athens' credit lines expire in 10 days. If they fail, Greece could rapidly run out of cash and need its own currency.

Greek banking sources said outflows of deposits increased on Tuesday after the failure of Monday's talks, but were not as severe as on some days last month around the election of a radical anti-austerity government.

The European Central Bank will review emergency funding for Greek banks on Wednesday but should not cut the lifeline this week, a source familiar with the situation said. Both sides continue to insist Greece will remain in the euro.

Greek Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras told lawmakers in his Syriza party that the government - elected to scrap the bailout, repeal hated austerity measures and end cooperation with the "troika" of EU, ECB and IMF lenders - would not compromise.

Greece would no longer be treated like a colony of a pariah in Europe, Tsipras said. He accused Schaeuble of losing his cool and making degrading comments about Greece and said "certain circles" in the euro zone were out to undermine his government.

Schaeuble, 72, hammered home a take-it-or-leave-it message, wondering sarcastically whether Tsipras and his "famous economist" of a finance minister knew what they wanted or were making the right choices for the Greek people.

"The question still remains if Greece wants a programme at all or not," he told reporters in Brussels after another day of meetings in Brussels. "On Feb. 28, at midnight, it's over."

Seasoned Eurocrats said Tsipras and his team seemed unprepared, unrealistic and oblivious to the dangers they are courting by refusing to roll over a 240-billion-euro credit deal and demanding easier terms.

Tsipras, 40, said he was in no rush and would not give in to "blackmail" from technocrats - a new hint that he hoped hitherto unresponsive EU leaders would step in and clinch a political agreement with him, which they declined to do last week.

Two of his EU peers who may be trying to broker a compromise - Cypriot President Nicos Anastasiades and Italian Prime Minister Matteo Renzi - telephoned the Greek leader on Tuesday, their offices said without giving details.

EU officials were unsure whether his fierce rhetoric was aimed at bolstering domestic support to avert a backlash against eventual compromise, or signalled he was retreating from a deal.

GLIMMERS OF COMPROMISE

Greek Finance Minister Yanis Varoufakis - an academic economist - dismissed suggestions his only option was to ask for the bailout to be extended. He said he had been ready to sign a text floated by EU Economics Commissioner Pierre Moscovici that Greek officials said called for the "loan agreement" to be extended as part of a "transition" to a new deal.

The Greek plan to request an extended "loan agreement" may be an attempt to revive the Moscovici formula shunned by euro zone ministers.

French Finance Minister Michel Sapin suggested Greece could win leeway to run a smaller budget surplus of 1.5 percent of GDP and said clinching a deal was largely a matter of finding the right words. It was not clear whether Sapin's compromise ideas had any backing from Germany or other euro zone hardliners.

Tsipras raised the stakes by vowing to legislate fast to scrap labour market deregulation brought in by his conservative predecessor to meet international creditors' demands for less protection for workers' rights.

Jeroen Dijsselbloem, the Dutch finance minister who chairs the Eurogroup of 19 countries using the common currency, stuck to his guns, saying Athens must seek an extension: "It's really up to the Greeks. We cannot make them or ask them. We stand ready to work with them, also (over) the next couple of days."

Schaeuble and others emphasised the unanimity Greek faced across the table, with some ministers from eastern Europe noting that a minimum wage Tsipras plans to raise is as high as average salaries in some countries where taxpayers funded the bailout.

"TROUBLESOME"

Some other ministers said the new Greek government did not seem to grasp the gravity of the situation or put forward coherent proposals in writing.

"It is troublesome that Greece has twice explained its goals orally, but no written presentation has been given yet," said Finnish Prime Minister Antti Rinne, one of the euro zone hawks.

Time is running short and investors marked down Greek stocks and bonds after Monday's debacle, some saying the risk of Greece exiting the euro had risen.

Three-year government bond yields rose more than a point to 19 percent, highlighting how far Athens remains unable to fund itself at manageable interest rates on the markets.

Dijsselbloem has said Friday is a deadline for a deal that would allow time for some national parliaments to ratify it.

A failure of the debt talks could lead to the imposition of capital controls, limiting money withdrawals and transfers, as happened in Cyprus in 2013.

Investment bank Barclays said the breakdown of talks had raised the risk that Greece would leave the euro zone and raised the prospect that Tsipras would have to call a referendum on whether to accept a deal with strings or ditch the euro.

Chris Scicluna of Daiwa Capital Markets said the failure raised the risk of a "disorderly conclusion". But he added: "All is not lost and we see no need for panic just yet." (Additional reporting by Adrian Croft, Robert-Jan Bartunek, Robin Emmott, Francesco Guarascio, Jan Strupczewski, Tom Koerkemeier, Alastair MacDonald and Barbara Lewis in Brussels and Jeremy Gaunt, Angeliki Koutantou and Deepa Babington in Athens; Writing by Alastair Macdonald and Paul Taylor; Editing by Giles Elgood and Paul Taylor) 
END
 
 


  ________________________________  
Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.