WTO negotiators close in on deal to cut farm subsidies
Froman urges WTO to find way past 'deadlock'
India Slams Two WTO Drafts Favouring Developed Nations
Russia backs countries calling for update of WTO agenda - minister
Afghanistan's WTO membership approved after 11 years of talks
Iran, biggest economy outside WTO, says it's ready to join
Australia wins court challenge to tobacco plain packaging
Kyiv to continue litigation with Russia regarding railway equipment under WTO
China Bid for EU Label as Market Economy Not a Sure Thing, European Diplomats Say
 
WTO negotiators close in on deal to cut farm subsidies
17 December 2015
dpa International Service in English
Nairobi (dpa) - Negotiators presented a draft deal on phasing out subsidies for farming products Thursday at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) talks, but they did not come closer on bridging fundamental gaps between rich and poor economies.
The deal would oblige industrialized countries to scrap agricultural subsidies that distort markets by 2020. Developing countries would have time until 2023.
According to the proposal that has yet to be approved by trade ministers from the 164 HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO member countries, India would be allowed to continue buying food stocks at low prices.
This was the only way to secure food for millions of poor people, Indian Agricultural Minister Nirmala Sitharaman said in Nairobi.
However, the compromise draft only contained some of the protection mechanisms and exemptions that developing countries had sought.
The West had done too little to accommodate poorer countries while insisting that these markets be opened to foreign imports, international aid groups criticized.
"Nairobi proves once again that food security in poor countries is treated secondary to commercial interests," said Francisco Mari, an agricultural expert with the German protestant development agency Bread for the World.
Despite the farming compromise and Wednesday's agreement on reducing IT product tariffs, negotiators from rich countries and the group of emerging and developing economies were still struggling over Western plans to end the blocked Doha round of global trade liberalization and development talks.
dpa Deutsche Presse-Agentur GmbH
Froman urges WTO to find way past 'deadlock'
By Doug Palmer and Victoria Guida 
Politico
NAIROBI, Kenya - U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman on Thursday warned of failure this week in World Trade Organization talks and urged countries to broaden the group's negotiating agenda to new areas.
"Let's work together, starting here in Nairobi, to move beyond the cynical repetition of positions designed to produce deadlock and instead have an honest, forthright discussion about what's doable in terms of a strong package of outcomes here in Nairobi," Froman HYPERLINK "http://go.politicoemail.com/?qs=fb43d62abc2db17f143bcdc1d003c4cc297230b3485121a665ee2a57890d06c1" said during the plenary session of the WTO's 10th ministerial conference.
The top American trade diplomat insisted that broadening the negotiating agenda of the WTO does not mean abandoning the "unfinished business" of the Doha round launched in 2001.
But "freeing ourselves from the strictures of the Doha framework would allow us bring new, creative approaches to those issues, as well as allow us to explore emerging trade issues, revitalizing the WTO and the multilateral trading system," he said.
Still, Indian Commerce and Industry Minister Nirmala Sitharaman expressed wariness of delving into new areas when she HYPERLINK "http://go.politicoemail.com/?qs=fb43d62abc2db17fc22a5f51e3751327adc24679af04797c7dfbe8bca7a7ba0c" spoke at the plenary session on Wednesday.
"We should resist the temptation of overloading the WTO agenda at this stage with 'new issues' when we are still grappling with the completion of work in the [Doha Development Agenda]," Sitharaman said.
In India's view, agriculture reform remains "the corner stone" of the Doha round negotiations, although a special initiative to encourage growth in services trade is also needed, she said.
"We are gathered here today in Africa, a land of opportunity and promise. There is no better place to resolve that we must and shall complete the DDA," Sitharaman said.
India Slams Two WTO Drafts Favouring Developed Nations
Kirtika.Suneja
18 December 2015
The Economic Times - Mumbai Edition
India has retaliated against the developed countries' attempts to pull the plug on the development issues in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO, junking two draft texts with an obvious tilt in their favour. New Delhi is now working on new texts with a language suitable to the developing countries in which it will insist on a permanent solution for food security, special safeguard mechanism (SSM) for protecting domestic industry besides vehemently opposing the inclusion of new issues in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO mandate. This looks like a repeat of the Bali ministerial two years ago. India is fighting to secure its interest in Nairobi but the only difference is that this time it is not isolated. "A surprise has sprung on us...
We are submitting a draft ministerial text with a language suitable for India. There will be no new issues unless the Doha agenda is fulfilled. We will insist and wait for a permanent solution for food security," commerce and industry minister Nirmala Sithara man said a couple of hours after the Nairobi ministerial declaration was unofficially circulated.
The six page draft ministerial text clearly states that the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO should have the ability to take any trade related issues deemed for it to stay relevant on an "exploratory basis".
Early in the day , India was got a rude shock when the first draft of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's committee on agriculture did not reiterate 2017 as the deadline for a permanent solution for food security concerns and linked SSM with the broader context of agricultural market access the latter being demanded by Brazil. India has asserted that it has not given up on the public stockholding issue and wants it to be included in the preamble of the Nairobi declaration. It also wants an SSM delinked from market access. "Before coming to Nairobi, we took the Union Cabinet's approval on issues being discussed in Geneva but many issues of export competition were not a part of these discussions. Many ministers say that they also didn't have the mandate to do so because the discussion had not reached such a level in Geneva," she said.
The issue will come up in her meeting with the US Trade Representative Mike Froman later in the day who has been vocal in doing away with the Doha Development Agenda of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO. "Freeing ourselves from the strictures of the Doha framework would allow us to bring new, creative approaches to those issues, as well as allow us to explore emerging trade issues, revitalizing the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO and the multilateral trading system," he said at the plenary session today. For the last three days, India has been saying that there is no consensus on issues related to export competition and opposed cherry picking of issues in the export competition which has four elements export subsidies, export credit, state trading enterprises and food aid. While there were talks of dismantling export subsidies in Geneva, India and Canada have severe reservations against credits given to exports. The draft text on agriculture barred countries from providing export credits, export credit guarantees or insurance programmes for exports of products. The minister said that this agenda is being pushed with undue haste and developed countries want to dump the Doha agenda without discussions or an alternative. Sitharaman communicated this position in her meetings with Lesotho trade minister and chair for agriculture talks Joshua Setipa and Kenyan trade minister Amina Mohamed on Thursday
Bennett, Coleman & Co., Ltd. 
Russia backs countries calling for update of WTO agenda - minister
17 December 2015
Interfax: Russia & CIS Business and Financial Newswire
NAIROBI. Dec 17 (Interfax) - In negotiations on the future of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization, Russia adheres to the position of those countries that are calling for updating the agenda of the trade body and the Doha round, Economic Development Minister Alexei Ulyukayev told reporters in Nairobi on Wednesday after a meeting with WTO Director General HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevedo.
"There are two extreme points of view. Some countries say that we need to give the Doha round a new start. Others say that we need to affirm our commitment to the Doha Development Agreement and work for as long as it takes. We are closer to the former point of view than the latter," Ulyukayev said.
"This could be called an updated agenda. The Doha round should be continued, but on a somewhat different basis, the mandate should be changed," Ulyukayev said, explaining Russia's position.
"We discussed these issues at the meeting with the head of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO: how to come to a result, reach something now and agree on what we will achieve going forward," the minister said.
"On the first point: in the past year we have said that the goal of this, and where there is currently most agreement, is agriculture, what's called export competition, in other words elimination of subsidies for agricultural exports, sorting out the system of lending for exports of agricultural products, like for manufactured products. There are some nuances in this area, but they can be resolved. The main thing is to not link issues on which there is consensus to demands that are important for specific countries but are not directly related to the matter at hand," Ulyukayev said.
"If we achieve these two things - adopt a package on export competition and agree on how we will continue working, how we are updating the Doha agenda, then it will be possible to say that the meeting in Nairobi was a success," the minister said.
Ulyukayev also attended a meeting of BRICS ministers on Wednesday. Asked whether the BRICS countries will have a common position in light of the fact that India has its own position that differs from the others, he said: "This is the main problem. We are trying to reach some sort of common understanding."
"The problem of food security that India is talking about is extremely important for both BRICS countries and a broader range of countries. But a temporary decision is now in effect, a permanent one is supposed to be made by 2017. We are proposing to now devote attention to working out a concrete working plan for reaching agreement. A working group should be formed, seminars held, certain discussions," Ulyukayev said.
He said consolidating the position of BRICS countries is problematic, "but we will try to discuss this again." Interfax Information Services, B.V. 
Afghanistan's WTO membership approved after 11 years of talks
Deng Yaomin
17 December 2015
Xinhua News Agency
NAIROBI, Dec. 17 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xinhua) -- The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) on Thursday formally approved Afghanistan's membership at its 10th ministerial conference in the Kenyan capital Nairobi.
Afghanistan has become the 164th HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO member and the 36th least developed country (LDC) to join the global trade body after 11 years of negotiations.
"Today is a historic day for Afghanistan as we reaffirm our commitment to free market economy in order to alleviate poverty and achieve lasting peace and stability," said Mohammad Khan, Afghanistan's First Deputy Chief Executive, at the ceremony for the accession.
The landlocked Asian country expects to reap the benefits of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO membership for its post-conflict reconstruction.
"For the last decade, we have focused on rebuilding state, academic institutions and the private sector. We request the international community to provide technical capacity to enable Afghanistan to handle the post HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO accession process," Khan said.
He said Kabul had accelerated domestic reforms in order to woo investment in key sectors of the economy, including transport infrastructure and energy.
"We are committed to greater fiscal discipline and creation of a favorable environment for trade and investments," he said.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevedo, WTO Director General, said Afghanistan's membership was "an endorsement of the extensive program of domestic reforms the country has undertaken to accelerate economic growth."
Zou Jiayi, China's Assistant Minister for Finance, who was attending the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO conference, said the admission was "a triumph of multilateralism" that inspired developing nations.
Xinhua News Agency
Iran, biggest economy outside WTO, says it's ready to join
17 December 2015
Reuters News
* Entry would integrate Iran more fully in global economy
* Tehran sees 'win-win for all'
* Tough bargaining lies ahead with existing members 
By Tom Miles
GENEVA, Dec 17 (Reuters) - Iran is prepared to negotiate its way into the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization, Industry Minister Mohammad Reza Nematzadeh said on Thursday, building on the momentum of a landmark nuclear deal as Tehran restores international economic links after years of sanctions.
"I'm here with an important message," Nematzadeh told ministers of the trade body's 162 members at a two-yearly meeting in Nairobi.
"Now that years of intensive negotiations have finally cleared all the misunderstandings around Iran's nuclear activities, we are taking the next step towards integrating more deeply into the global economy."
Tehran sealed an accord with world powers in July, agreeing to curb sensitive parts of its nuclear programme in return for an easing of international sanctions. The breakthrough, after more than a decade of deadlock, is prompting keen interest from foreign firms in striking business deals in Iran.
Joining the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO would involve long and difficult negotiations, but Nematzadeh said Iran was already opening up its trade and investment regime and pursuing bilateral and regional integration with its trading partners.
But regionalism was no substitute for the global system, he said.
"Finalising HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO membership is therefore a priority for the Iranian government. As the largest non-member economy in the world, our full membership will be win-win for all and a significant step towards creating a truly universal organisation."
SLOW PROGRESS
Despite having some of the world's biggest oil and gas reserves, Iran's economic growth has been slowed by sanctions, low energy prices and high interest rates.
It first applied for HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO membership in July 1996, but progress has been glacial. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO only began to consider its membership in 2005 and Iran provided a file detailing its relevant laws and regulations four years later.
It had now updated this file and was ready to submit it to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO, and for the first time it was prepared to enter talks on lowering tariffs and other barriers to trade in goods and services, Nematzadeh said.
Countries seeking to join the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO have to bring their own laws into line with HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO rules, but they also have to buy their way in by bargaining with existing members, who can push for concessions in sectors that interest them.
Joining the club would impose limits on Iran's tariffs and commit it to be transparent about a wide range of policies that affect trade, such as subsidies, agricultural rules and rules for importing and exporting goods.
It would gain the right to bring trade disputes against other members of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO and it would join negotiations on new trade rules, where every member has an effective veto.
Other large economies that are not HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members include Ethiopia, Belarus, Algeria, Uzbekistan and Iraq.
The nuclear deal is designed to curb sensitive activities like uranium enrichment and extend to a year the 'breakout time' it would take Iran to obtain enough weapons-grade material to build a nuclear bomb - even though Tehran has always denied any such intention.
In return Iran would get relief from sanctions. The head of the U.N. nuclear watchdog said on Wednesday it was "not impossible" that this could happen by the end of January, as Tehran is seeking. 
Thomson Reuters (Markets) LLC
Australia wins court challenge to tobacco plain packaging
18 December 2015
Reuters News
By Matt Siegel
SYDNEY, Dec 18 (Reuters) - A Singapore-based court has refused a challenge by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Philip Morris to Australia's landmark plain packaging legislation passed in 2011, which the tobacco giant had brought under a bi-lateral trade treaty with Hong Kong, the company said.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Permanent Court of Arbitration declined on jurisdictional grounds to allow the case to proceed, effectively ending the challenge through this venue, which was based on claims that Australia was violating intellectual property laws.
The decision by the court not to hear the case is likely to be seen as a major victory for Australia, which is facing challenges in other forums such as the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation (WTO), and for other countries considering similar laws.
Australia was the first country in the world to force manufacturers to strip all branding from cigarette packets, most of which are now sold over the counter from blank fronted cabinets, although other countries have followed its lead.
The court said on its website that it would make its decision public once any potentially confidential material within it had been redacted.
Australian Minister for Rural Health Fiona Nash, who is responsible for government tobacco policy, welcomed the decision.
"Plain packaging is a legitimate public health measure which is consistent with Australia's international legal obligations," she said in a statement.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Philip Morris blasted the ruling, saying that Australia had exploited procedural issues to avoid an open discussion about the effectiveness of plain packaging in curbing tobacco consumption.
"There is nothing in today's ruling that addresses, let alone validates, plain packaging in Australia or anywhere else," Marc Firestone, Philip Morris International Senior Vice President, said in a press release.
"It is regrettable that the outcome hinged entirely on a procedural issue that Australia chose to advocate instead of confronting head on the merits of whether plain packaging is legal or even works."
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" The World Trade Organisation (WTO) is currently considering a separate challenge to Australia's legislation by four member states, and a flurry of challenges by tobacco companies are ongoing as more countries follow Australia's lead.
The court's decision would not have any bearing on the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO case or any of the other legal challenges currently underway.
Companies including HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Philip Morris, British American Tobacco BATS.L, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Japan Tobacco International 2914.T and Imperial Tobacco Group IMT.L took the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" British government to court earlier this month to challenge its plain packaging laws, which take effect next May.
The case will be heard in a six-day hearing at London's Royal Courts of Justice. 
Thomson Reuters (Markets) LLC
Kyiv to continue litigation with Russia regarding railway equipment under WTO
17 December 2015
Interfax: Ukrainian General Newswire
NAIROBI. Dec 16 (Interfax-Ukraine) - Kyiv plans to continue litigation with Moscow as a part of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) over the fact that Russia restricted imports of wagons and points from Ukraine, Deputy Minister of Economic Development and Trade, Trade Representative of Ukraine Natalia Mykolska has said on the sidelines of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO conference in Nairobi (Kenya),
The Ukrainian and Russian delegations on December 4 held bilateral consultations on the Ukraine's claim to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO in Geneva. A source told Interfax-Ukraine that Ukraine will decide on the fate of the claim whether the new round of talks are held or the application to convene the panel of arbiters is submitted.
"There are liabilities for confidentiality of these consultations. We will move as a part of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO procedures. Everything that we can say is that if Russia does not remove the barriers in trade which we believe unjustifiable, we will move until the end as a part of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO procedures," Mykolska said.
As was reported, Ukraine late in October filed a claim at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO against Russia's restrictions of the shipments of Ukrainian-produced wagons and railway switches. Ukraine claims that the restrictions introduced by Russia since 2013 have been groundless.
Mykolska also confirmed the plans to file another claim to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO regarding restrictions on imports of food from Ukraine to Russia.
"We've raised the issue of food embargo at three committees inside the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO, but we haven't received the answer from Russia," she said.
"Documents are being drawn up. We're working with producers and collect evidences. The claim will be filed," she said.
Interfax Information Services, B.V. 
China Bid for EU Label as Market Economy Not a Sure Thing, European Diplomats Say
17 December 2015
Dow Jones Newswires Chinese (English)
China's bid to be labeled a market economy by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union 15 years after it joined the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization isn't a sure thing, say European diplomats in Beijing, who added that China appears to view it as a foregone conclusion. In addition to its prestige value, market economy status could save China tens of millions of dollars in antidumping duties. The U.S. and Canada have signaled their opposition to market status, and an HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU industry study suggested the change could endanger up to 3.5 million HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU jobs. The deadline for HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members to decide is December 2016 but a change in China's market status entails amending European law and securing HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU parliamentary approval that could take a year, diplomats say. The debate comes as China faces dozens of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO antidumping cases involving steel and related industries. "China seems to think it will just happen automatically," said an ambassador from an HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU member state.
"But it will not." HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" China's commerce ministry didn't respond to questions. 
Dow Jones Newswires
END
 
Josep Bosch, 
Head of Media unit
Information and External Relations Division
+41227395681
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.