Sagging global trade will throttle India's ambitious export targets

India's exporters need more policy support

Kuwait eyes more trade exchanges with Turkey - Sheikh Nemr

Egypt to impose 8 pct import tariff on steel rebar

Russian Duma speaker decries US "neocolonialism"

Nepal: Subsidise our farmers

La mondialisation du commerce marque un coup d'arrêt selon le FMI et l'OMC

China no tiene intención de cambiar el orden mundial actual

Cyclists say we are green, urge FM to cut duty

Les islamistes algériens font reculer le gouvernement sur la vente d’alcool




Sagging global trade will throttle India's ambitious export targets

Pyaralal Raghavan 

20 April 2015

The Times of India & The Economic Times Blogs

India's ambitious plans to boost exports of goods and services to $ 900 billion by 2019-20 seems to have suddenly run into major hurdles with the dynamics of global trade changing substantially in recent years. This is brought out in the latest global trade estimates of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organisation (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO) which points out that the synergy between growth in global merchandize trade and global output seems to have suddenly ebbed sharply in recent years.This is in sharp contrast to the global experience in the last few decades during which growth of trade has generally outstripped economic growth. In fact numbers for almost a quarter of the century between 1990 and 2014 shows that while global real GDP growth averaged around 2.5% annually during the period volume of global merchandize trade surged at double the pace at around 5%. However, this two to one relationship that existed between growth of global trade and global output has been suddenly broken down in recent years.

In fact figures show that the pace of expansion of global trade and global output has remained the same in the last three years up to 2014. Explanations for the new phenomenon are many and include new protectionist measures enforced by governments in response to slowing growth and adverse macroeconomic conditions.Trade experts point out that the new trend is not surprising and that at least some indicators pointed to the break in strong links between global trade and output. This is best brought about by the numbers on income elasticity of world trade, which is the ratio of world trade growth to world GDP growth, which peaked at around 2.2 sometime in the nineties, much before the global financial crisis, and fallen steadily since then to 1.4 in the more recent years.

Another explanation is that global trade takes some time to gain traction after an economic shock as was witnessed after the oil shocks in the mid-seventies and early eighties. Whatever be the actual reasons the base message is that growth of global trade has been badly hit by structural and cyclical factors and that it would be only reasonable that countries like India to bank too much on the expanding goods export to pay for the growing imports or to balance its current account. And the trends in the growth of Indian exports in the last few years reinforces this view. Though India's goods exports have shot up by double the pace of global exports in the last decade the trends has suddenly been reversed in the recent years. Thus while value of global goods exports grew at an annual average rate of 7% during the 2005-14 period Indian exports surged by an average annual rate of 14%.But the trends has suddenly been overturned both in 2012 and 2014. While growth of value of goods exported globally remained stagnant in 2012 India's exports fell by 2%. In 2014 growth of value of global and Indian exports stagnated at around 1%. Only in 2013 did Indian good exports do substantially better than the global trends. The worst part is that this new phenomenon on the goods exports seems to have affected services exports too which is generally identified as the most buoyant segment of the Indian economy. Thus we find that though the 13% growth in Indian services exports was almost double that of the 7% growth in global exports the scenario has changed substantially in recent years.For instance in 2012 the gap between growth of services exports from India and the global average narrowed to 5% and 3% respectfully. In 2102 the 2% growth in services exports from India was less than half the global average of 5%. And the most recent figure for 2014 shows that growth of Indian and global exports of services remained almost stagnant at 1%.This sudden slowdown in growth of Indian exports of goods and services are warning signals that Indian policy makers would do well to incorporate in the decisions when they embark on implementing grand strategies on boosting manufacturing or exporting skilled labour to meet global needs. This also means that global trade scenario is changing fast and it would certainly be difficult for India or any other country to emulate the Chinese export based growth model that worked well in another time and era.

Bennett, Coleman & Co., Ltd.

India's exporters need more policy support

Ritesh Kumar Singh 

20 April 2015

Business Line (The Hindu)

The recent foreign trade policy has some positives. However, inverted duty structure is a cause for bother India’s Foreign Trade Policy (FTP) 2015-20 sets an ambitious target of $900 billion in merchandise and services export by 2020. Which means, exports of goods and services must grow at CAGR of over 15 per cent in the next five years to double from its current levels of $ 450 billion.

The new FTP seems to be guided by the following considerations: keeping tabs on how much money goes out on account of export incentives given the fiscal constraints; HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO obligations to phase out export subsidies; linking the FTP to the Make in India initiative; and improving FTAs utilisation in trade.

Thus, the number of countries covered under the new merchandise export from India scheme (MEIS) that replaces five existing incentive schemes, including FPS and FMS, has been pruned to a keep a tab on fiscal outgo. The quantum of export subsidies is lower than earlier.

Reduction of export obligation by 25 per cent under the EPCG (export promotion capital goods) scheme is expected to boost indigenous production of capital goods.

The introduction of online filing of documents is to reduce trade transaction cost and help manufacturing exports by increasing their cost competitiveness. Merchandise falling under the categories of handloom products, books/periodicals, leather footwear, toys and customised fashion garments, with fob values of up to Rs. 25,000/consignment and their sale finalised through e-commerce, would get the benefit of FTP.

Advantages and limitations

The exports from SEZs suffering from high MAT would now be eligible for incentives. Another notable positive is the introduction of transferability of duty free scrips and allowing them for payment of customs, excise duties and service tax without any conditionality. However, it would be worth examining how effective the new FTP would be in pushing India’s merchandise exports.

It is very difficult to decode what forms the basis of categorising India’s export destinations into three groupings as well as allocation of MEIS rates for different commodities. What could explain the exclusion of countries such as Brazil, Bangladesh and China for export promotion with respect to top textile products?

Again, increasing exports to China should have been top priority, but there is no real incentive for China in the new FTP even though it is a top export destination for cotton fibre and yarn.

From a strict reading of the FTP, only direct export to Japan and the US should be eligible for MEIS. The problem is India mostly exports fabrics to Bangladesh, Indonesia, Myanmar and Vietnam for conversion into garments that are ultimately shipped to Japan and the US.

It is worth mentioning that some of India’s well intentioned trade policy actions (to help LDCs like Bangladesh), though outside the purview of the FTP, are hurting indigenous manufacturing.

For instance, allowing duty free, quota free import of garments from Bangladesh (or Myanmar) without imposing sourcing obligations promotes the backdoor entry of Chinese textile material into India, and hurts the whole textile value chain in the country from fibre to yarn, fabrics and apparel.

Sourcing blues

The FTP needs to follow up with other actions like making the use of fibres, yarns and fabrics of Indian origin mandatory for allowing duty free imports of apparel from Bangladesh and other LDCs seeking preferential market access on non-reciprocal basis.

It’s not that India would be the first country to impose sourcing restrictions for allowing duty free imports of apparels. The US imposes sourcing restrictions in all its existing and proposed trade pacts. Why can’t India?

Because of India’s FTAs and other trade deals such as Information Technology Agreement (ITA), India’s manufacturing sector has to suffer what is called inverted duty structure, that is, high import duties on inputs/ raw materials and lower duties on finished goods. Thus, one can import an apparel item duty free in India but its basic raw materials are subject to 5 to 10 per cent import duties.

The last Union Budget did attempt to address some of the cases of inverted duties, but only partially.

Again, increasing the use of FTAs would require addressing non-tariff barriers in partner countries. For instance, Japan, as per the terms of the India-Japan CEPA, allows duty free import of apparels from India only if all the material used for the manufacture of apparels are either of Indian or Japanese origin.

Indian businesses should realise that the days of export subsidies are numbered because of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO obligations. To deal with slowing demand and rising cost on a long-term basis, businesses must develop suitable global strategies for sourcing, production and trade.

The writer is a former government official and currently a corporate economic advisor based in Mumbai. The views are personal

Kasturi & Sons Ltd

Kuwait eyes more trade exchanges with Turkey - Sheikh Nemr

19 April 2015

Kuwait News Agency (Kuna)

KUWNA

KUWAIT, April 19 (KUNA) -- Assistant Undersecretary of the Kuwaiti Ministry of Trade and Industry Sheikh Nemr Al-Sabah said Sunday the State of Kuwait and the other Arab countries are eager for greater commercial and investment cooperation with Turkey.

"To enhance the Arab-Turkish economic ties will serve the interests of both sides and contribute to the welfare of our nations," he said in a statement to KUNA following the preparatory meeting for the second session of the ministers of trade and economy.

The ministerial, due to open tomorrow, is part of the Turkish-Arab Economic Forum (TAF); it will be held under auspices of His Highness the Prime Minister Jaber Mubarak Al-Hamad Al-Sabah.

The gathering will review the progress made since the first such meeting, held in Mersin city, south Turkey, in September, 2013, he pointed out.

The preparatory meeting, chaired by Sheikh Nemr, has worked out the blueprint of the final statement of the ministerial.

"The agenda of tomorrow's ministerial focuses on three themes; first the prospects of expanding the commercial and economic cooperation; second, the ways to increase the Arab-Turkish investment and improve the investment atmospheres in both sides; third, the role of private sector in this regard," he disclosed.

"We have discussed the efforts of the Arab countries to join the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO) and the plans for holding joint workshops on sustainable development and environment," Sheikh Nemr went on.

He welcomed Turkey's participation in the first Kuwait International Trade Fair, slated for February 21-27, 2016. (end) smr.gb

Kuwait News Agency

Egypt to impose 8 pct import tariff on steel rebar

19 April 2015

17:49

Reuters News

CAIRO, April 19 (Reuters) - Egypt will impose an 8 percent import tariff on rebar - reinforced steel bars - for three years, the industry and trade ministry said on Sunday, extending temporary tariffs introduced last year to protect the domestic industry.

A ministry statement said Egypt would also impose a 20 percent tariff on white sugar for 200 days, following a filing to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization last week in which it sought to safeguard domestic producers from a damaging surge in imports.

The tariffs come at a critical time for Egypt's steel industry, which is recovering from four years of political and economic turmoil, and for a global market struggling with low prices and over-capacity due to lacklustre demand.

Egyptian steel companies have been further pressured by energy costs and availability in a country where energy shortages have hit output and profitability. The country produces six to seven million tonnes of reinforced steel a year.

Egypt's major steelmakers had petitioned the government to impose anti-dumping measures on rebar and wire rod imports from China, Ukraine and Turkey after energy subsidies were cut last summer.

The ministry statement said the steel tariffs would be at least 408 Egyptian pounds ($53.5) per tonne in the first year, dropping annually to 175 pounds in the third year.

A ministry official told Reuters the tariffs on steel imports would begin on May 2 and those on sugar would start once a notice is published in the official gazette.

Temporary "safeguard tariffs" are allowed under HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO rules if there is a sudden, unexpected and damaging surge of imports, and if the country that imposes the tariffs first seeks the views of interested parties.

The ministry statement said a minimum tariff of 700 Egyptian pounds per tonne would be imposed on white sugar while the government investigates an influx of imports in 2014 and the first quarter of 2015.

"This fierce attack of white sugar imports came as a result of a drop in global prices which has not happened in more than 20 years," the statement said, adding that the surge in imports had already cost Egyptian industry about 1 billion pounds. ($1 = 7.6250 Egyptian pounds) (Reporting by Stephen Kalin and Ehab Farouk, Editing by Mark Trevelyan) 

Released: 2015-4-19T16:49:24.000Z

Thomson Reuters (Markets) LLC

Russian Duma speaker decries US "neocolonialism"

19 April 2015

BBC Monitoring Former Soviet Union

Text of report by the website of Russian business newspaper Vedomosti 

[Article by State Duma Chairman Sergey Naryshkin: "Colonialists' Instincts, or Subtext to Global Leadership"]

The longer the resolution of the Ukrainian conflict drags on and the more persistently Kyiv fails to fulfil the Minsk agreements, then the more frequently the subject of the United States' special role in launching this military-political adventure surfaces. Why is Kyiv not fulfilling the "Normandy four" accords? "Poroshenko breached virtually everything he agreed" in Minsk, Stephen Lendman writes on thepeoplesvoice.org, and he suggest this is connected to "orders from Washington." Yet the United States' ultimate goals have not yet been completely revealed. It continues to dictate the line of conduct not only to Ukraine but also to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union. The United States is not stopped either by accusations of interference in all-European politics or by the reputation, melting away before our eyes, of the leaders of the two leading EU states who took part in the conclusion of the Minsk agreements. It is hard to avoid the feeling that the continuation of the bloodshed in the Donets Basin [Donbas, Donbass] is needed by the United States in order to achieve something of importance to itself.

Yes, access to the resources of Eurasia via the Ukrainian "window" and the deployment of new military bases there form part of US plans. But, recalling how shamelessly the United States pressured the EU over anti-Russian sanctions and how it is "steamrollering" them on the issue of arms deliveries to Kyiv, you understand that they are playing for time for a good reason. America needs the protracted sanctions epic, in violation of international law, and the atmosphere of information hysteria in order to continue its unpunished economic robbery. Its ultimate goal is certainly not a bright all-European future for Ukrainian citizens but the conclusion of a harsh and over-arching economic agreement with the EU in which Europe appears to have been assigned the role of junior partner.

In addition to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"NAFTA Treaty (between the United States, Mexico, and Canada) which has already been in operation for two decades, a further two major draft agreements are now being strenuously promoted - with the EU on Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) and on Trans-Pacific Partnership (TTP [as published, should be TPP] with 12 states of the region. What is bad about this? Any power wants to have new markets and as many trading partners as possible. But they do not like posting any information about the agreements under preparation and it is no accident that 1 million Europeans have signed a petition against TTIP. Only under pressure from the European public (over a year after the approval of the relevant HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Commission mandate) was there any success in getting even some details of the behind the scenes trans-Atlantic talks.

A year ago the talks revealed serious differences between the sides. Now they are talking of their intention to reach agreement by the end of 2015, although it is hard to list all the areas of conflict. But the most dangerous thing is falling into the trap of new restrictions which would be very tough for the Europeans. And also a substantial reduction to the role of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO: It is hard to imagine "the peaceful coexistence" of several large trade associations which will account for a substantial proportion of world GDP. Not only in Europe and the Asia-Pacific region states but also in the United States, the two projects are being subjected to considerable criticism. In the first instance justified fears are being voiced for the fate of entire segments of national economies which will go under to more powerful US sectors. In the latter instance the objections (in Congress) are of a more political nature. But should we doubt the United States' ability rapidly to pressure partners to make the decision it wants? For instance, for the US presidential elections which will take place in 2016.

As a result of the opening of the two new zones, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO could be hostage to secretly developed trade and investment rules. This could lead to profound crisis. Including in political relations between countries and continents on which standards of economic relations which no one has discussed with them will be imposed as a new model. We know from history the sorry consequences to which the desire of individual powers to reallocate the planet's economic wealth and to "re-work the world" to their own ideas can lead. Yet those ambitions did not grow out of nowhere - their roots were laid down back in colonial times. And if it seems to anyone that the last "squabbles" between the former colonial powers ended centuries ago - that is not the case. Military invasions of various parts of the world are quite often dictated even now by the desire to establish control over a particular part of the globe. At one time this was called "neocolonialism" and now it is called "hegemonism" or, which sounds better, "leadership." That does not change the essence.

Of course it is far simpler to take away than to create something new. It is easier to steal than to earn. It is cheaper to feed an army than an entire people and with the army's aid to win lands rich in other people's oil, gas, and other resources. And to turn a devastated country soaked in blood into a new raw-material or industrial appendage. But this is medieval barbarity, whatever the rhetoric of enforced democracy or information screen accompanying it. The ever new conflicts in various parts of the world arising sometimes because of external acts of provocation show that the colonialists' instincts have not gone away. They are being manifested with new force in some political adventurists from Europe, while they have become the essence of its geopolitical strategy for the United States. The obedience of almost all Europe has already been achieved in military matters and much is also under control in political issues. Now it is the turn of trade and finance.

From this we citizens of the European states must draw practical conclusions important for a new amalgamation of forces for a just world order based on the law. And our Ukrainian brothers must start to think about the true role assigned to their country by the trans-Atlantic "director." After all, for that "director" the tragedy of their Motherland is not even a secondary role, it is a mere episode. And the number of victims is of no importance here. By Hollywood standards a sea of blood is the customary background for the exploits of the "main hero."

Source: Vedomosti website, Moscow, in Russian 14 Apr 15

The British Broadcasting Corporation

Nepal: Subsidise our farmers

BIJENDRA MAN SHAKYA 

19 April 2015

The Katmandu Post

Nepal, April 19 -- An abrupt rise in Nepal's food imports in recent years has drawn much media attention and the publicity has aroused the interest of the general public. Food imports (cereals and live animals as defined under the harmonized system of product category of the customs) have jumped from Rs24 billion in 2009-10 to Rs88 billion in 2013-14. This represents a massive leap of 266 percent in the past five fiscal years. On average, the annual growth rate was more than 30 percent in the review period.

In contrast, exports of the same food category increased from Rs13 billion to Rs21 billion during the same period, an increase of only 64 percent. Exports of food items could not climb above the annual average rate of 10 percent in the last five years. This simple trade data illustrates how domestic food production has been lagging behind increased domestic demand leading to a growing dependency on food imports. Ultimately, this has resulted in a massive deficit in the country's food trade balance.

Net food importer

These indicators have revealed Nepal, despite being an agricultural economy, is turning into a net food importing country. There are two basic reasons commonly referred to behind this phenomenon. One, there has been a growing shortage of farm labourers to produce enough food in the country due to the increased outflow of our manpower to overseas countries attracted by a relatively better pay abroad. Two, the overflow of cheap and subsidized food imports in the country has outcompeted domestic production. But why the fuss as long as we can feed our people by importing cheap food from the remittance sent back by our labour force working abroad or through any other net foreign exchange incomes in the balance of payments?

Yes, in the short run, there is no reason to worry about it. But in the long run, the problem of food security emerges. This is why many countries, irrespective of their economic development, subsidise farm production and protect it from external competition. Forget about some developing countries like India and Brazil which are striving hard to subsidize their farming with the view of maintaining food security. The farm subsidies provided in the world's richest and industrialized countries, specifically the EU and the US, are astonishingly high.

The developed countries have been accused of spending $1 billion a day in farm subsidies and outpricing the developing countries in the international market. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD) has estimated that farmers in the West received more than $300 billion a year which was six times the assistance provided by the rich countries to the poor countries.

Subsiding subsidies

The EU's common agriculture policy (CAP) provides another example of farm subsidies. About half of the farm income in the EU countries comes directly from this programme. Ascribed to production-based subsidies, European countries were said to have produced a "lake of wine" and a "mountain of butter". At the same time, the tariffs imposed on agricultural imports in the rich countries are unbearably high. They have not lived up to their promise to cut farm tariffs and provide easier market access to the farm exports of the developing countries.

Instead, the rich countries have succeeded in protecting their farm sector by increasing subsides and maintaining relatively higher tariffs despite HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO negotiations to liberalize the farm sector. These persistent practices have made agriculture one of the most contentious issues in the global scenario.

For a least developed country like Nepal, these international developments have provoked much thinking. While subsidies are central to food security and farm trade in most of the developing and developed countries, they are virtually non-existent in Nepal. For many years in the past, farm subsidies were considered to be a violation of international norms as if they mattered to only a poor country like Nepal. Lack of funds with the government has also been cited for its being unable to finance subsidies.

Food security

Considering the current international situation, Nepal cannot go against food subsidies because it is a net food importing country. Imports of subsidised and low-priced foods have maintained total consumer welfare. At the same time, if we are to ensure food security and promote agro exports, the country's agricultural sector has to have solid government support. So the country needs a comprehensive farm subsidy programme that increases the output and lowers the unit price so that imports can be easily substituted and food security can be ensured. In the same manner, subsidies on farm exports will allow Nepali exporters to effortlessly outprice competitors in the rich country markets as Nepal enjoys duty-free access in these countries which have high tariff walls in agriculture.

Shakya specializes in the economic and trade interests of Nepal and the LDCs.

Published by HT Syndication with permission from EKantipur.com.

For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com 

Kantipur Publications Pvt. Ltd.

La mondialisation du commerce marque un coup d'arrêt selon le FMI et l'OMC

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Jean-Pierre Robin

20 April 2015

Le Figaro

LIBRES ÉCHANGES

L'âge d'or des échanges internationaux est-il derrière nous ?

Le pot de yaourt est devenu l'un des objets symboles de la mondialisation. Il lui faut parcourir des milliers de kilomètres pour aller du pis de la vache française au breakfast britannique et entre-temps il a franchi quatre ou cinq frontières pour intégrer la fraise espagnole, l'emballage italien et le ferment fabriqué aux Pays-Bas. L'iPhone d'Apple est plus encore emblématique de la division internationale du travail : « designed in California, made in China » est sa devise, « conçu en Californie, assemblé en Chine » , et à partir de composants venus de Corée, d'Allemagne et du Japon principalement. Les chaînes internationales de production n'en finiront-elles jamais de s'allonger avec pour effet de doper les échanges internationaux ?

Au grand dam des écologistes qui y voient une source de gaspillage en termes de transport. Or il se pourrait fort qu'elles commencent à raccourcir, sans crier gare. Et ce ne sont pas les altermondialistes qui l'annoncent, mais l'Organisation mondiale du commerce et le Fonds monétaire international.

Les deux institutions phares de l'économie ouverte viennent la semaine passée d'exprimer l'une et l'autre leur étonnement au vu des dernières statistiques du commerce mondial. Dressant le bilan 2014, l'OMC note que les échanges de marchandises ont progressé d'à peine 2,4 % l'an entre 2012 et 2014. « La croissance du commerce a été décevante ces dernières an nées » , reconnaît Roberto Azevêdo, le successeur de Pascal Lamy à la tête de l'OMC. La déception ne provient pas tant des chiffres eux-mêmes, qui restent largement positifs. La nouveauté est que le commerce transfrontière progresse désormais moins vite que l'activité économique elle-même mesurée par le PIB mondial. Celui-ci a en effet augmenté de 3,4 % en moyenne sur les trois années 3012-2014 selon le FMI.

Et l'organisation que dirige Christine Lagarde de s'interroger, dans une étude de son World Economic Outlook : la faiblesse des échanges internationaux est-elle conjoncturelle ou s'agit-il d'une rupture de fond ? « Malaise dans la mondialisation » , dirait-on pour paraphraser un titre célèbre : l'économie ouverte considérée comme notre horizon indépassable serait-elle en train de marquer le pas, voire de refluer ?

S'il fallait donner une définition simple de la « globalisation » , comme disent les Anglo-Saxons, ce serait celle-ci : les échanges entre pays progressent plus vite que leur activité économique considérée globalement, le PIB mondial. Car chaque pays tend à spécialiser sa production pour être le plus efficace. Les économistes parlent « d'élasticité du commerce au PIB » pour mesurer ce phénomène. Ainsi, de 1986 à 2000, le commerce a progressé d'année en année plus de deux fois plus vite que le PIB, soit une élasticité de 2,2 (quand le PIB augmentait de 1 %, les échanges commerciaux s'accroissaient de 2,2 %). Ce fut l'âge d'or des échanges internationaux. En revanche, l'élasticité n'a plus été que de 1,3 entre 2001 et 2014 selon les calculs du FMI. Et sur les trois dernières années le commerce a même progressé moins vite que le PIB. Que se passe-t-il ?

La première explication tient au ralentissement de l'économie mondiale elle-même : on commerce moins car on est moins dynamique. Et c'est d'autant plus vrai que les entreprises ont réduit leurs investissements. Car les biens d'équipement constituent traditionnellement une part très importante des échanges internationaux. Au total, les économistes du FMI considèrent que « les facteurs cycliques » selon leur terminologie expliquent pour moitié le ralentissement du commerce mondial.

Les explications de nature structurelle sont évidemment les plus intéressantes, car elles dessinent un nouveau régime de croisière. Tout d'abord, il se pourrait bien que les années 1986-2000 aient été exceptionnelles. Les multinationales ont découvert les charmes des chaînes de valeur transfrontalières, cherchant à tirer le plus possible avantage des spécialisations locales et des bas coûts de main-d'oeuvre. Mais cette montée en régime appartient au passé, le système s'est stabilisé. D'autant que les économies émergentes ont elles-mêmes cherché à se diversifier. La Chine en est le meilleur exemple. « La part de composants et de pièces détachées dans les importations chinoises a culminé à 60 % du total au milieu des années 1990, mais elles n'en représentent plus aujourd'hui que 35 % » , a calculé le FMI.

D'autres facteurs plus ou moins irréversibles se sont conjugués pour ralentir le commerce mondial : les écarts de salaire entre pays du Nord et du Sud se sont comblés un peu, contribuant à endiguer la vague de délocalisations qui avait déferlé dans les années 1990. À quoi se sont ajoutées des mesures protectionnistes larvées. Même si depuis la grande récession de 2008-2009 les frontières ne se sont pas fermées, contrairement aux années 1930, le processus de libéralisation du commerce a baissé de plusieurs crans. Ainsi depuis la création de l'OMC en 1995, il a fallu attendre la conférence de Bali, décembre 2013, pour enregistrer un premier accord de libéralisation multilatérale. Et il fut tout sauf spectaculaire, à peine 10 % du programme de libéralisation du « Doha round » lancé douze ans plus tôt ont été réalisés.

Pour toutes ces raisons, « les chaînes de valeur qui s'étiraient à l'infini sont en train de rétrécir et cela se voit dans les statistiques de commerce » , nous confirme Bertrand Badré, le directeur général de la Banque mondiale. Mais il est sans doute prématuré de diagnostiquer un véritable mouvement de « démondialisation » .

“China no tiene intención de cambiar el orden mundial actual”

L. Barber/D. Pilling/J. Anderlini. Financial Times 

Expansión. 20 April 2015

La poderosa economía china crece ahora mismo al ritmo más lento del último siglo y se espera que se ralentice aún más. El Partido Comunista está inmerso en una enérgica campaña contra la corrupción y los líderes del país intentan acabar con los devastadores efectos de décadas de polución industrial.

Li Keqiang, el segundo hombre más poderoso de China, es responsable de gestionar la mayor economía del mundo y de cambiar el modelo de crecimiento basado en el crédito y la inversión por uno que haga hincapié en un futuro sostenible.

En su primera entrevista a un medio occidental, Li quiso dejar claro el férreo compromiso de China con el actual orden financiero global, sobre todo a raíz de la creación del Banco Asiático de Inversiones en Infraestructuras (BAII).

A finales de enero, parecía que ningún país occidental quería pertenecer a una institución que representa un desafío al orden mundial liderado por EEUU. Pero, desde entonces, la mayoría de los aliados de EEUU se han adherido al BAII, un ejemplo de cómo el centro del poder geopolítico está desviándose hacia el Este.

A lo largo de la entrevista, Li insistió en que China no tiene ninguna intención de crear un nuevo orden mundial. “China quiere trabajar con los demás para sostener el actual sistema financiero. El BAII está destinado a ser un complemento al actual sistema financiero internacional”, declaró.

Bretton Woods

A la pregunta concreta de si China tiene intención de sustituir a las instituciones de Bretton Woods, Li se mostró firme: “No hay nada de eso; no queremos cambiar el orden actual”, insistió. “Hemos adquirido experiencia de trabajar con el Banco Mundial y otras instituciones y nuestra pertenencia a la OMC también ha ayudado a las empresas chinas a tener un mayor conocimiento de cómo competir con las demás según la normativa internacional”, puntualizó.

Li mostró su escepticismo sobre la relajación cuantitativa (QE) y el plan de la Fed de poner fin a su política monetaria extraordinaria. “Es muy fácil introducir una política como el QE, sólo hay que imprimir dinero. Sin embargo, es difícil pronosticar qué ocurrirá cuando esta política se retire”, manifestó.

En su opinión, la mayoría de los países todavía no han adoptado las reformas estructurales necesarias para abordar las causas de la crisis financiera global. Aunque los analistas políticos del país creen que la figura del primer ministro se ha visto eclipsada por la del presidente chino, Xi Jinping, en el área económica, el primer ministro siempre ha llevado la batuta.

A pesar de la ralentización económica, Li se mostró confiado en el futuro de su economía. El año pasado, China creció un 7,4%, su ritmo más bajo de los últimos 24 años. Además, según los datos oficiales de esta semana, el crecimiento económico ha retrocedido al 7% en el primer trimestre frente al mismo periodo del año anterior. Y todo apunta a que la ralentización continuará.

Li reconoció la dificultad de su Gobierno para mantener el empleo y conseguir que este año la economía crezca “en torno al 7%”. “Es cierto que nuestra economía pasa por un proceso de ralentización, por lo que no será fácil registrar un crecimiento del 7% este año”, reconoció.

No obstante, el mandatario insiste en que Pekín tiene los recursos para alcanzar sus objetivos a la vez que mantiene “unos niveles de empleo decentes y un aumento de los ingresos familiares”.

“Desde el cuarto trimestre, hemos introducido muchos ajustes a nuestra política fiscal y monetaria, ajustes que no son comparables al QE. Más bien son medidas regulatorias que ya han comenzado a dar sus frutos”, explicó.

Tipos de interés

En febrero, China recortó los tipos de interés por segunda vez en tres meses y también ha anunciado planes para revisar las finanzas de las autoridades locales y fomentar las inversiones en infraestructuras donde el crecimiento se ha ralentizado más.

En opinión de muchos expertos, el mayor riesgo para el crecimiento del país es el sector inmobiliario, donde los precios y las ventas han caído en el último año, una tendencia que podría empeorar.

Hasta el año pasado, el boom de la propiedad era el principal motor de crecimiento en China y Li reconoce que el declive del sector, donde las ventas cayeron un 7,6% el año pasado, es preocupante.

“Queremos que el sector inmobiliario tenga un crecimiento estable. El Gobierno seguirá fomentando la compra de viviendas para uso personal, pero estará atento a posibles burbujas. No va a ser fácil pero creemos que es posible”.

Li se mostró más confiado cuando se le preguntó sobre la caída de precios en China. “La caída de los precios de las materias primas a nivel mundial sin duda ha afectado a nuestro IPC, pero eso no significa que tengamos deflación en China. El IPC subió un 1,4% en marzo con respecto al año anterior, muy por debajo del objetivo del Ejecutivo “en torno al 3%”, aunque siguió en territorio positivo.

Ahora que tanto Japón y Europa han adoptado políticas monetarias extraordinarias, en parte encaminadas a devaluar sus monedas, muchos inversores globales preguntan si China se puede ver tentada a devaluar su propia moneda, sobre todo si el crecimiento se ralentiza más de lo esperado. Pekín siempre se ha resistido a competir en devaluación monetaria con otros países y Li mantiene una postura parecida a sus predecesores, aunque no descarta la posibilidad de una intervención para devaluar en renminbi. “No podemos depender de una devaluación de nuestra moneda para dar un impulso a las exportaciones”, asegura. “Pero no queremos entrar en una guerra de divisas. Si China se ve obligada a devaluar el renminbi, no será beneficioso para el sistema financiero global”, añade.

En cuanto a la campaña contra la corrupción en China, Li declaró que “queremos garantizar que el Ejecutivo ejerce su poder con moderación”. Según las cifras oficiales, en los últimos dos años, cientos de miles de funcionarios han sido investigados por supuesta corrupción, infringiendo la disciplina del Partido Comunista.

Aunque el primer ministro insiste en que China no intenta desafiar el actual orden global, Li opina que “seguiremos desempeñando un papel importante en el desarrollo del actual sistema financiero global. Estamos dispuestos a colaborar con otros países para que el sistema esté más equilibrado”.

En ese sentido, la decisión de China de crear el BAII, entre otras entidades, se considera una forma para que Pekín acelere determinadas reformas, más que una búsqueda de alternativas al orden mundial actual.

El cometido de Li es que la voz de China se oiga en la escena global en proporción a su mayor peso mundial mientras garantiza que la economía nacional no descarrila. Aunque no se sabrá si tiene o no éxito en la escena internacional hasta que se haya retirado, el veredicto sobre sus resultados económicos se conocerá en su primer mandato, que termina en 2018.

Traducción: Paloma Echazarra

Es muy fácil imprimir dinero e insuflarlo a la economía. Lo difícil es pronosticar qué ocurrirá cuando se retire”

Es cierto que China se está ralentizando, por lo que no será fácil tener este año un crecimiento del 7%” No queremos entrar en una guerra de divisas. Si devaluamos el renminbi no beneficiará al sistema financiero”

Nuestra pertenencia a la OMC ha ayudado a las empresas chinas a competir con las normas internacionales”

En la lucha contra la corrupción, queremos garantizar que el Ejecutivo ejerce su poder con moderación”

El Gobierno seguirá fomentando la compra de vivienda, pero estaremos atentos a una posible burbuja inmobiliaria”

entrevista a Li keqiang Primer ministro de China / El Banco Asiático de Inversiones en Infraestructuras “será un complemento del actual sistema financiero internacional”. “China quiere trabajar con los demás países”.

Unidad Editorial Revistas

Cyclists say we are green, urge FM to cut duty

HT Correspondent 

20 April 2015

Hindustan Times

New Delhi, April 20 -- Leisure cyclists in India have urged finance minister Arun Jaitley to reduce or eliminate import tariffs and barriers on bicycles, as per the Green Product category in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organisation (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO) norms.

India is a huge cycle market with 17 million units sold a year.

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO has agreed in 2012 to reduce tariffs to 5% or less by 2015 on 54 categories of green products. These include solar panels, gas and wind turbines, soot removers and catalytic converters.

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO will soon have another new round of negotiations with its members over adding product categories to the Environmental Goods Agreement (EGA).

"The bicycle is on top of agenda to be added in the list," Mahendra Awasthi, convenor of the All India Bicycle Pedlars Forum, an apex body of cycling enthusiasts in the country.

"Use of bicycles burns no fuel except human energy, is environment friendly and healthy" said VK Arora, an avid cyclist based in Delhi.

AIBPF said the high import tariffs on bicycles and bicycle parts do not protect any significant domestic manufacturing. "Import duty as high as 30% is completely senseless," said Karan Zombade, secretary, AIBPF.

Agreed Shiv Inder Singh, CEO of Firefox Cycles, which manufactures in Sri Lanka, and also imports Trek, Tern and BMX bikes: "If imported cycles become cheaper, the domestic companies would invest more in R&D and upgrade their products. Right now they have no incentive. The buyer would be the winner."

Published by HT Syndication with permission from Hindustan Times.

For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com 

HT Media Limited

Les islamistes algériens font reculer le gouvernement sur la vente d’alcool

Amir Akef 

18 April 2015

Le Monde.fr

Le premier ministre a «gelé» une mesure de libéralisation de la vente des boissons alcooliques qui avait été prise par le ministre du commerce.

«In vino veritas!» en latin. Traduction en algérien: le poids des islamistes se mesure dans la bouteille de vin. La boutade, un peu désabusée, a été entendue ces derniers jours en Algérie après la décision, mardi 14avril, du premier ministre Abdelmalek Sellal de «geler» une mesure de libéralisation de l’activité du commerce de gros de boissons alcoolisées. Un désaveu clair pour le ministre du commerce, Amara Benyounès, à l’origine de cette mesure, et durement attaqué, depuis, par les religieux officiels et les islamistes.

Des manifestations avaient été prévues le vendredi 17avril à l’issue de la prière hebdomadaire pour dénoncer la mesure. Les télévisions privées avaient fait monter la pression en invitant tous ceux qui étaient hostiles à la libéralisation de la vente du vin, «mère de tous les vices», à y participer. Depuis plusieurs semaines, le projet faisait l’objet d’attaques en règle de la part des religieux traditionnels mais aussi des islamistes salafistes.

«Après le vin, l’OMC va exiger de libéraliser la vente du porc et après elle demandera de libéraliser la prostitution», a accusé le prêcheur Chemessedine.Accusations fallacieusesSur Ennahar TV, une chaîne pro-Bouteflika, un prêcheur connu, Chemessedine, a accusé M. Benyounès de livrer une «guerre contre Allah», d’œuvrer à mettre l’Algérie entre les mains du «lobby sioniste (…). Après le vin, l’OMC va exiger de libéraliser la vente du porc et après elle demandera de libéraliser la prostitution». Des accusations fallacieuses, mais à l’impact réel. Amara Benyounès, habitué à se voir ouvrir les plateaux pour attaquer l’opposition et faire l’éloge du président Abdelaziz Bouteflika – il avait dit que le «cerveau de Bouteflika fonctionne mieux que tous nos cerveaux réunis» –, s’est retrouvé bien isolé.

Seule l’Association des producteurs algériens de boissons (APAB) l’a défendu en relevant qu’il n’avait fait qu’abroger une disposition prise de manière «illégale» par son prédécesseur. En2006, le ministre du commerce de l’époque, l’islamiste Hachemi Djaaboub, avait institué une autorisation préalable pour l’activité du commerce de gros des boissons alcoolisées. La disposition donnait toute latitude aux walis (préfets). Une prohibition de fait, aucun wali ne prenant le risque de faire usage de cette «latitude». Pour beaucoup d’analystes, le recul du gouvernement est une victoire des islamistes et des conservateurs.

Le Monde Interactif
