WTO chief to visit India, govt eyes food security solution
BD for timeline extension
US unemployment rate falls to 5.6%
European Parliament Draft Opinion Seeks Privacy Exemption From EU-U.S. Trade Pact
AmCham Says 83 Percent of U.S. Companies Back Taiwan Move to Become TPP Member
IT sector to defy China slowdown with 8 pct growth in 2015
Tanzania, Jordan to sign free trade pact next month, says TCCIA official
Some House Democrats, Various Groups Denounce Plans for Fast-Track Legislation
Letters to the Editor: Free Trade Often Doesn't Help U.S.

WTO chief to visit India, govt eyes food security solution
Nayanima Basu, Business Standard  |  New Delhi  January 10, 2015

India is going to up its ante on seeking a permanent solution to the food security issue at the WTO even as director general Roberto Azevêdo is visiting India this month.

Azevêdo, who is coming to Jaipur to take part in the CII Partnership Summit from January 15-17, will be meeting Minister of State (Independent Charge) Nirmala Sitharaman during the visit.

He might visit New Delhi to meet Prime Minister Narendra Modi and others, according to officials. But this has not been confirmed yet.

The WTO director general's visit comes at a time when the date for the next WTO ministerial meeting, the highest decision-making body, has been finalised. The 10th ministerial meet will be taking place in Nairobi, Kenya from December 15-18 this year.

During their meeting in Jaipur, Sitharaman is expected to discuss the possible stance India might take in seeking a permanent solution to the issue of food stockholding and farm subsidies.

The meeting in Jaipur will be followed by an informal meeting of trade ministers from US, Australia and India among others on the sidelines of the World Economic Forum Summit at Davos this month, where it is expected that the post-Bali work programme will be discussed.

Last year in November the WTO signed its first such multilateral pact since its inception – Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA). It also simultaneously agreed to grant an interim relief to India and other developing countries on food stocks schemes until a permanent solution to the issue is achieved, which was seen as a major victory by the Modi government.

The TFA is expected to inject $1 trillion into the global economy by way of easing global customs norms and facilitating smoother transition of goods across international borders.

Issues concerning the post-Bali work programme will also be discussed by all members during the next General Council meet that is scheduled to take place in February 20 at the WTO headquarters in Geneva.

This will be Azevêdo’s first visit to India since assuming the present role in September 2013. He last visited India early that year when he was running for the post.



BD for timeline extension

The Financial Express (Bangladesh)

Bangladesh, Jan. 9 -- Bangladesh wants to see the start of negotiation on extending the timeline for implementing patent law on drugs which will expire on December 31, said Commerce Minister Tofail Ahmed in the city on Thursday, reports UNB.

"We've already taken an initiative to extend the deadline. We've sent our position paper to Bangladesh Mission in Geneva after consulting the stakeholders so that negotiation can start based on the paper," he said.

The commerce minister said he would visit Geneva, Switzerland next month to attend a conference of the World Trade Organisation (WTO). "I'll try to expedite the process after discussing with all including least developed countries (LDCs) group."

The WTO Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS), with its 'one-size-fits-all' approach has created serious implications for the developing and LDCs in the field of public health, agriculture and development, according to industry insiders.

High quality global journalism requires investment. Please share this article with others using the link below, do not cut & paste the article. See our Ts&Cs and Copyright Policy for more detail. Email ftsales.support@ft.com to



US unemployment rate falls to 5.6%

FT Alice Ross in Washington and Richard Blackden in New York and Chris Giles in London

The US added more jobs than expected in December, confirming 2014 as the best year for job creation since 1999 even as growth in workers’ wages remained tepid enough to weigh on US government bond yields.

The world’s largest economy created 252,000 jobs last month, better than the 240,000 extra jobs that economists had predicted. Total US job creation for 2014 hit 2.95m, the Labor Department figures showed.

The strong job growth data reinforce the growing evidence that the US is powering ahead of other large economies and is likely to increase the gap in growth rates in the first half of this year.

The outlook for the US economy contrasts sharply with that of the eurozone, which has plunged into deflation for the first time in more than five years. While investors are betting that the US Federal Reserve will raise interest rates this summer, expectations are also growing for the European Central Bank to embark on a full-blown programme of bond-buying to stimulate its economy.

Friday’s figures also showed a better than expected fall in the US unemployment rate in December, from 5.8 per cent to 5.6 per cent, ahead of predictions of 5.7 per cent.

Economists have warned that as unemployment continues to fall to the rate the Fed considers normal — between 5.2 per cent and 5.5 per cent — pressure will build for interest rates to rise sooner rather than later.

The steady pace of US job creation — and the falling unemployment rate — have sharpened the pressure on the Fed to raise interest rates for the first time since the recession. In December, chairwoman Janet Yellen signalled that the central bank could lift its overnight lending rate as early as April.

However, the low level of inflation, which remains below the Fed’s target of 2 per cent, is still an area of concern.

Wage growth — another worry for the Fed — also disappointed in December, with average hourly earnings dropping 0.2 per cent from November to increase just 1.7 per cent over the previous 12 months.

Treasuries rallied following the report, with yields on the 10-year note, which move inversely to its price, falling 7 basis points to 1.945 per cent.

US labour secretary Thomas Perez hailed the jobs figures as “very solid”, but said that more still needed to be done to boost wage growth. “The challenge is undeniably the unfinished business of this recovery, which is to ensure the prosperity we see is shared prosperity and the contributions that workers make to productivity result in real wage growth,” he said.


European Parliament Draft Opinion Seeks Privacy Exemption From EU-U.S. Trade Pact
 By Stephen Gardner, Bloomberg BNA

Jan. 8 — The proposed European Union-U.S. Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership should contain a “comprehensive and unambiguous” exemption for European Union data protection rules, according to a draft European Parliament opinion drawn up by the Parliament's lead data protection negotiator, Jan Philipp Albrecht.

According to the Jan. 6 opinion, which Albrecht prepared for the European Parliament's Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs Committee (LIBE), TTIP should “guarantee full respect for EU fundamental rights standards,” and shouldn't undermine EU safeguards on transfers of personal data outside the bloc.

In addition, TTIP could be used as a means to protect EU citizens from mass electronic surveillance, according to the opinion. Data protection authorities and many lawmakers in the EU are concerned about the scope of data collection activities by the U.S. National Security Agency.

“The consent of the European Parliament to the final TTIP agreement could be endangered as long as the blanket mass surveillance activities are not completely abandoned,” the draft text said.

Albrecht is a German Green lawmaker who is the European Parliament's lead negotiator on the EU's data protection reform effort.

Albrecht's draft opinion, will, if approved by LIBE, be forwarded to the European Parliament's International Trade Committee, which is preparing an overarching European Parliament resolution on TTIP. Neither the LIBE opinion nor the final resolution would be binding.

The European Parliament didn't set a deadline for submission of amendments to Albrecht's draft text, or set a date for when the proposed LIBE opinion will be debated.

Negotiation Transparency Concerns

The European Parliament resolution on TTIP is being prepared amid the concerns of some lawmakers and advocacy groups that the EU-U.S. TTIP talks lack transparency. Albrecht's draft opinion said that, in particular, a draft TTIP chapter on electronic commerce hasn't been made available to members of the European Parliament.

The TTIP talks, which are aimed at coordinating EU and U.S. regulation in several areas, started in July 2013.

The EU Ombudsman, who investigates allegations of mismanagement by EU institutions, published a decision Jan. 6 that said the European Commission, which is negotiating for the EU side, should more openly provide information about TTIP.
The commission Jan. 7 published draft negotiating texts drawn up by EU negotiators and several fact sheets on TTIP chapters.

These make little reference to data protection, apart from a statement in one fact sheet on services that “data protection standards won't be part of TTIP negotiations. TTIP will make sure that the EU's data protection laws prevail over any commitments.”

A European Parliament official who asked not to be named told Bloomberg BNA Jan. 8 that this statement hasn't assuaged lawmakers' concerns.

“The commission has only revealed commission proposals,” and there was concern that as the negotiations progress, U.S. proposals, especially in the e-commerce chapter, which hasn't been published, “could undermine our data protection,” the official said.



AmCham Says 83 Percent of U.S. Companies Back Taiwan Move to Become TPP Member 
By Yu-Tzu Chiu, Bloomberg BNA

Jan. 8 — More than 80 percent of U.S. businesses surveyed by the American Chamber of Commerce in Taipei (AmCham Taipei) support Taiwan's goal of joining the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) trade bloc, assuming an agreement is completed among the 12 countries, the business chamber said Jan. 8.

The AmCham Taipei 2015 Business Climate Survey, released Jan. 8, interviewed more than 400 members, who are mostly general managers, chief executive officers and senior managers at their companies. Some 245 of the select respondents responded to the survey.

According to the survey, 83 percent of the chamber's business leaders strongly support the Taiwanese government's hope of joining the proposed trade agreement, as this will enhance Taiwan's growth prospects and help it avoid economic marginalization. They added that Taiwan will be able to meet the pact's high standards.

Taiwan's President Ma Ying-jeou has spoken about the vital importance of engaging in thorough economic reform to prepare the country for participation in TPP. To avoid being isolated from regional economic integration, Ma's administration set a goal to join the TPP by 2020.

According to AmCham Taipei, during the past year, the business chamber has been encouraged by indications that the Taiwanese government has been reviewing the regulatory process with an eye to bringing Taiwan's procedures in line with standard international practices.

“The pace will need to be accelerated to enhance Taiwan's chances for eventual inclusion in the Trans-Pacific Partnership. But whether or not TPP membership materializes, liberalization would improve Taiwan's ability to compete effectively in global markets,” Thomas Fann, AmCham Taipei Chairman, wrote in the report.

Taiwan Will Meet TPP Standards

The survey also found that 68 percent of respondents believe Taiwan is capable of meeting the high standards required for the TPP membership.

In the survey, respondents said they believe that, for Taiwan to sign free trade agreements with other economies, it must increase its ability to attract foreign investment and boost trade by liberalizing its market and implementing international standards.

A majority of respondents also said Taiwan and the U.S. should negotiate a bilateral investment agreement. The result shows that 66 percent of respondents see the lack of a U.S.-Taiwan bilateral investment agreement as a disadvantage for Taiwan; among them, 20 percent view it as a major disadvantage.

Seventy percent of the executives surveyed said their companies were profitable in 2014, adding that they can maintain similar profit levels in 2015.

“We hope that we may look forward to the vigorous adoption of economic reform initiatives in the coming year, including implementation of the Free Economic Pilot Zone plan, to further strengthen Taiwan's future economic outlook,” Fann wrote.



IT sector to defy China slowdown with 8 pct growth in 2015

Cihan News Agency (CNA) 9 January 2015,

China is poised to record the second-fastest growth, behind India, in the US$2.3 trillion global information technology market this year, despite concerns about the mainland's economy and speculation that the central government wants less foreign technology.

Total government and enterprise spending in information technology goods and services on the mainland is estimated to reach 807 billion yuan (HK$1.02 trillion), up 8 per cent from last year, according to the latest industry forecast published yesterday by Forrester Research.

That prediction puts the mainland strongly entrenched as the world's third-largest information technology market, behind the United States and Japan.

The report, which excluded consumer and corporate telecommunications services spending, projected the US market to reach US$862.8 billion this year, followed by Japan at 19.9 trillion yen (HK$1.3 trillion).

India's enterprise technology market is expected be worth 1.97 billion rupees (HK$240.3 million) this year, advancing 9.1 per cent from last year.

Research firm IDC on Tuesday released a bigger estimate for the mainland's overall information and communications technology market, which included consumer and telecommunications services purchases. It calculated this market to be worth US$465.6 billion this year, an 11.4 per cent increase over last year.

Forrester analyst Charlie Dai said yesterday the mainland's economic growth may be slowing down but technology investments of the government, the state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and the country's aggressive internet firms continue to rise.

"Premier Li Keqiang has been stressing the importance of innovation through big data and cloud computing technologies, which has helped drive adoption in the country," Dai said.

IDC predicted that domestic hi-tech manufacturers will pursue more co-operation and joint-venture deals with foreign companies.

Reports last month, however, suggested that Beijing was keen to ramp up efforts to remove all foreign technology from its financial services industry, SOEs, the military and key government agencies.

"They can, but they will pay a cost in terms of higher-priced systems with less functionality, interoperability and security," Robert Atkinson, the president of US think tank The Information Technology & Innovation Foundation, told the South China Morning Post.

"This [initiative] would violate the spirit, if not the letter of the law, under the WTO. The Chinese government wants all the perks of being part of a global trading system, but does not want to be a responsible partner," he said.



Tanzania, Jordan to sign free trade pact next month, says TCCIA official 
By The guardian reporter 9th January 2015

The government will next month sign free trade agreement with the Middle East Kingdom of Jordan that would enable smooth movement of goods and services from both countries.

Speaking to this paper in a telephone interview the Vice Chairman of Tanzania Chamber of Commerce Industry and Agriculture (TCCIA), Dar es Salaam Region, Vicent Minja said the signing is a result of the recent visit made by the chamber in Jordan.

During the visit which was held from December 6 to 10 last year the Jordan business delegation agreed to come to Tanzania in February this year to discuss areas of cooperation between two countries, he said.

Apart from visiting Tanzania, he said, the delegation will also sign free trade agreement with the government of Tanzania.

It is expected that the Minister for Industry and Trade, Dr Abdallah Kigoda will sign the agreement on behalf of Tanzania.

According to the chamber’s Executive Director, Getfred Muganda, this is the first visit of Tanzanian businessmen to Jordan.
“It is our hope that the visit will result in attraction of more foreign investors to our country,” he said.

Early last year, the chamber signed various pacts with multiple chambers worldwide to build economic cooperation with Tanzania.
According to the Chairman of TCCIA, Dar es Salaam Regional chamber, Francis Lukwaro, the MoU signed between the chamber and the Zarka Chamber of Industry of the Kingdom of Jordan (ZIC) aims to improve business relations between two parties.

“It is a good opportunity for the Tanzanian business community to explore the untapped potentials in Jordan and establish relationship with its Jordanian counterparts who already have a steady economy,” he said, citing vast economic investment potentials in agriculture and mining.

The TCCIA Dar es Salaam Region has over 1,200 members from various sectors, including industries, agriculture and services.



Some House Democrats, Various Groups Denounce Plans for Fast-Track Legislation 
By Len Bracken, Bloomberg BNA

Jan. 8 — A coalition of some House Democrats, labor groups and non-governmental organizations Jan. 8 voiced their opposition to congressional proposals to approve trade promotion authority (TPA) legislation that has been cited by senior Republican lawmakers and the White House as an area of possible cooperation.

In a briefing with reporters on Capitol Hill, coalition members said past trade agreements have been disastrous for U.S. workers and expressed their strong doubts as to the benefits of the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) being negotiated by the U.S. and 11 other Pacific Rim countries.

Some members of the coalition called into question the constitutionality of any fast-track legislation that would limit debate on trade agreements and deny opportunities to amend trade deals submitted to Congress by the administration for approval.

The coalition, which was led at the event by Rep. Rosa DeLauro (D-Conn.) and AFL-CIO President Richard Trumka, included lawmakers and a wide spectrum of organizations.

“The AFL-CIO doesn't just oppose fast track, we're going to fight actively to kill it,” Trumka said.

DeLauro described the coalition as one of the broadest she has seen in her 24 years in Congress, including environmental and health care advocacy groups, community and consumer protection organizations, and unions.

Seventeen House Democrats

In addition to DeLauro, 16 Democratic House members spoke at the event. Louise Slaughter (N.Y.) spoke first, followed by Peter DeFazio (Ore.), Mark Pocan (Wisc.), Barbara Lee (Calif.), Keith Ellison (Minn.), Marcy Kaptur (Ohio), Tim Ryan (Ohio), Alan Grayson (Fl.), Donna Edwards (Md.), Jan Schakowsky (Ill.), Dan Kildee (Minn.), Raul Grijalva (Ariz.), Janice Hahn (Calif.), Debbie Dingle (Mich.), Mark DeSaulnier (Calif.) and Paul Tonko (N.Y.).

DeFazio noted that Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) Jan. 7 said he was in favor of renewing the Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA), referring to the program primarily administered by the Labor Department that is designed to offer assistance and training for workers displaced by international trade.

DeFazio questioned whether the training would be for work at McDonalds and pledged not to serve as a “doormat” for multinational corporations that he said were the primary beneficiaries of U.S. trade agreements.

Dingle, who traveled with President Barack Obama to Michigan Jan. 7, praised the president for the assistance provided by the administration to the auto industry in her state, but she said passage of trade promotion authority legislation would represent a setback for companies such as Ford that are currently successful.
She raised the issue of Japanese currency devaluations, describing currency manipulation as “the mother of all trade barriers” and providing an unfair advantage to Japanese automakers, specifically citing Toyota as a beneficiary.
While the TPA legislation introduced in the 113th Congress included currency-related provisions among a long list of negotiating objectives, critics note these provisions were non-binding. U.S. trade officials said in late 2013 that currency was not a subject of the TPP negotiations up to that stage in the talks.

The Big Three U.S. automakers—Chrysler, Ford and General Motors—have said through the American Automotive Policy Council (AAPC) that they will not support TPP unless it includes meaningful provisions against currency manipulation.

White House Pledges Not to Sign Bad Deal

When asked about Democratic opposition to the administration's trade agenda, administration spokesman Josh Earnest said Jan. 7 to the press aboard Air Force One en route to Detroit that the president will not agree to a trade pact that is not in the best interest of the U.S.

“As the President seeks to open up additional markets overseas to American businesses, we're going to use the same guiding principle, and we're going to make sure that whatever trade agreement that the President is able to reach is in the best interests of the American auto industry and in the best interests of American businesses,” Earnest said. “And here's the thing: If presented with an agreement that doesn't do that, then we won't have a deal and the President won't agree to it.”

When asked to respond to this assertion, DeLauro questioned the transparency of the process—whereas members of Congress can see draft negotiating texts, their staff cannot, nor can notes be taken in the highly secure, designated reading room. She contrasted that with health care legislation that could be scrutinized on a line-by-line basis before the deal was consummated.

“We are the duly elected people in 435 congressional districts,” she said. “We have to represent their interests and that is what we are trying to do.”

Other speakers at the press event were Sister Simone Campbell, Executive Director; NETWORK, A National Catholic Social Justice Lobby; Larry Cohen, president of the Communications Workers of America; Tony Corbo with Food and Water Watch; and Debbie Sease, federal campaign director at the Sierra Club.



Letters to the Editor: Free Trade Often Doesn't Help U.S.
The Wall Street Journal 10 January 2015,

I read the op-ed "A Trade Opportunity for Obama and the New Congress" by Rep. Charles Boustany and Robert B. Zoellick (Dec. 29) and wondered what economic data they are viewing.

Recently the Economic Policy Institute published a study about the effect our massive trade deficit has on manufacturing jobs. This trade deficit with China will be in excess of $320 billion for 2014. When Mr. Zoellick started as U.S. Trade Representative in 2000, the trade deficit with China was about $83 billion. Great growth for China! The study concluded that the China trade deficit has cost the U.S. economy 3.2 million jobs. Of those jobs, 2.4 million were manufacturing jobs. With this massive trade deficit all common sense tells us that China is taking our jobs.

We watched the median household income drop from $56,000 in 2000 to $52,000 in 2013. Can Rep. Boustany and Mr. Zoellick not connect the dots about massive trade deficits and lower income on Main Street?

Let's use the example of the most recent "free trade" agreement with South Korea. This agreement went into effect in 2011, and since 2011 U.S. exports to South Korea have gone nowhere while our trade deficit with South Korea has gone from $13 billion in 2010 to over $20 billion in 2013. Where are all the exports that the Obama administration promised the American people when they passed this free trade agreement?

The Trans-Pacific Partnership is the same snake oil that has been sold to the American public for the last 20 years -- free trade deals will create great export jobs for our citizens. The countries in the TPP want to export to the U.S. market, not buy U.S. products.

