WTO negotiators reach agreement on expanded IT tariff cut 
ITA Talks Lurch Forward After Draft Product List Accord 
OMC avanza en eliminar aranceles a productos tecnológicos 
WTO ambassadors meeting pushed back to July 31
Liberia, EU sign deal on WTO ascension 
ASEAN can replace china in providing total value chain 
CFK calls for united Mercosur against ‘vultures’ 
Stop lawmakers from retreating from COOL 
India needs to resist pressure from big drug firms and their backers to change patent laws
Pakistan can change the trend of its chronic trade deficit by utilizing increased market access of China



WTO negotiators reach agreement on expanded IT tariff cut 
19 July 2015, Kyodo News
 
Negotiators from countries and regions participating in World Trade Organization talks to eliminate tariffs on information technology products agreed Saturday to expand the list of products covered, negotiation sources said. A final deal by the Information Technology Agreement signatories is expected on Friday to newly include some 200 products such as magnetic resonance imaging machines and video game consoles, they said. Countries such as the United States are in favor of expanding the product list, while China and other countries have been asking for some exemptions. For Japan, over 8 trillion yen ($64.5 billion) worth of exported products a year would be tariff-free under the new agreement, according to the sources. WTO Director-General Roberto Azevedo wrote on Twitter that he is "very optimistic that we'll have a final successful deal by the end of next week." "We have the basis for an agreement" after the talks involving all participants, he said.  The Information Technology Agreement entered into force in 1997. The number of participants stands at 80, representing 97 percent of global trade in technology products, according to the WTO.
 
ITA Talks Lurch Forward After Draft Product List Accord 
19 July 2015, BNA
 
Trade negotiators tentatively agreed to eliminate tariffs on an array of technology products valued at $1 trillion worth of global trade. The development came after Korean trade negotiators withdrew their opposition to an extended Information Technology Agreement (ITA) and members agreed to consider a draft list of covered products. The breakthrough occurred at a July 18 ambassadors meeting at the European Union embassy in Geneva. Members were able to address a series of tariff lines, notably LCD screens, which were contested by Taiwan and China, and an EU ex-out request for car radios. The expanded product list will now undergo consideration from trade ministers at their various capitals. 
Pretty Big Deal. “We have the basis for an understanding,” World Trade Organization Director Roberto Azevedo told Bloomberg BNA after the meeting. “The very next step is next Friday,” Azevedo said. “The list is out, members are going to consult their capitals, and we will know by Friday whether we have final approval on the list of products and the declaration itself,” he said. Azevedo said this would be “a very important” systematic outcome for the WTO because it would be the first tariff cutting agreement for the organization in the last 17 years. 
 
Product List

The product list could pave the way for a finalized deal that would contribute as much as $190 billion to the global gross domestic product and support 60,000 U.S. jobs. Technology manufacturers like Intel Corp., Samsung Electronics Co. Ltd., Sandisk Corp. and Texas Instruments Inc. stand to benefit from the elimination of tariffs on some 250 products, including solid state hard drives, video game consoles, video cameras, GPS devices, medical equipment and multi-component semiconductors (MCOs). Eighty WTO countries participate in the ITA talks and account for about 97 percent of global trade in IT products. The ITA requires participants to eliminate import tariffs on technology products on a most-favored-nation basis, meaning that any duty-free terms are applied to all WTO members. 
 
Next Steps

In September, ITA negotiators will begin discussions on schedules of concessions for tariff reductions, also known as staging. Staging allows countries to gradually phase in the tariff reductions for certain products deemed too sensitive for the ITA's various signatories. Negotiators will also engage in technical negotiations and verification work with the goal of completing the agreement by the WTO Ministerial Conference scheduled for Dec. 15-18 in Nairobi, Kenya. U.S. technology industry officials are hopeful the deal could enter into force as soon as July 2016.
 
OMC avanza en eliminar aranceles a productos tecnológicos 
19 July 2015, El País - Nacional
 
El pacto afecta a 250 bienes, como sistemas GPS o pantallas LCD
 
La Organización Mundial del Comercio (OMC) está más cerca de cerrar lo que sería el primer acuerdo global de eliminación de aranceles en 17 años. El director de la organización, Roberto Azevedo, aseguró ayer que "se han sentado las bases para un acuerdo" que suprimiría tarifas en 250 productos tecnológicos, cuyo comercio se valora en 925.000 millones de euros al año. El "principio de acuerdo", como lo bautizó también una fuente europea, se alcanzó en la mañana de ayer tras una reunión la embajada de la UE en Ginebra (Suiza) de negociadores que representaban a 54 países miembros de la OMC. Los negociadores pactaron los productos que entrarían en esta supresión de aranceles que, de aprobarse, beneficiaría a las exportaciones de todos los países adheridos a la OMC. Si cuenta con el respaldo definitivo de los países implicados, la lista inicial será aprobada el próximo viernes, según detalló Azevedo. Entre los productos que se discuten están los sistemas GPS, las consolas de videojuegos, equipamiento médico o unidades de memoria SSHD. También pantallas LCD (cuyos aranceles a la importación fueron denunciados por China y Taiwan) o radios para coches. Una vez haya acuerdo sobre la lista inicial, en septiembre comenzaría el debate sobre el calendario para una aplicación gradual de esos recortes en los productos que los países firmantes consideren sensibles (es decir, que al facilitar la importación pueda dañarse la producción nacional).
 
Negociación desde 2012
 
La previsión de la OMC y de la industria tecnológica de EE UU (una de las más beneficiadas con la reducción de aranceles) es que la discusión pueda acabar en un acuerdo en la conferencia ministerial de Nairobi (Kenia), a finales de año, y que pueda ponerse en marcha en julio de 2016. Si es así, el desenlace sería relativamente rápido para lo que suele ser habitual en las largas y complejas negociaciones que se desarrollan en el seno de la Organización Mundial del Comercio. De hecho, el acuerdo sobre las tecnologías de la información (ATI), fue firmado por 80 países en 1997, pero la discusión sobre la supresión de aranceles en los productos cubiertos por este acuerdo no comenzó hasta 2012. Las divergencias entre Estados Unidos y China han marcado la negociación, que se desbloqueó a finales de 2014 tras una visita del presidente de EE UU, Barack Obama, a Pekín. Y el último escollo salvado, la resistencia de Corea del Sur a ampliar el acuerdo.
 
OMC: percée dans les négociations sur l'accord sur les technologies de l'information
19 juillet 2015, Agence France Presse 
 
Une percée a été obtenue samedi dans les négociations sur les technologies de l'information menées au sein de l'OMC (Organisation mondiale du commerce) à Genève depuis 2012, a-t-on appris de source européenne. Des négociateurs, venant de 54 pays membres de l'OMC, se sont mis d'accord sur "un projet d'accord" qui permettrait de couper les tarifs douaniers d'environ 200 produits des technologies de l'information, représentant un volume d'échanges de 1.000 milliards de dollars. Ce projet d'accord va à présent être envoyé aux différentes capitales des pays négociateurs pour approbation. Dans un tweet, le directeur général de l'OMC, Roberto Azevedo, a déclaré que "nous avons les bases pour un accord" et s'est déclaré "très optimiste quant à la conclusion d'un accord d'ici la fin de la semaine prochaine". Dans un communiqué, la délégation de l'UE auprès de l'OMC a indiqué que des négociations ont été menées à Genève du 14 au 18 juillet, présidées par l'UE. "Ces négociations ont été un succès, représentant un très important pas en avant", a indiqué la délégation. Le round de négociations s'est focalisé sur la finalisation de la liste des produits concernés par le nouvel accord sur les technologies de l'information. Il fait suite au round de décembre 2014, qui s'était soldé par un échec en raison des trop grandes divergences entre les négociateurs. Selon l'ambassadeur de l'UE auprès de l'OMC, Angelos Pangratis, qui a présidé les discussions, "durant les derniers jours, toutes les parties prenantes ont affiché la flexibilité nécessaire qui nous a permis d'arriver à cet important résultat". Selon l'UE, le "nouvel accord sur les technologies de l'information sera une contribution importante à l'OMC et à son système commercial multilatéral". Le premier accord sur les technologies de l'information (ATI) date de 1997. En 2012, des négociations ont été engagées pour élargir les produits couverts par l'ATI. Le 11 novembre 2014, ces négociations avaient connu un rebondissement favorable grâce à un rapprochement entre les Etats-Unis et la Chine, annoncé à Pékin par le président américain, Barack Obama. Washington avait alors accepté les exceptions demandées par Pékin mais, en décembre, les négociateurs s'étaient à nouveau séparés sur un échec.

WTO ambassadors meeting pushed back to July 31
19 July 2015, Politico
 
World Trade Organization Director-General Roberto Azevedo has pushed back an informal meeting of WTO ambassadors until July 31 to give member countries time to discuss new proposals in each of the pillars of the Doha round of negotiations. Geneva-based sources said allowing the new proposals to be discussed at a certain level of specificity next week during negotiating sessions for agriculture, non-agricultural market access and services will help prepare members for talks when they return from the August recess in mid-September. But one source emphasized that the likelihood has not increased of getting a so-called work program that would chart the path forward for the negotiations. Countries such as Barbados and Uganda have pushed for members to continue making efforts toward a work program even though most delegations believe such a program is not feasible by the end-of-month deadline, sources said. However, if significant progress is made in negotiating sessions next week, a July 27-28 General Council meeting could be suspended until after ambassadors, organized as the Trade Negotiations Committee, meet July 31. The TNC meeting was originally scheduled for July 24 to let ambassadors discuss the status of the talks before they attend the General Council meeting, where any official decisions would be made. Azevedo informed delegations of the meeting change in a fax on Thursday.
 
Liberia, EU sign deal on WTO ascension 
19 July 2015, The New Dawn
 
Liberian and the European have signed a deal, concluding bilateral negotiations on Liberia's ascension to the World Trade Organization (WTO). Ascension to the WTO is expected to make a lasting contribution to the process of economic reform and sustainable development in Liberia, according to a press release. Today's signature is a milestone in Liberia's WTO accession process and an important step towards fostering our economic relations”, said Angelos Pangratis, EU Ambassador to the WTO. She said against the background of the devastating public health challenge of Ebola, Liberia has made remarkable progress in preparing for WTO entry and the EU looks forward to rewarding Liberia's efforts and welcoming the country into the WTO family very soon. The bilateral deal signed by EU Ambassador to the WTO AngelosPangratis and Liberia's Minister for Commerce and Industry, Axel M. Addy, defines the level of market access Liberia will grant to EU goods and services in the WTO. These commitments will be then embodied in the future Protocol of Accession of Liberia to the WTO. The Republic of Liberia applied for WTO membership in mid-2007. The accession talks started half a year later with the establishment of a dedicated Working Party made of interested WTO members. In order to join the WTO, Liberia must complete bilateral negotiations with each of them and obtain the endorsement of the entire Working Party. Minister Addy said trade flows between the EU and Liberia are small but balanced. From an EU perspective, trade with Liberia represents just 0.03 percent of its total trade value. The EU imports from Liberia, worth half a billion euros in 2013, amount, however, to as much as over 40 % of Liberia's total goods' exports. As a Least Developed Country, all Liberia's products (except arms) enjoy duty-free and quota-free access to the EU market. Trade between the EU and Liberia will soon be governed by the Economic Partnership Agreement that the EU has initialed with 16 West African states last year.
 
ASEAN can replace china in providing total value chain 
19 July 2015, Cambodian Business Review
 
An economically-integrated ASEAN can replace China in providing multi-national companies (MNCs) a total value chain for their business. In a paper titled: The Asean Community: Capturing the zeitgeist of rising Asia, TMF Group said that through it was possible, that would be only achieved if all non-tariff barriers are removed, it said. On the plus side, the formation of the Asean Economic Community, due to complete in Dec 31, means the integration of the diverse range of industrial specializations in Asean, which would make the region suitable for a wide array of investors. The paper notes that Singapore and Malaysia specialize in electronic products, Thailand is the leading manufacturer of fast moving consumer goods and processed foods, while Vietnam and Cambodia focus on garments. Indonesia, Brunei, and the Philippines are the main producers and exporters of natural resources such as palm oil, rubber, sugar cane, rice, cocoa, timber, petroleum, natural gas, coal and tin. The vertical and horizontal integration of South-East Asia economies under the AEC would stimulate intra-regional investment, trade and business connections benefitting both foreign and local firms," said Paolo Tavolato, TMF Group's head of Asia-Pacific. As China's population ages and the workforce becomes more expensive, Asean can offer the full value chain to multi-national companies, from, say, research and development in Singapore, to labor-intensive manufacturing in Indonesia and Vietnam, supported by business process outsourcing in the Philippines," he added. Nevertheless, TMF Group highlighted that a crucial step to this new era for the region would be the removal of non-tariff barriers. According to the chairman's statement at the 26th Asean Summit in April, 458 out of the total 506 high-priority measures outlined in the AEC roadmap have been fully implemented across all Asean countries.
 
This took the AEC's implementation to 90.5%. For the remaining deliverables, the Asean Economic Ministers (AEM) have been tasked to identify, priorities and implement measures that carry the highest economic impact in a bid to achieve 95% implementation rate by year-end. Among the remaining deliverables, the removal of non-tariff barriers (NTBs) is the hardest to implement as most are populist measures designed to protect strategic national industries," said Tavolato. Challenges remain in the elimination of NTBs such as a single channel for imports, price control measures, natural resource subsidies and preferential treatment of state-owned enterprises. Although the withdrawal of NTBs might inflict short-term pain, it would eventually be beneficial as competition will push these industries to move up the value chain and increase productivity."
A study by the Institute of Southeast Asian Studies (Plummer and Chia, 2009) shows that the total removal of tariff and NTBs in Asean could reduce the cost of doing business in the region by five per cent and increase its GDP by five per cent. According to the Asian Economic Journal (2012), the establishment of the AEC could generate US$280bil (RM1.02 trillion) to US$615bil (RM2. 26 trillion) (equivalent to five per cent to 12% of projected Asean GDP) in annual economic value by 2030. It is predicted that by 2025, more than half of the world's consumers would live within a five to six hour f light from Asean. Every step towards creating the AEC tests the commitment and political will of the leaders to sacrifice their national agenda for the common good. Investors are drawn to Asean countries as they hope to leverage the region's emerging consumer market, rising middle classes and equally increasing spending power. All of this makes Asean one of the most important consumer markets of the future, and helps pave the way for an Asean Economic Communit y to emerge as a powerhouse of the world economy," Tavolato concluded.
Asean economies attracted more than USD128 billion in FDI in 2014. The AEC will allow seamless integration of industries across the region and help achieve the economies of scale, further establishing Asean as a leading investment destination. 
 
EU positive about preparation for Asean Economic Community
 
As the Asean Economic Community (AEC) takes effect at end-2015, many have questioned Asean's preparation. From the perspective of a non-A sean member, A sean members are geared up towards welcoming the AEC in achieving the goal of regional economic integration. Among the AEC's objectives are to promote a single market and production base, develop a highly competitive economic region and a region that is fully integrated into the global economy. Chairman of the European Union-Malaysia Chamber of Commerce and Industr y Fermin Fautsch said the outlook for Asean was positive, be it among the 10 members or the soon-to-be AEC with other countries. According to him, Asean is expected to be the world's sixth largest economy by 2020 but in order to achieve that status, each of its members needs to strengthen intra-trade within the community before trading as a community with other trading blocs. This was possible as most of the tariffs within Asean had been removed, making the trading process easier, he said. More than 98% of goods are basically no tariff and this will benefit the Asean countries while soon benefiting other countries that are trading with the Asean community. Currently the intra-trade in Asean is only about 25 % as most are trading with the big countries such as the United States, the European Union, Japan and China," he said. He said this was normal as countries would normally want to build their business relationships with big countries with higher gross domestic product (GDP). Taking the EU as an example, he said the countries in the grouping were also focused on building relationships with growing economies instead of among the EU members. But today, after more than 40 years and with 28 countries, intra-trade among the EU members accounts for 60%. Each member needed to support one another and together, they would form a bigger trading bloc, which was a type of inter-governmental agreement, he said. Fautsch added that Asean would accelerate faster as there were now 10 member countries with the number to grow soon. However, he said, integration is a journey and it will not happen overnight". There are challenges that need to be addressed, especially in making sure all countries had excellent infrastructure, he said. Having good infrastructure such as a good roads, airports, electricity, water supply as well as telecommunications is crucial. It provides convenience to the companies from other countries that are doing business in the country. Compared with some of its members, the infrastructure in some Asean countries was very good but perhaps more investment was needed in some less populated areas, he added. Asked about the relationship between the EU and Asean once the AEC came into effect, he said it would definitely become stronger. With a GDP of US$18 trillion, the EU is still the largest investor in the world and it is an important partner for Asean. We were ranked as the second foreign investor in the manufacturing sector in Malaysia last year, after Japan, and with the economic integration it will be positive to Malaysia and Asean in terms of attracting foreign direct investment," he said.
 
Asean SMEs discuss AEC
 
The implications and relevance of the Asean Economic Community (AEC) on business operations and strategies, and the dissemination of information to networks and communities, were deliberated at a seminar in Bangkok. The two day seminar on the AEC Information for Business" discussed the importance of awareness and understanding of AEC's key initiatives for the business community. Delegates included representatives from regional and national business councils, SME promotion agencies, Asean SMEs and government agencies. Palarin Yamchinda, director of Policy and Strategy Unit, Office of Small and Medium Enterprise (SME) Promotion of Thailand, asserted the importance of enhancing the competitiveness and dynamism of SMEs by facilitating their access to information, market, human resources development and skills, finance and technology. Syed Nabil Fauwaz Aljeffri, secretar ygeneral of the Asean-Business Advisory Council, called for public and private sector collaboration to reduce non-tariff barriers/ measures (NTBs/ NTMs) to spur trade in the region. He raised the challenges faced by SMEs, including limited access to finance, market, technology, and facilitating free movement of goods. He said the Asean Business Advisory Council was studying ways to lower NTBs/ NTMs and optimize the use of information and communication technology to support SMEs. The Asean SME Agencies Working Group (SMEWG), in coordination with the Asean Secretariat, is currently working on the Asean SME Service Centre Web Portal, which will provide information.
 
CFK calls for united Mercosur against ‘vultures’ 
19 July 2015, Buenos Aires Herald
 
Bloc member countries ask to move forward with trade deal with European Union
 
With the economy as the main issue on the agenda, President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner yesterday attended the Mercosur bloc summit in Brasilia and asked to deepen the integration between Mercosur and the Union of South American Nations (UNASUR), while warning over a new Plan Cóndor in the region by the “vulture” funds. The heads of the Mercosur trade bloc — Brazil, Paraguay, Uruguay, Venezuela and Argentina — accepted Bolivia as a full member country and set finding new markets for their products as a priority, asking to move forward with a free trade agreement with the European Union. Meanwhile, they agreed to implement a plan to eliminate trade barriers in the region. “We have taken important steps but now we have to do it on real terms. We have a large potential as a market but we haven't exploited it enough yet,” CFK said. “The Mercosur is a formidable instrument and has its focus on the economy but the world's conflicts continue to be deeply political.” Unlike the United Nations, all the member states are equal and there's no Security Council where some members have a veto power, the President said, suggesting to use the Mercosur and Unasur as models to solve the world's conflicts peacefully and with speed and efficiency. Nevertheless, she insisted she wasn't being critical of the UN. “We know the huge difficulties and pressures the UN goes through. Its authorities are always willing to discuss all the conflicts, but there are large pressures from some of the members,” CFK said. “All countries should be treated equally, no matter their economic, military or technological power. That's the UN main problem now.” The head of state, who held a meeting with Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff, warned about a new Plan Cóndor in the region — the repressive coordination plan carried out by the the Southern Cone dictatorships between 1970 and 1980 — now spearheaded by the “vulture” funds and asked to strengthen the countries democracies. “Today is the 40 year anniversary of the Plan Cóndor. Perhaps somewhere in the world a new plan is being developed. We need to strengthen our democracies as never before. The plan can be a vulture one and not a condor this time. It's not a coincidence, they are always raptors,” CFK said. “It's a more subtle and sophisticated plan.” In the final statement at the end of the summit, the bloc member countries condemned the actions of the “vulture” funds, which “complicate deals between countries and their creditors and affect the countries financial stability.” At the same time, they criticized the “lack of progress” in the negotiations between Argentina and the United Kingdom over the Malvinas Islands.
 
Looking for a deal
 
Unlike previous summits, the Mercosur bloc leaders showed a united front regarding the negotiations with the European Union over a free trade agreement and asked to exchange offers before the end of the year. Uruguay President Tabaré Vázquez and Paraguay President Horacio Cartés described the negotiations as complex but remained hopeful about reaching a deal. “We are confident about maintaining the commitment agreed between the Mercosur and the EU over finalizing the negotiation and exchanging offers in the last quarter of the year,” Vázquez said. “A close relationship between all the governments is needed to do that. That's the challenge and we'll face it with unity and dignity.” Mercosur foreign ministers and European Commissioner for Trade Cecilia Malmström agreed in a summit in Brussels in June to hold a new meeting before the end of the year and exchange offers if negotiators of both blocs see that they are solid enough. But the meeting showed the many differences between Mercosur bloc members regarding the deal. Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff said the Mercosur wants to reach a “wide trade agreement” not only with the European Union but also with other countries, mentioning South Korea and Tunisia specifically. At the same time, she said the bloc has taken “important steps” in the dialogue with the Pacific Alliance, leaving a door open to a deal between both blocs. Cartés, who now holds the pro-tempore presidency of the bloc, also mentioned the “common interests” of Mercosur and the Pacific Alliance — formed by Mexico, Colombia, Peru and Chile. He said there are “urgent issues” to be discussed by the bloc members, putting the elimination of trade barriers as one of the most important ones, so to have an “efficient and fluid” trade. The bloc's member countries agreed yesterday to implement a work plan to eliminate trade barriers by the end of the year. The plan, proposed by Uruguay and Paraguay, includes a survey to know the current trade barriers, followed by a negotiation between members to see which barriers can be eliminated faster than others. The plan comes days after Argentina agreed with the European Union to comply by December 31 with a ruling from the Dispute Settlement Body of the World Trade Organization (WTO) against import restrictions. The WTO said in April the country's DJAI import permits and other non-tariff barriers (including national licencing rules) breached international trade rules.
 
Stop lawmakers from retreating from COOL 
19 July 2015, The Rapid City Journal
 
Distinguishing imported from domestic meat is not new. The Tariff Act of 1930 requires labels on imported meat to indicate to the "ultimate purchaser" its country of origin. This explains why imported canned meat and imported ready-to-eat meat has been labeled for as long as most of us can remember. However, volumes of imported meat remained unlabeled because the U.S. interpreted "ultimate purchaser" to be the last purchaser of the meat product in the form in which it was imported. Big meatpackers began circumventing labeling requirements by cutting, blending, grinding or repackaging imported meat. The United States accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO) brought with it a similarly lax origin standard. Under WTO rules, the country of origin is where the meat product was last substantially transformed. Thus, meat from a Canadian steer slaughtered in the U.S. would bear a USA label when exported to Japan. Parents whose children received ground beef in school lunches were dissatisfied with such lax origin standards. The U.S. responded by prohibiting imported beef or beef from cattle imported for immediate slaughter from federal procurement programs. As a result, school lunch beef must be derived from animals that were at least raised and slaughtered in the U.S. By 2002, Americans decided the WTO's origin definition was too weak; the USDA's policy of omitting origin information on altered or repackaged meat was unacceptable; and the somewhat better origin standard used for school lunches was still intellectually dishonest. That's why Congress passed the mandatory country of origin labeling law, or COOL. Foreign countries and big meatpackers opposed it. But Americans committed to defending their right to know where their food is produced persevered. What emerged was a uniquely American mandatory COOL law that reserved the USA label only for meat from animals born, raised and slaughtered in the U.S. The COOL law was initially implemented as a voluntary program that lasted from 2002 until late 2008. Only a negligible volume of meat was ever labeled during the voluntary program. Voluntary COOL failed because big meatpackers don't want to disclose the origins of meat. In 2013, they sued the USDA claiming that COOL violated their First Amendment free speech rights by forcing them to provide COOL labels against their will. Our federal courts repeatedly rejected their claims. Contrary to our court system rulings, the WTO ruled that providing accurate labels to U.S. consumers violates U.S. obligations to the WTO. More and more in Congress believe the U.S. must become subservient to a higher authority. That higher authority is the WTO. The certain amount of national sovereignty they willingly cede to this international tribunal is justified, they say, because the U.S. must go along to get along. Global governance admirers are now scrambling to change our COOL law even before the WTO dispute resolution process is completed. Alarmingly, 300 members of the U.S. House of Representatives voted to repeal COOL even before the U.S. had a chance to initiate arbitration, the final phase of the WTO's dispute resolution process. This is an unprecedented surrender of U.S. sovereignty. Not to be outdone, members of the U.S. Senate Agriculture Committee are in heated competition to either repeal COOL or convert it to a voluntary program. It's a sad commentary that without so much as a public quarrel Congress is working to deprive U.S. consumers of their freedom to choose from which country their meat is produced. If you agree you have a right to know where your meat is produced, call your U.S. senators and urge them to vote "no" on the repeal of COOL and "no" on converting COOL to a voluntary program.
 
India needs to resist pressure from big drug firms and their backers to change patent laws
19 July 2015, Scroll.in
 
India's intellectual property model is under attack not because it has failed, but because it has succeeded – in balancing private profits with public health. Often called the “pharmacy of the developing world”, India has long exported high-quality, low-cost generic medicines to the rest of the globe. Its progressive patent system has facilitated a model of local production and entrepreneurship that has allowed India's generic drugs industry to contribute to improved access to lifesaving drugs across the world, especially HIV medicines. Generic drugs, which are effectively a bioequivalent form of an original branded drug that has gone off patent, represent the vast majority of medicines consumed each year. Just as India's generic industry begins to expand this model to more sophisticated medicines and richer markets, its government is entertaining policies that will restrict this growth by introducing unnecessarily stringent intellectual property barriers that effectively hand big pharmaceutical companies the power to keep Indian firms on a tight leash. These intellectual property barriers can reach beyond patent terms, as they also extend to the granting of proprietary status to the clinical trial data on which drug approval and generic entry depends. These provisions address a concept known as data exclusivity. Furthermore, through so-called “patent linkage” rules that prohibit marketing approval of a drug until patent disputes are fully resolved, developed countries hope to give their pharmaceutical firms additional tools, via patent litigation and appeals, to block generic competition.
 
Under attack for success
 
Through formal and informal trade negotiations with developed countries, India is being put under pressure to “reform” its rules. However, India's current intellectual property model is under attack not because it has failed, but because it has succeeded. This success is viewed as a threat by multinational pharmaceutical corporations, who see generics as eroding the profits of blockbuster drugs. The threat is real: India's generic-led pharmaceutical exports to the US have increased almost ten-fold in the past decade. With more FDA-registered facilities than any other country outside the US, this trend is expected to continue. However, the generic drug industry threatens big pharma's hold on the global market, notably in the lucrative arena of so-called specialty drugs. As a pillar of the global generic industry, India has been facing relentless international pressure, especially from governments that act on behalf of their pharmaceutical industries. This is particularly significant for new cancer drugs that India is capable of producing at low costs and that big pharma prices exorbitantly, and is thus desperate to keep under its control. The commerce minister of India was in Malaysia in mid-July for a ministerial meeting to negotiate a trade agreement with south-east Asian countries, Australia, South Korea, New Zealand, China and Japan. Leaked texts of the draft intellectual property chapter revealed proposed IP provisions such as patent term extensions, data exclusivity conditions, lowering of patentability criteria and stricter enforcement mechanisms (i.e. increasingly punitive) for intellectual property rights. If accepted, these provisions would further extend the monopoly powers of the multinational pharma companies.
 
Massive profits
 
Compulsory licences are a WTO-approved provision that allows governments to give licences to a generic manufacturer to produce a specific drug, without the consent of the patent holder. The generic firm, in turn, must pay a fixed royalty to the patent holder from each sale. These licences are issued in order to address public health emergencies, which include but are not limited to cases of prohibitive drug prices and chronic drug supply shortages. In 2012, amidst considerable controversy, the Indian patent office granted a compulsory licence for the generic production of the cancer drug, sorafenib, whose brand name is Nexavar. Originally developed by Onyx Pharmaceuticals, Bayer acquired the patent rights for this drug and now markets it. Based on Onyx's own figures, the drug's R&D costs were recovered in its first year of sales. In 2012 alone, Nexavar brought in more than $1 billion in revenue worldwide, which is more than five times the drug's cost of development. At the time the compulsory licence was issued, the Indian market's price for Bayer's lifesaving drug was $5,626 per month, a price so exorbitant that only 200 patients in India obtained the drug in 2011. Since the grant of the compulsory licence and the subsequent entry of an Indian generic form of the drug, the price fell to just $108 per month. While India is a major consumer of drugs by volume, its expenditures account for a relatively small share of the global market's revenue. By contrast, US drug expenditures account for approximately one-third of the world's pharmaceutical revenues. In fact, if the US health sector were measured as its own economy, it would be the fifth-largest economy in the world, an amount equivalent to one-and-a-half times the size of the entire Indian economy. In short, the US provides the fat on which the global pharmaceutical sector feeds. One of 2014's blockbusters, a new hepatitis C drug called sofosbuvir (brand name: Sovaldi) illustrates this point. Gram for gram, it costs 67 times the price of gold. A 12-week treatment course totals $84,000 for 84 pills; however, each $1,000 pill costs less than $2 to manufacture. The multinational corporate pharmaceutical industry often attempts to exploit R&D overheads to justify these prices, but the figures rarely add up. This case is no exception. The entire private development of sofosbuvir cost a maximum of a few hundred million dollars, confirmed via tax filings. Compare this with what Gilead Sciences, which acquired the drug during the final stages of clinical trials, made more than $10 billion dollars in revenue in the first year alone. Furthermore, it is a classic case of the value of publicly financed research being transferred to private hands, via the 1980 Bayh-Dole Act. This law allows universities to patent discoveries made with the nearly $30 billion dollars in medical research grants allocated each year by the US government, and subsequently to license these patents exclusively to a pharma company. Increasingly, such late-stage acquisitions of innovation are becoming the rule rather than the exception. Even when drug majors acquire patent rights at the early stages of development, i.e. prior to clinical trials, it is becoming common practice for them to outsource both the running of clinical trials and the manufacturing process itself. Notably, the contracted work is often carried out in the developing world. Given the questions raised by big pharma about the quality of the developing world's pharmaceutical products, this practice generates no shortage of ironies.
 
Money power
 
Specialty drugs such as sofosbuvir represent just one in 100 prescriptions in the US and yet, they account for 30% of drug sales. These drugs are the pharmaceutical sector's equivalent to Wall Street's “1%”. The enormous revenue generated from these drugs is collected by a handful of firms, which, in turn, leverage a part their profits to fund an army of lobbyists. In contrast with India's generics-driven approach, this Western model has failed to yield a balance between corporate profits and concerns of public health. Mobilised by the massive influence of the corporate world's soft-power techniques, notably through campaign contributions and what is known as the “revolving door” between government and industry, governments of rich countries have consistently bullied governments that have advocated patent policies that seek to maintain an equilibrium between intellectual property and access to affordable medicines. Unfortunately, a gulf in financial power consistently tips this balance in the interests of multinational corporations and against public health considerations. Consider the following: between the 1997 launch of Pfizer's Lipitor and its expiration in 2012, this blockbuster anti-cholesterol drug brought in more revenue than what Pakistan and Bangladesh combined spent on all health care over that period. In other words, one drug was able to leverage more financial clout than 300 million people (the average population of the two countries in this period). This example should hit particularly close to home for Indians, not just geographically but financially as well. Currently, medicines account for 60% to 80% of total household health expenditures in India. Most of those expenditures are financed out of pocket, as opposed to payments via insurance. And while Indians spend 3% of GDP on private health care, the private sector's emphasis on treatment, as opposed to prevention, can lead to inefficient distortions for any health system.
 
India must decide
 
Meanwhile, India's dismal public health expenditure accounts for just 1% of GDP. One may expect that if India's economy grows, these figures will rise in relative and absolute terms in the coming decade. However, a growth in financial resources will not necessarily translate to growth in resources for public health. Regulatory barriers that are currently under consideration by the Indian ministry of health would, if implemented, expand the monopoly power that gives big pharma the ability to simply keep prices high, or raise them further, as wealth increases. Increased prices would cancel out gains from economic growth, effectively draining the ministry's treasury at whatever rate it happens to fill. Notably, expanded IP barriers are just one of the tools that big pharma employs in its pursuit of monopoly control over markets. Furthermore, it is important to keep in mind that every dollar extracted by IP-enabled monopolies on unnecessarily expensive medicines will be a dollar not spent on nutrition, education or infrastructure; it would also be a dollar that is likely flowing out of India. If that's not enough, it's a dollar you will one day be asked to pay for yourself or for your loved ones — assuming that you are among the fortunate ones that can afford the overpriced medicines in question. If not, the price of limited access could be your life. Big pharma is attempting to coerce India to relinquish its strict patentability criteria and restrict compulsory licences that are critical in providing access to affordable medicines across the developing world. One should be clear: every stage of the development of India's generic industry, including the issuance of a compulsory licence, has been in accordance with its obligations under international law. While India has been careful to provide a legal environment for competition's free hand to build a generics industry, acceptance of the proposals, as highlighted above, would effectively tie its own hands. In both industrial and health spheres, India stands to lose from adopting policies designed by – and for – multinational pharmaceutical companies.
 
Pakistan can change the trend of its chronic trade deficit by utilizing increased market access of China
19 July 2015, Pakistan and Gulf Economist
 
Mr. Shah Faisal Afridi is a leading businessman. He is CEO of Ruba SEZ Group. He received his formal education from Stamford College, Singapore and afterwards joined the family business and gained extensive experience in business management. He is leading a large and diversified group of companies in Pakistan, known as Ruba SEZ Group, which is one of the major players of Pakistan's industry in Textiles, Electronics, Information Technology, Automobile, Banking, Real Estate Development, Power Generation and Steel Sector. Ruba SEZ Group is the only group in the private sector, which has collaborated with Chinese firms, both in public and private sector, in various companies including Haier Group of China, Yulu, Royal Roads, Shandong Education CFMCC, TBEA China, Lit Cheong Power Engineering Limited, Shifeng, Foton, Real Force etc. Recently Ruba SEZ Group has acquired majority share holdings of Burj Bank and Mr. Faisal Afridi has been appointed as one of the key board members of the Burj Bank. Besides being CEO of Ruba SEZ Group, Mr. Afridi is President of Pak-China joint Chamber of Commerce; Honorary Consul of Kyrgyzstan, Member, KPK Board of Investment, Honorary Technical Advisor of Board of Investment (BoI) for investment from China, Energy Sector and Special Economic Zone (SEZ), Chairman of Pakistan-Saudi Arabia Business Council of FPCCI, President, All Pakistan Business Forum (APBF), FATA, Member, Private Sector Development (PSD) Task Force, Member, City Police Liaison Committee (CPLC), Lahore, Board Member of Ghulam Ishaq Khan Institute of Engineering Sciences and Technology. In a chat, Mr. Shah Faisal Afridi shared his views on Free Trade Agreements. He said, "Free trade or globalization is a hotly debated phenomenon in the global village of today's economic system. If the economic prosperity and growth of all the nations of the world could be brought at par with each other by the free flow of goods and services, regardless of borders, under the free trade banner, then it is a scenario for which every one of us should strive for." According to him, bilateral trading arrangements, although less preferred to multilateral ones, are one of the instruments employed by various countries, both developed and developing, to secure their export markets and to guarantee their trading activities in the future. Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) are a common type of bilateral arrangement between two or more countries. FTAs facilitate the free flow of trade and investment and bring about closer economic integration between the binding parties by eliminating tariff/restrictions on each other's commodities. More than 60% of global trade, at the moment, is being channeled through bilateral and regional trading arrangements. At present, almost 300 such arrangements exist globally. Mr. Afridi viewed that Pakistan- China FTA is a move in the same direction. With the growing importance of emerging economies in South and East Asia, Asia Pacific and South America, Pakistan is aiming at strengthening its trading relations with the economies of those regions, he said. Further, with the growing importance attached to China as the fourth largest economy of the world as well as an immediate neighbor of Pakistan, it is about time for Pakistan to think of strengthening its economic ties, apart from their already strong strategic and military relations. It was with this enthusiasm and aim in mind that Pakistan laid the foundation for an FTA arrangement with China in July, 2006, he added. Although, Mr. Afridi says Pakistan's economy is much smaller than that of China's in terms of GDP, trade, reserves etc., yet the FTA offers a huge potential for Pakistan's economy. Pakistan can change the trend of its chronic trade deficit with China by utilizing the increased market access given by China. He believes that Pakistan can also reduce its overall trade deficit by diverting its exports from traditional destinations to the new one billion consumer base of China; but for that Pakistan has to make its exports more competitive, more diversified and much better in quality. Increased investment flows will enhance the capacity of the existing industries, will help in technology transfer, and generate employment opportunities for the local population, thereby positively contributing to the economy of Pakistan, he opined. In order to get full benefit of free trade agreements with China, Mr. Afridi says Pakistan has to devise a strategy to review and empower its manufacturing sector and recast it according to the market trends in China. Diversification of exports from Pakistan into non-traditional items will help minimize the trade imbalance. According to the current export structure of Pakistan's economy, it is imperative to analyze the prospective impact of this FTA on Pakistan's economy. In the initial stages of development, Pakistan should try to expand its industrial base through the expansion in its production of semi-finished and finished products, he added. Widening trade deficit between Pakistan and China is a big Challenge. During last five years bilateral trade has expanded, but the balance of trade remained in favor of China. The possible reasons could be the lower potential of our export oriented sectors, low quality (not meeting the international standards), severe energy crisis and high cost of production, he opined. Mr. Afridi said that opportunities of joint ventures exist in textile, agro farming, food processing, pharmaceuticals, engineering goods, etc. There is enormous potential in energy sector and Chinese companies should come forward and invest in this sector. China can also help Pakistan in developing and modernizing SMEs sector. More than 11,000 Chinese engineers, technicians and workers are rendering their valuable services in progress and development of Pakistan. Chinese investment in Pakistan increased manifolds in key sectors including port development, roads, railways, mobile telephones communication technology, hydro and thermal power, mining, electronics, and nuclear energy, he added. He said the main items of Pakistan's imports from China are machinery and parts, iron and steel manufactures, sugar, chemical materials, chemical elements and medical and pharmaceutical products. The main items of Pakistan's exports to China are cotton fabrics, cotton yarn, petroleum and its products, fish and its preparations, leather, fruits and vegetables. Unfortunately, the mix of Pakistan's products exported to China is very narrow. Almost around 80% of its exports consist of cotton yarn and fabric. Ambassadors and Consul Generals abroad, are the eyes and ears of Pakistan. Their aggressive efforts to promote Pakistan and marketing of Pakistani products are imperative. Moreover Chambers of commerce and selected people from Trade and Commerce should be channeled to conduct Market Research of items that are given duty free access in China and then manufacturing of such items should be enhanced accordingly, Mr. Afridi insisted. As far as the issue of low profitability is concerned, he said, it is related with various internal matters of the country mainly because Pakistan's manufacturing sector lacks sophistication and understanding of the Chinese market and to overcome this, Pakistan will have to diversify the basket of exports to China. The Chinese do not eat basmati rice, Pakistan's main farm export, nor are they interested in importing textiles and garments, which are produced with better quality in their own country. Even surgical instruments, sports and leather goods could not penetrate the Chinese market because of local production, making the free trade agreement irrelevant from Pakistan's point of view, he said. In order to get maximum benefits from Free Trade Agreement (FTA) between Pakistan and China, Mr. Afridi stressed the need to ensure several measures at the part of government, policy makers and trade bodies. Pakistan should ensure quality, efficiency and cost minimization particularly in textile sector. There is a dire need to focus on the manufacturing of nontraditional products because living standards of Chinese has increased and their new generation is more inclined towards innovative and latest trends. Factors that might have hampered the exports also include lack of China-specific trade specialists, lack of preparation and guidance of the business community to explore market under the FTA, language issues and lack of knowledge to exploit the segmentation in Chinese market from low to high value-added products, he opined. Despite all these facts ,while criticizing FTA's it should not be ignored that Pak-China FTA's holds significant position for Pakistan in terms of bringing foreign investment, technology, innovation and experts from China because for a developing country like Pakistan it is costly to trade with countries located faraway. Hence Pak-China FTA is a good opportunity for Pakistani exporters, Mr. Afridi asserted. He further said that Pak-China FTA can be a foundation stone for regional political harmony, peace and economic co-operation among major players like China, Pakistan, India, Bangladesh, Afghanistan etc. The extended co-operation among these nations can convert the region to a powerful economic block, leading towards welfare and prosperity of billions of people living in the region, the Pak-China FTA can be an opportunity if all the stakeholders including Ministry of Commerce, Textile Industry, and exporters make appropriate plans, revisit their priorities, have better co-ordination and remove the hurdles faced by the exporters and importers.
 
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.