HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "Ukraine drops WTO action against Australian tobacco-packaging laws
·         HYPERLINK \l "US asks India to consider more steps to facilitate trade
·         HYPERLINK \l "Seychelles set to join WTO procurement agreement
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S. Has Strong Case Against Developing Countries on Farm Subsidies, Experts Say
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S. Lashes Out Against WTO For Flawed, 'Paradoxical' Rulings On COOL
·         HYPERLINK \l "Steel Firms Fire Salvo Against Imports
·         HYPERLINK \l "Ecuador: CAN authorises safeguards
·         HYPERLINK \l "EU Parliament approves draft law mandating conflict minerals reporting
·         HYPERLINK \l "OECD calls US dip a blip, but chops world growth forecast
 
Ukraine drops WTO action against Australian tobacco-packaging laws 
By Tom Miles

GENEVA, June 3 (Reuters) - Ukraine has suspended a case it was pursuing through the World Trade Organization aimed at overturning Australia's strict tobacco packaging laws, a WTO panel of adjudicators said in a statement published on Wednesday.

Ukraine asked the panel to suspend the proceedings on May 28 and said it will try to find a mutually agreed solution with Australia, the statement said.

Honduras, Cuba, Indonesia and Dominican Republic are also challenging Australia's tobacco packaging laws at the WTO. There was no indication that their litigation would be affected.

A growing number of countries have said they plan to follow Australia's 2010 step, banning flashy logos and distinctive-coloured cigarette packaging in favour of drab olive packets that look more like military or prison issue, with brand names printed in small standardised fonts.

Tobacco firms say the rules infringe their trademarks, and the WTO complainants say they constitute illegal barriers to trade.

Public health advocates say standardised packaging heralds a new era of tobacco control.

Both supporters and opponents say the legal battle could have consequences beyond tobacco because similar rules could be imposed on food judged unhealthy and alcohol if Australia wins.

Ukraine was the first of the five countries to challenge Australia's laws at the WTO, even though it does not export tobacco to Australia.

Health campaigners were perplexed by Ukraine's WTO suit because it is also a party to the U.N.'s Framework Convention on Tobacco Control and was one of the countries that backed guidelines on how to implement the treaty, including enforcing plain packaging.

British American Tobacco has previously said it was helping meet Ukraine's legal costs in the WTO case against Australia. Individual companies cannot pursue litigation via the WTO.

Ukraine's move follows two other potential setbacks for the tobacco industry: China's launch of a campaign to ban smoking in public in Beijing, and an Ottawa court ruling that awarded more than C$15 billion ($12 billion) in damages to Quebec smokers, which tobacco firms are appealing.

Under WTO rules, Ukraine's suspension could last 12 months. After that its right to return to the panel proceedings would lapse.

The WTO adjudication panel has previously said it expected to rule on the cases brought by the five complainants against Australia in the first half of next year. (Reporting by Tom Miles; Editing by Toby Chopra and Hugh Lawson) 
 
 
US asks India to consider more steps to facilitate trade 
From Lalit K Jha

Washington, June 4 (PTI) The US has said it is encouraged by the economic reforms being pursued by the Indian government, and appealed to it to consider taking additional steps towards facilitating trade.

"We have seen a positive recognition from the Indian Government that it can do more to attract foreign investment. We are encouraged by a number of reforms being pursued with respect to taxes, land acquisition and labour," said US Deputy Chief of Mission Christopher Wilson at the WTO Trade Policy Review of India in Geneva.

"There are encouraging signs that positive trade-specific reforms may be contemplated, including the drafting of the National Intellectual Property Rights Policy and recent public statements by Prime Minister (Narendra) Modi calling for a stronger IPR regime," a statement by the Office of the US Trade Representatives quoted Wilson as saying.

Wilson said the US is pleased that in March, the Indian Parliament passed a bill increasing the limit on foreign investment in the insurance sector. And in April, India published its new 5-year foreign trade policy, announcing new programs aimed specifically at implementing the WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement.

"In light of India's very direct role in shaping the TFA, we look forward to hearing India's plans to complete timely ratification of the TFA and also to submit its Category A notifications," he said.

"The US invites India to consider how additional steps to open the country's trading regime can help India harness the benefits of trade to drive up investment and create jobs," Wilson said.

These steps would include significant, long-term reductions in agricultural tariffs and removal of unjustifiable SPS and TBT impediments on agricultural imports, both of which can help address food price inflation," he said.

"This would also open the retail and the e-commerce sectors to increased foreign participation which can contribute to improving supply chains and greatly reducing food wastage and avoiding recourse to export restrictions," he said.

A strong and effective IPR regime is a critical component of attracting and retaining investment and achieving India's ambitious economic goals, the US trade official said.

"As the Indian Government reviews the recommendations of the IPR Think Tank, we recommend providing a new round of solicitation of public comments before the Policy is made final," he said.  
 
 
Seychelles set to join WTO procurement agreement 
BY Marino Donati 03.06.2015 
HYPERLINK "http://www.supplymanagement.com" www.supplymanagement.com
 
The Seychelles is set to join the World Trade Organisation’s (WTO) Government Procurement Agreement (GPA). The country, which became a WTO member in April, said that it would now start negotiations to accede to the agreement, which allows members to open their government procurement markets to each other.
 
The total market is currently estimated to be worth around US$ 1.7 trillion (£1.1trn). According to the WTO annual report 2015, China submitted a fifth revised GPA accession offer setting out multiple improvements to its proposed market access commitments under the GPA.The WTO estimates that China could add up to US$ 289 billion (£189bn) annually to the value of the market access commitments under the GPA.
 
The report also said that substantial progress had been made on the GPA accessions of Moldova and Ukraine, and it is hoped that these would be completed this year. Tajikistan applied for accession to the GPA in February.
 
Montenegro and New Zealand joined the GPA last October. The GPA ensures that signatories do not discriminate against the products, services or suppliers of other parties to the GPA with respect to the government procurement opportunities that are opened to foreign competition.
 
The plurilateral agreement requires transparent and competitive purchasing practices in the markets covered.
 
 
U.S. Has Strong Case Against Developing Countries on Farm Subsidies, Experts Say
By Catherine Boudreau
WTO Reporter, June 4, 2015
 
June 3 — The U.S. could bring a successful case against Brazil, China, India and other developing countries at the World Trade Organization (WTO) over trade-distorting farm subsidies, according to two international trade experts.
 
Over the last decade, these countries have increased support of agriculture producers in various ways, including direct price and income payments, subsidies on inputs like seed and fertilizer and policies that encourage exports.
 
Some countries' subsidy levels are exceeding limits set in the Agreement on Agriculture that was established during the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations, which led to the creation of the WTO in 1995, according to Craig Thorn, a partner at the consulting firm DTB Associates LLP, which represents agricultural companies and trade associations.
 
The U.S., as the biggest agricultural exporter, suffers most from market distortions, as farmers and ranchers are placed at a competitive disadvantage.
 
China, India
 
“Chinese officials speak openly of their policy of subsidizing producers to maintain self-sufficiency in wheat, corn and rice, despite the fact that they agreed at the time of China's accession [in 2001] to the WTO to limit subsidies to no more than 8.5 percent of value of production,” Thorn said during a June 3 House Agriculture Committee hearing.
 
A four-year study released in 2014 by DTB Associates found that China has raised the support price for wheat by 71 percent since 2006, for rice by 100 percent since 2007 and for corn by 50 percent since 2008. The data used in the study was mainly derived from Agriculture Department reports, Thorn said.
 
Subsidy policies in India also have stimulated production, displaced imports and, in many cases, increased exports. Since 2005 rice production has increased by 13 percent and exports more than doubled.
 
U.S. Subsidies
 
The U.S. also subsidizes its agricultural producers through programs enacted in the farm law that international groups like Oxfam International say damage markets in developing countries.
 
For example, U.S. subsidies to cotton producers were the subject of a WTO dispute with Brazil that argued U.S. policies were market-distorting. The dispute was resolved in October 2014 after more than a decade when the U.S. agreed to pay $300 million. During the case, the U.S. also made changes to its domestic cotton support programs (191 WTO, 10/2/14).
 
Overall, the U.S. ranks near the bottom of the global subsidy and tariff scale, Darren Hudson, director of the International Center for Agricultural Competitiveness (ICAC) at Texas Tech University, said during the hearing. “This means we maintain an open market and offer low support for farmers and ranchers,” he said. Hudson referenced an ICAC database that compiles information on global subsidies.
 
Lawmakers Call for WTO Challenges
 
Agriculture Committee ranking member Collin Peterson (D-Minn.) said he thinks the U.S. should challenge Brazil, China, India and other countries when they fail to meet their WTO commitments.
 
“If we are going to compete in a global marketplace we need to be on a level playing field,” Peterson said. Chairman Michael Conaway (R-Texas) shared that view, noting that U.S. agriculture is dependent on exports.
 
The issue hasn't received much attention at the WTO because countries often are delinquent in reporting increases in subsidy levels, Thorn said. For example, China just recently submitted data for 2010. Also, when countries do submit required notifications, they sometimes use faulty methodologies that misrepresent the level of support provided.
 
Relaunching Doha Round
 
WTO members in Geneva are discussing re-igniting the 2001 Doha Round work plan for agriculture, negotiations that stalled over countries' domestic support policies (105 WTO, 6/2/15).
 
In light of developing countries' rising farm subsidies, a new framework should be established with more enforcement mechanisms, Thorn said.
 
“I hope they succeed in relaunching Doha, but I would oppose relaunching based on the old text,” he said. “The original text had a healthy dose of specialty differential treatment for developing countries. That's inevitably going to be a part of any agreement, but disciplines should be tightened for countries like Brazil and China and less stringent for countries like Ghana and Mozambique.”
 
 
U.S. Lashes Out Against WTO For Flawed, 'Paradoxical' Rulings On COOL
World Trade Online
Posted: June 03, 2015 
The United States late last week blasted the World Trade Organization for consistently handing down what it said were flawed and paradoxical rulings against U.S. country-of-origin labeling (COOL) for meat that leave members with no viable, WTO-consistent way to deliver information to consumers about the origin of livestock.
 
The U.S. criticism came at a May 29 special session of the WTO's Dispute Settlement Body (DSB), where it adopted the WTO Appellate Body's report in the compliance phase of the long-running COOL case.
 
The May 18 Appellate Body report upheld a compliance panel ruling that faulted an amended 2013 U.S. COOL rule as even more burdensome than the original version and still in violation of trade rules.
 
At the DSB meeting, the U.S. argued that both the panel and the Appellate Body rulings were flawed because they failed to truly demonstrate that the new regime was more burdensome, or show how the exceptions contained within the COOL rule reflected discrimination in violation of trade rules.
 
It also complained that the WTO rulings were paradoxical because both in the initial phase of the case and the compliance proceedings, the panels and the Appellate Body have consistently recognized the provision of origin information for consumers to be a "legitimate objective" under Article 2.2 of the TBT Agreement, but then went on to fault the U.S. for how it sought to fulfill that objective. Article 2.2 requires that members' technical measures "not be more trade-restrictive than necessary to fulfill a legitimate objective."
 
The WTO rulings faulted the U.S. for providing that origin information in a way that discriminated against imported products under TBT Article 2.1. That article requires that members' technical regulations not treat imported products any less favorably than like domestic products, although the Appellate Body through case law has established that measures can impose a detrimental impact on imports without running afoul of this article if the treatment stems from a "legitimate regulatory distinction."
 
"Paradoxically ... it would appear from [the panel and Appellate Body] findings that there is no clear way under the covered agreements for a Member to achieve that legitimate objective," the U.S. said in its statement.
 
"When examined as a whole, the Panel and Appellate Body findings appear to mean that the United States cannot require U.S. retailers to inform consumers of beef and pork about where the animals were born, raised, and slaughtered. This is a conclusion with which the United States strongly disagrees,” it added.
 
The main reason the panel and Appellate Body found the new labeling measure to be more burdensome is because it requires meat packaging to bear labels stating where livestock were born, raised and slaughtered – also called “point-of-production” labeling. This is in contrast to the previous COOL rule that essentially allowed all the meat’s countries of origin to just be listed, for instance, as “Product of the U.S. and Mexico.” The panel found that this more specific labeling would increase the need to segregate and require more distinct labels.
 
In making this finding, it relied on a hypothetical scenario in which there would be a package of meat containing beef from two cattle, one born in Mexico and one in Canada. Under current rules, the package would need to bear two distinct labels, whereas previously it could have borne just a single label, the panel said.
 
The U.S. in its appeal dismissed this rationale as based on "incorrect hypothetical transactions.” But the Appellate Body upheld the panel finding, saying that this scenario was both possible under current law and that the U.S. could also not definitively disprove that it was happening in the marketplace.
 
At the May 29 DSB meeting, the U.S. made two complaints about the Appellate Body's approach. It first said that this scenario “represents an exceedingly small percentage of the market” and that the Appellate Body had also made “no real evaluation” of whether this potential need for an extra label actually increased the record-keeping burden on livestock importers. Without such an evaluation, it is impossible to determine whether the new measure had an added impact on the competitive opportunities for Mexican and Canadian livestock, it said.
 
Second, the U.S. argued that “even that hypothetical scenario fails to show that the amended COOL measure reflects discrimination,” which is the fundamental obligation under Article 2.1 of the TBT Agreement.
 
Ironically, the U.S. decision to make its COOL labels more specific in 2013 came in response to the Appellate Body's ruling in the initial phase of the case. In that ruling, the Appellate Body found there was an imbalance between the amount of origin information gathered along the livestock supply chain and what was ultimately conveyed to the consumer.
 
Although the compliance panel and Appellate Body found that the 2013 COOL rule was more burdensome, that was not the main driver behind their ruling that it violated Article 2.1. Instead, they found that the COOL rule did not make a legitimate regulatory distinction – and thus violated Article 2.1 – because it allowed for potential inaccuracies in the labels and exceptions for processed products and meat sold in restaurants.
 
First, whereas labels are required to bear information about where an animal was born, raised and slaughtered, they may be inaccurate as to where the animal was "raised," the panel said. This is because the measure allows an animal labeled as as being "raised" in a country even if it only spent just over two weeks in a given country.
 
The panel also said this disconnect was exacerbated by the fact that a considerable portion of livestock -- despite being tracked along the production chain -- would ultimately not have to be labeled if the meat from the animals ended up in processed products or being served at restaurants, as the COOL measure exempts such products from labeling requirements. The Appellate Body agreed with both of these findings.
 
The U.S. in its statement argued that this analysis amounts to a fundamentally wrong interpretation of Article 2.1. In the findings, "there was no explanation as to why either the fact that there could be some slightly more detailed information provided in a few cases or that not all beef and pork sold was required to be labeled would 'reflect discrimination,'" it said. "And after all, Article 2.1 addresses discrimination. It is not concerned with whether a technical regulation is 'perfect' or 'could be better or even more accurate' or 'could apply to even more products.'"
 
The United States welcomed the Appellate Body's finding that the amended COOL measures were not "more trade restrictive than necessary" and thus consistent with Article 2.2. But it flagged as as worrisome a particular aspect of the Appellate Body's analysis under Article 2.2.
 
Typically, an analysis under Article 2.2 involves a comparison between the measure being challenged and a proposed alternative by the complaining party that it asserts would fulfill the responding member's objective at an equivalent level but in a less trade-restrictive manner, the U.S. notes. If the proposed alternative measure is accepted by the WTO panel, then it may find that the challenged measure violates Article 2.2.
 
The U.S. took issue specifically with the Appellate Body's finding that that it would be possible for a proposed alternative measure to fail in one way to achieve a member's legitimate objective at the level it had chosen, if there were some offsetting factor that would contribute to the objective in another way.
 
Specifically, the compliance panel had suggested that the U.S. objective could be met at the same level if the COOL regime were changed to provide "less origin information" or "less accurate origin information," as long as those changes were offset by expanding the labeling requirements to a broader range of products.
 
The Appellate Body endorsed that idea, to the dismay of the U.S. "The United States is concerned that this approach undermines a Member's ability to address legitimate objectives at the level the Member considers appropriate," the U.S. said in its statement
 
 
Steel Firms Fire Salvo Against Imports 
By John W. Miller and Lisa Beilfuss 
4 June 2015
The Wall Street Journal
 
Six steelmakers with major U.S. operations filed a trade complaint on Wednesday seeking punitive tariffs for alleged unfair pricing of imported steel from China, India, Italy, South Korea and Taiwan.

The suit, which concerns a common kind of coated steel used in automobile and construction industries, is the first salvo in the campaign this year by the beleaguered U.S. steel industry to protect itself against a record flood of imports.

The steelmakers are United States Steel Corp., Nucor Corp., Steel Dynamics Inc., ArcelorMittal USA, AK Steel Corp. and California Steel Industries. All are based in the U.S. except for ArcelorMittal, the world's biggest steelmaker, which is based in Luxembourg and London but owns big mills in Indiana and elsewhere in the country.

The petitioners are frustrated because prices have been sluggish -- down around 25% since the start of the year -- despite strong demand. That has forced the companies, which make most of their steel near auto factories in the Midwest and South, to lay off thousands of workers and idle plants around the country.

They blame imports, particularly from China. Slowing demand in that country has led its steelmakers to export excess capacity, flooding global markets. Exports of steel from China rose 36% to 30.4 million tons during the first four months of the year.

Imports have "devastated pricing in the U.S. market, increased their share of the U.S. market by undercutting U.S. producers' prices and caused injury to U.S. producers and their workers," lawyers for the six steelmakers said in a statement.

The United States International Trade Commission must decide within 45 days whether the business of U.S. producers was sufficiently "injured" to merit duties. The Department of Commerce will issue a preliminary ruling by the end of 2015. Final rulings by both agencies are due by mid-2016.

The U.S. last year slapped duties on imports of steel used in the energy industry from South Korea and five other countries. Those duties haven't stemmed the tide of shipments.

To win this new case, the U.S. companies will have to prove that the foreign companies sold their steel at below-market prices or benefited from illegal state aid, and that these tactics allowed them to win market share in a way that damaged the profits of domestic steelmakers.

The U.S. isn't the only country to protest higher imports. The European Commission last month passed provisional tariffs on the import of a valued-added steel product called grain-oriented steel electrical steel from China, Russia, the U.S., Japan, and South Korea.

The European Commission also levied provisional tariffs on the import of stainless steel cold rolled sheet from China and Taiwan earlier this year and has launched two separate investigations into the import of two different kinds of steel from China.

"We're having a direct impact from these tonnages which are sold at cut rate prices" into Europe, said Jeroen Vermeij, director of market analysis & economic studies at the European Steel Association.

"It is clear that Chinese exports are threatening the long-term viability of the European steel industry," he said.

A concern for American steelmakers is that foreign-produced steel benefits from unfair help from home governments. The petitions filed by U.S. companies identified 48 separate subsidy programs in China, 88 in India, 12 in Italy, 43 in South Korea, and 22 in Taiwan.

Imports of corrosion-resistant steel from the five countries jumped 85% between 2012 and 2014, to 2.75 million tons, the petitioning steelmakers said. In 2014, the five countries exported more than $2.2 billion of corrosion-resistant steel to the U.S., the companies said. Steel company officials from China and other countries have denied unfair trade practices.

Tom Conway, vice president for the United Steelworkers union said he was delighted with the petition for duties. He also suggested taxing "customers who knowingly purchase such illegally priced and dumped products."

Charles Bradford, an analyst at New York-based investment research firm Bradford Research Inc., said the steel companies are expected to argue before the USITC that foreign companies benefit from subsidies from their governments and from currencies that have been intentionally depreciated relative to the dollar. "Currencies are a big deal for the steelmakers," said Mr. Bradford.

"A 20% change in currency rates can make a difference of a $100 for a ton of steel coil," said Mike Lee, plant manager at Nucor's mill in Decatur, Alabama. By comparison, he says, "if we can save 20 cents on operating costs, that's a lot."

 
Ecuador: CAN authorises safeguards 
3 June 2015
Esmerk Latin American News
 
Telegrafo (Ecuador), 03 Jun 2015, online:- The Andean Community of Nations (CAN) has approved a decision by the Ecuadorian government to apply safeguards on products from some countries, implemented from 11 March 2015, so that it can balance its payments, in light of a rising US dollar and falling oil prices. CAN has called for quarterly information from Ecuador to monitor this country's macroeconomic situation. Authorities in Ecuador have reminded institutions such as CAN and other nations that this is only a temporary measure, imposed for a period of 15 months. The government is awaiting a response from the World Trade Organisation (WTO) on this topic, where it expects a positive outcome. Ecuadorian officials will meet with the business sector during the week commencing 1 June 2015 to carry out a first evaluation on safeguards, although any modifications for some products are unlikely.
 
 
EU Parliament approves draft law mandating conflict minerals reporting
Financial Times
3 June 2015
 
The EU is in the process of crafting a law to tackle mineral and ore imports associated with violence and conflict. 
 
EU parliamentarians signed off in May on a draft law that would impose stricter measures throughout the supply chain to ensure that certain imported minerals – tin, tantalum, tungsten, and gold – do not exacerbate conflicts and human rights abuses in conflict areas. The 20 May vote passed by 402 votes to 118, with 171 members abstaining. Compliance under this draft law would be mandatory for all EU importers who source such minerals from conflict areas. Companies that use such minerals in production of other goods would also have to produce information showing their own efforts at dealing with risks in the supply chain.

The 28-nation EU is home to approximately five percent of the smelters and refiners operating worldwide, as well as 880,000 “downstream” companies that use these minerals in their manufacturing processes, for consumer goods ranging from automobiles and electronics to jewellery and industrial machinery. The EU imports around 25 percent of global trade in tin, tantalum, and tungsten, and about 15 percent of gold. Under the draft law, areas that qualify as conflict-afflicted and high risk include those that suffer from armed fights, involving widespread violence and systematic human rights violations, as well as little to no governance and security.
.
The EU imports around 25 percent of global trade in tin, tantalum, and tungsten, and about 15 percent of gold.

Supply chain responsibility

One of the hotly-contested subjects ahead of the vote was whether parliamentarians would require downstream producers that use such minerals in manufacturing to also provide information on how they are tackling risks throughout their supply chains, or whether the legislation would just target importers of the raw minerals and ores. Under the version approved by Members of the European Parliament (MEPs), these downstream companies will indeed be required to do so, marking a significant shift from earlier versions of the legislation. Importers, for their part, would have to face compulsory, independent audits by third parties.

“The regulation reflects the need for due diligence along the entire supply chain from the sourcing site to the final product, by requiring all companies who first place covered resources, including products that contain those resources on the [EU] market to conduct and publicly report on their supply chain due diligence,” the relevant amendment to the draft law says.

The draft law approved by the Parliament also includes provisions that would help small- and medium-sized enterprises, in light of some concern that these companies might not have the same capacity to deal with additional costs of these requirements. These provisions include a request that the Commission grant such enterprises financial support to help with these practical difficulties, including in the areas of third party audits and responsible sourcing.

The version approved by the full Parliament goes further than a draft text previously approved by the European Parliament’s International Trade Committee (INTA) in April, which had only asked that smelters and refiners be subject to mandatory certification requirements. The committee voted against making certification mandatory for downstream companies and rejected a proposal to extend the scope of the regulation to include other minerals and metals.

For its part, the European Commission had proposed a voluntary “self-certification” scheme over a year ago, also targeting the “upstream” part of the supply chain, relying on smelters and refiners to monitor their purchases of the raw minerals and ores. According to the bloc’s legislative process, parliamentarians have agreed to begin informal talks with representatives from EU member states in order to agree a final version of the law, with some predicting a difficult negotiating process ahead.

International comparison

Under the draft law, the EU’s due diligence standards for the supply chain would be based on those already developed by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), which outline a series of steps to ensure responsible sourcing. These guidelines, known formally as the “Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply Chains of Minerals from Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas,” already serve as the basis for the US’ own requirements in this area, which are mandatory but more region-specific.

The US’ Dodd Frank Act includes among its provisions an annual disclosure requirement over whether conflict minerals needed to produce or use a good came from either the Democratic Republic of the Congo or an adjoining country. Should that be the case, those persons must prepare a report outlining the due diligence measures taken throughout the supply chain, together with an independent private sector audit.

Stakeholder response

The vote by EU parliamentarians received a mixed reception from stakeholder groups. While some welcomed the move to target the whole supply chain, others raised concerns over whether the approach is sufficient or appropriate to tackle the human rights concerns while not harming EU producers.

Groups such as Global Witness and Amnesty International, who have been among those groups pushing for mandatory reporting across the supply chain, openly endorsed the 20 May result. “Despite concerted efforts by big business to weaken the legislation, MEPs have clearly positioned themselves for a strong, binding law that is fit for purpose. This would put Europe at the helm of global efforts to clean up the minerals trade and encourage businesses to source minerals in a way that benefits local communities, not armed groups,” said Michael Gibb of Global Witness in a statement.

Some business groups, such as the Brussels-based BUSINESSEUROPE coalition, have pushed back against this version of the draft law, suggesting its design could negatively impact EU companies. Another question raised is whether trade tools alone focused on just the supply chain go far enough to address conflict in the countries where these minerals are sourced.

“Unfortunately, the system, as voted by the plenary session of the European Parliament is neither workable for business operators, nor going to provide concrete solutions for the conflicts on the ground,” said Markus J. Beyrer, BUSINESSEUROPE Director General.

However, this view is not universal across EU industry, as some metals industry groups had reportedly pushed for a full supply chain approach. Such groups, sources familiar with the talks say, had expressed the concern that a system only focusing on smelters and refiners within the 28-nation bloc could actually give non-EU operators a competitive advantage, while reducing European access to the necessary raw materials.
 
 
OECD calls US dip a blip, but chops world growth forecast 
Gina DOGGETT 
3 June 2015
Agence France Presse
 
The OECD on Wednesday sharply lowered its global growth forecasts for 2015 and 2016, dragged down partly by a "transitory" shortfall in US performance and by businesses and governments skimping on investment.

"Global growth is projected to strengthen in the course of 2015 and 2016, but will remain modest relative to the pre-crisis period," the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development said.

It predicted the world economy would grow at a rate of 3.1 percent this year, down from the 4.0 percent increase it projected in March.

The growth forecast for next year has been revised downward half a percentage point, from 4.3 to 3.8 percent, with an expectation that the world economy "will strengthen gradually to approach its past (pre-crisis) average pace by late 2016."

"The global recovery continues but is mired by unemployment, rising inequality, low wages and low productivity growth," OECD chief Angel Gurria said, unveiling the new report.

The OECD, a policy analysis body grouping 34 advanced economies, slashed its outlook for the United States from 3.1 to 2.0 percent this year, and from 3.0 percent to 2.8 percent next year.

The Paris-based think tank said the stronger dollar and a brutal North American winter -- which it said caused "transitory disruptions" -- put a brake on growth in the first quarter of 2015, while predicting: "Activity should regain steam, with aggregate demand propelled by continued employment gains, wealth effects from rising asset prices, and the boost to purchasing power from lower oil prices."

China, too, will grow more slowly than the OECD predicted in March, by two-tenths of a percentage point lower in both years, at 6.8 percent in 2015 and 6.7 percent in 2016.

"Consumption will remain robust" in China, where growth will also be spurred by stepped-up infrastructure investment, it said.

The OECD said that overall, "the economic recovery from the global financial and economic crisis that broke out in 2008 has been unusually weak."

The knock-on effects have included continuing job insecurity, sluggish development in emerging economies and "rising inequality nearly everywhere", the report said.

However, the OECD said it expected growth "to be shared more evenly across regions of the world" in the coming period.

Its outlook for the eurozone was unchanged at 2.1 percent for this year and a slightly rosier 2.0 percent for 2016, thanks to lower oil prices, the weak euro, better financial conditions and fresh stimulus spending.

But unemployment in the eurozone will remain stubborn, declining to a still painful 10.25 percent by the end of next year, the OECD said.

The report chided businesses and governments for what it called "tepid" investment.

"By and large, firms have been unwilling to spend on plant, equipment, technology and services as vigorously as they have done in previous cyclical recoveries," it said.

"Moreover, many governments postponed infrastructure investments as part of fiscal consolidation," it said, with negative effects on employment and wages and therefore consumption.

"On the supply side, sluggish investment has undermined the rate of growth of potential output -- the capacity of economies to increase living standards, make good on future obligations to citizens, and repay debt," the report said.

Addressing a news conference at the OECD's Paris headquarters, Gurria urged governments "to use all the policy tools they have in hand" to step-up investment.

"If investment is there, growth will come," he said.

Among global risk factors the OECD cited were new drops in oil prices, failure to reach a "satisfactory" deal between Greece and its creditors, and a "disorderly exit" from Washington's zero interest rate policy.

It said it expected oil prices to "stabilise above current levels" but well below the $110 per barrel average of the three years preceding last year's precipitous drop.

Greece faces a Friday deadline to repay more than 300 million euros ($328 million) to the IMF. Overall it needs to repay the global lender some 1.6 billion euros this month, funds it currently lacks.

The US Federal Reserve funds rate has remained locked at zero since the end of 2008 as the Fed has sought to help pull the economy back from the Great Recession.

Fed boss Janet Ellen last week said to expect a rate hike "at some point this year" as the economy continues to mend. 
END


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.