HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "Obama clears last big hurdle to fast-track trade powers
·         HYPERLINK \l "EU Trade Chief Calls on WTO Members to Renew Progress on Doha Negotiations
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S. Objects to Retaliation by Mexico Over Labeling Rules, Seeks Arbitration
·         HYPERLINK \l "India, Brazil cross swords with U.S. at WTO
·         HYPERLINK \l "OMC: Falta de inversión en I+D y en personal cualificado afectan la economía chilena
·         HYPERLINK \l "Fabric of a Trade Deal: U.S. Asks Vietnam to Cut Out Chinese Textiles
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S. airs deep concerns over cyber security in China meetings
·         HYPERLINK \l "China's Zhang hopes U.S. removes barriers to investment
·         HYPERLINK \l "Ukraine Expects To Resolve Issue Of Dairy Supplies To Kazakh Market Through WTO
·         HYPERLINK \l "Taiwan to share experience at WTO's aid review meeting
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S. export lender heads for partial shutdown
·         HYPERLINK \l "Supreme Court says government seizure of raisins is unconstitutional
 
Obama clears last big hurdle to fast-track trade powers 
Shawn Donnan and Demetri Sevastopulo in Washington 
23 June 2015 19:34
Financial Times (FT.Com)
 
President Barack Obama is poised to win the powers he needs to close the biggest trade deal in a generation, after a bill granting him fast-track authority passed its last major legislative hurdle.

The Senate voted 60-37 to close debate on legislation giving Mr Obama so-called Trade Promotion Authority, overcoming the 60-vote threshold needed to prevent any procedural moves to block it by opponents. The White House commended Democrats and Republicans for taking the move.

"Today's vote and further action on trade in Congress this week will send an important message to the world about America's engagement and continued global leadership," said Josh Earnest, White House press secretary.

The Senate will vote formally to pass the legislation on Wednesday but that ballot requires only a simple majority to pass in the 100-seat chamber. If all goes as expected, Mr Obama will have the legislation on his desk to sign into law before the end of the week.

The move follows months of bitter debate and legislative manoeuvring over trade in Congress that have seen Mr Obama's trade agenda come close to unravelling a number of times, largely owing to opposition from his own party.

It means that trade ministers from the US, Japan and 10 other countries who have been negotiating the Trans-Pacific Partnership for more than five years are likely to meet within weeks for what officials insist will be a final round of negotiations.

With 40 per cent of the global economy included in the agreement, the TPP would be the biggest trade deal struck globally since the 1990s Uruguay Round that created the World Trade Organisation.

The TPP has been sold by Mr Obama as the economic backbone of a strategic "pivot" to Asia and a bid to maintain US leadership in the region and balance a rising China.

Its conclusion would also mark a fundamental shift from the pursuit of vast, global agreements, such as the now-stalled Doha Round within the WTO, to more focused regional and sectoral agreements. Apart from the Pacific negotiations, the Obama administration has also launched talks with the EU on a transatlantic pact and talks with others over trade in services and environmental goods.

"This is a day of celebration in corporate suites in America," said Sherrod Brown, an Ohio Democrat who has been among the most vociferous critics of Mr Obama's trade push. Mr Brown argues the deal will lead to more job losses in industrial states like his.

But Mr Obama's temporary Republican allies on trade hailed the vote as a victory for US leadership in the world and a rare bipartisan victory.

Mitch McConnell, Senate majority leader, said that after travelling a "long and very twisted path" through Congress, the vote on Tuesday indicated that "America is back in the trade business" and "will continue to be deeply involved in the Pacific".

"This is a very important day for our country. We've demonstrated that we can work together on a bipartisan basis to finalise something very important for America," he added.

A new poll showed strong support in many TPP countries for the pact. The Pew Research Centre survey found a majority of people in favour of the deal in seven of the nine TPP countries where it was conducted. In the US, it found 49 per cent of respondents thought the TPP would "be a good thing for our country" while 29 per cent felt it would be bad.

Mr Obama's victory followed a blow this month when Democrats derailed his push by opposing a bill - called Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) - to give aid to workers who lose their jobs because of trade. The vote complicated efforts to approve TPA on procedural grounds.

Mr Earnest said "our work on trade is not finished" and that the president wanted Congress to approve a TAA bill this week. He declined to say whether Mr Obama would sign the TPA measure if TAA did not pass.

"There is no reason that this should be an issue," said Mr Earnest. "We have encountered problems, but so far we have a pretty good track record of working through. We believe there is a clear path for both TPA and TAA to come to the president's desk."

 
EU Trade Chief Calls on WTO Members to Renew Progress on Doha Negotiations
EU's Malmstroem Calls for ‘Return to High Ambition Rules Negotiations'
 
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, June 24, 2015
 
June 23 — The European Union's top trade minister said World Trade Organization members have a responsibility to fortify the multilateral trading system after 14 years of limited results.
 
EU Trade Commissioner Cecilia Malmstroem bemoaned the lack of progress on the 2001 Doha round of trade negotiations and said the EU is committed to modernizing international trade rules for the future, according to a June 23 speech.
 
The WTO has “moved away from the center of trade policy” as bilateral and regional trade agreements increasingly seek to fill the void created by the impasse of the 2001 Doha round, Malmstroem said.
 
“We need to prepare the ground now for a return to high ambition rules negotiations at the WTO,” she told attendees at a European Trade Policy Day event.
 
Doha Still Stuck
 
WTO members have acknowledged in recent weeks that many of the same difficult issues that have prevented the conclusion of the 14-year negotiations persist.
 
Specifically, members of the Group of 33 countries (G33) have demanded that members accept trade liberalization terms from 2008, the last time the Doha negotiations collapsed. Developed nations, such as the U.S. and EU, have resisted modifications to their tariff schedules and agricultural subsidy regimes unless large, emerging economies like China and India agree to major new concessions on market access terms and farm subsidies.
 
Members previously agreed to deliver by July 31 a detailed work program that would provide a path for concluding the 2001 Doha round. However, that deadline may lapse without prospects for delivering a substantive agreement for moving forward.
 
Trade ministers will enter a critical moment in their negotiations later in 2015 as they confront the possibility of ending the round without achieving the broad goals of the Doha Development Agenda.
 
Earlier this month, Malmstroem said, “Doha is dead” if WTO members fail to address the round at the Dec. 15-18 ministerial conference in Nairobi, Kenya (108 WTO, 6/5/15).
 
Multilateralism Remains Important
 
Malmstroem said it is in the EU's best interests to support the WTO's multilateral system.
 
“This is about principle. The EU and the WTO are both founded on the idea of a rules-based international order,” she said.
 
“It is also a practical issue. Trade rules that apply in 161 countries are much easier to use than a web of subtly different bilateral agreements. That's vital when global value chain cross many borders, not just one.” While the EU must also make sure that the bilateral agreements help strengthen the WTO, “we have work to do on those bilateral deals themselves,” she said, citing the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership with the U.S. as a “fundamental” objective.
 
The EU trade commissioner said trade policy should be more inclusive. In the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership and the Trade in Services Agreement, steps on inclusiveness have already been taken with mandates and text proposals for these deals now available online, she said. “We are now looking at how to extend this openness to other trade negotiations,” she added.
 
A more effective trade policy also means tackling novel types of trade barriers, Malmstroem said. “We should improve access to imported energy and raw materials, including green goods and services; boost digital trade and make it easier to move key staff when necessary. People who provide the services, or who maintain the traded machinery or equipment must be able to move more easily,” she added.
 
Malmstroem also said she was exploring what more trade policy can do to address corruption, which she said is a serious problem.
 
She called for a deepening of the EU's Asia Pacific strategy. In Latin America, Malmstroem said she hoped work on modernizing the agreements with Mexico and Chile could start soon.
 
 
U.S. Objects to Retaliation by Mexico Over Labeling Rules, Seeks Arbitration
By Bryce Baschuk 
WTO Reporter, June 24, 2015
 
June 23 — The U.S. said it would seek arbitration to address Mexico's request to impose $713 million in retaliatory trade measures stemming from the recent World Trade Organization ruling on U.S. country-of-origin labeling (COOL) for meat.
 
The arbitration request will delay for at least another two months Mexico's ability to seek sanctions for retaliatory trade actions against the U.S.
 
The WTO in May ruled that U.S. COOL rules, which require meat producers to indicate on retail packaging where each animal was born, raised and slaughtered, accord less favorable treatment to imported meat than to domestic products — in violation of international trade rules (96 WTO, 5/19/15).
 
The U.S. made the arbitration request June 23, less than a week after the U.S. sought arbitration of Canada's request for nearly $2.5 billion in retaliatory tariffs (117 WTO Reporter, 6/18/15).
 
Mexico recently increased its estimate of COOL costs up to $713 million from $653 million per year and said it would include the details of its request in a new WTO submission (116 WTO, 6/17/15). Mexico plans to submit its modified request at a special meeting of the WTO dispute settlement body June 29.
 
 
India, Brazil cross swords with U.S. at WTO 
Sriram Lakshman 
24 June 2015
The Hindu
 
CHENNAI,BUSINESS Switzerland and the U.S. have begun a campaign at the World Trade Organisation (WTO) to not renew a moratorium on ‘non-violation complaints and situations’ for intellectual property rights that expires at the end of the year.

Intellectual property laws are governed internationally by the Trade-Related Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) Agreement. The moratorium first came into being in 1995, when the WTO was born. And has survived by way of several extensions.

A non-violation and situation complaint can be raised against a WTO member when it undertakes a certain action which, while not violating WTO rules itself, denies another member an expected benefit by nullifying or countering another action or policy required by the WTO.

Introducing subsidies to undo the effect of lowered tariffs would be an example of an action that could potentially attract a non-violation complaint. A proposal to continue the moratorium has been submitted by Brazil on behalf of a group of 19 countries that includes India and China. If the proposal is successful, the moratorium will continue after 2015, preserving the status quo. If unsuccessful, however, it opens the door to a new world of possibilities and litigation as far as intellectual property is concerned.

Section 3(d) of the India Patents Act (1970) is likely to be a target of complainants, according to the Regulatory Affairs Professionals Society. This section of the Act defines what an invention is, and has been interpreted by the Indian Patent Office to deny patents for drugs such as Sovaldi, a hepatitis C drug by Gilead Sciences, and Glivec, a cancer drug by Novartis.

The denial of these patents has significant benefits for access to affordable medication in India. It also has implications for the revenues of multi-national pharmaceutical companies and their incentives to innovate.

 
OMC: Falta de inversión en I+D y en personal cualificado afectan la economía chilena
23 June 2015
El Mercurio
 
Entre este martes y el jueves, Chile se someterá al Examen de Política Comercial, evaluación que la Organización Mundial del Comercio realiza periódicamente a todos los Estados miembros.

GINEBRA.- La baja inversión de las empresas en investigación y desarrollo (I+D)y la falta de personal calificado son dos de los aspectos que limitan el crecimiento de la productividad en Chile y lastran su Economía, según informó la Organización Mundial del Comercio (OMC).

Chile se somete entre hoy y el jueves 25 de junio al Examen de Política Comercial, evaluación de la OMC que se le realiza periódicamente a todos los estados miembros de la organización.

En un informe del organismo, que analiza lo sucedido durante los años 2009 y 2014, indica que luego de un rápido periodo de crecimiento económico entre 2010 y 2012 en Chile, la economía se desaceleró en 2013 y particularmente en 2014, cuando el PIB real creció sólo un 1,9%.

El informe reconoce que las autoridades locales reaccionaron ante este frenazo y adoptaron políticas monetarias más expansivas con el fin de bajar las tasas de interés y permitir una depreciación del peso.

"Sin embargo, y a pesar del buen desempeño económico, el crecimiento de la productividad en Chile ha sido modesto, y aunque existen signos de que ha repuntado recientemente, la inversión de las empresas en investigación y desarrollo es baja y existe una falta de personal cualificado".

Dicho esto, los economistas de la OMC asumen que el país ha dado "pasos importantes" para mejorar la productividad como las políticas de apertura comercial; las modificaciones al marco regulatorio de la inversión; y la adopción de una ley de competencia de mayor alcance, y "apuntan también los esfuerzos por mejorar el sistema educativo", agrega el texto.

El informe recuerda que el periodo 2009-2014 se caracterizó por un incremento de las importaciones de mercancías a un ritmo más acelerado (69%) que el de las exportaciones (38,2%).

A pesar de los precios más elevados del cobre, la participación de los productos mineros en las exportaciones totales se redujo ligeramente durante esos años (56,8%).

"Aun así, las exportaciones chilenas continúan dependiendo mucho de la minería y en particular del cobre, que en 2014 representó el 50,1% de las exportaciones", advierten los economistas.

En 2014, China fue el principal mercado de exportación chileno, al absorber el 24,6% de las exportaciones, seguido de la Unión Europea (14,5%), Estados Unidos (12,2%), y Japón (10%).

El año pasado, el gigante asiático reemplazó a Estados Unidos como el mayor proveedor de Chile, con un 20,9%, seguido por el país norteamericano (19,8 %), la Unión Europea, Brasil y Argentina.

Chile continúa aplicando un sistema de bandas de precios basado en precios internacionales de referencia para las importaciones de trigo, harina de trigo y azúcar.

El texto recuerda que los niveles arancelarios resultantes de la aplicación de las bandas de precios fueron iguales a cero durante la mayor parte del periodo examinado.

"Aunque la aplicación del sistema no supuso una mayor protección durante este período, su existencia causa incertidumbre entre los potenciales exportadores y resta transparencia a la política arancelaria", advierte la OMC.
 
 
Fabric of a Trade Deal: U.S. Asks Vietnam to Cut Out Chinese Textiles 
By Tom Wright And Mark Magnier 
24 June 2015
Dow Jones Institutional News
 
HANOI--The U.S., aiming to bolster American exporters, is stipulating that countries joining its new Pacific trade zone cut back on imports from China--a proposal that is meeting resistance from businesses and officials who say it will disrupt global supply chains.

The Senate is expected to pass on Wednesday legislation to expand President Barack Obama's trade-negotiating powers after a bruising battle that has put pressure on proponents to show that the 12-nation Trans-Pacific Partnership will create jobs in the U.S.

To that end, American trade negotiators are demanding that Vietnam, a major garments exporter, reduce its reliance on textiles made in China, which isn't part of the trade pact, to get preferential market access to the U.S.

The goal is to create new markets in Vietnam for the U.S. textile industry, which employs a quarter of a million Americans and exported $20 billion last year.

"The U.S. and Mexico are especially large textile producers," said Eliza Levy, a spokeswoman for the National Council of Textile Organizations. "Vietnam would simply have to shift its sourcing of yarns and fabrics from China to the U.S. and Mexico."

U.S. fashion brands oppose this approach, which they say ignores the complexities of global supply chains. Vietnam is the second-largest exporter of apparel and footwear to the U.S., behind China, with $13.1 billion in sales last year. But the country only produces enough fabric to meet a fifth of its needs and buys about $4.7 billion worth from China, or about half its total annual imports.

Clothing brands want duty-free entry to the U.S. for all goods made in the new free-trade zone, no matter where the fabric is produced. The trade negotiations could slash U.S. duties on many of Vietnam's exports of garments and shoes to zero from between 7% and 32%.

Julia Hughes, president of the U.S. Fashion Industry Association, a trade group representing American brands, said U.S. textile exporters won't be able to feed Vietnam's appetite in sufficient quantities, forcing garment producers there to continue to rely on Chinese fabrics. "Vietnam isn't going to get much duty-free access" to the U.S. under current rules, Ms. Hughes said.

The U.S. garment industry argues that free trade will help the sector, which employs three million people, including designers and retail workers. In Congress, though, the debate over whether free trade imperils manufacturing employment has made the Pacific trade pact a contentious issue.

U.S. negotiators defend their position. Trevor Kincaid, a deputy assistant U.S. trade representative, said the deal "will deliver new opportunities for American-based businesses, including opportunities related to textiles and apparel in Vietnam." The administration, he said, has "a single-minded focus on getting [the] best possible deal for American workers and exports."

Vietnam has its own ideas. The country is working quickly to develop a homegrown textile industry, which would help get around the restrictions. "Vietnam is seeking to reduce its reliance on imports from China for its garment industry to better benefit from TPP," said Phan Chi Dung, a senior official with Vietnam's Ministry of Industry and Trade. However, he sees little chance of U.S. producers filling the void.

Companies from Hong Kong, South Korea and Taiwan recently have poured hundreds of millions of dollars into textile factories in Vietnam, hoping to later obtain tariff-free entry to the U.S. market.

TAL Apparel Ltd., a Hong Kong-based company which supplies says it makes one in six dress shirts sold in the U.S., is building a $240 million textile plant in Vietnam, which it hopes to complete by 2017, to feed its two garment factories there.

Roger Lee, chief executive of TAL Apparel, thinks it will take five years for Vietnam's textile industry to be self-sufficient. U.S. textile suppliers, he said, are too costly and far away from Asia to be competitive.

Chinese companies, too, are moving factories to Vietnam as wages rise at home and in anticipation of the Pacific trade zone.

Youngor Group, a Chinese apparel maker that runs a factory in Vietnam's northern Nam Dinh province, is looking to source more textiles from Vietnam, rather than from its own factories in China, with an eye on exporting duty-free to the U.S. "Our major competitor moved to Vietnam. Many companies are moving," said Yu Jian, deputy general manager of Youngor's Vietnam operations.

Ou Kui, manager of Yanian Garment Co., a Chinese apparel company based in Hanoi, is looking at producing zippers, buttons and other accessories to help investors from China meet local-content requirements.

A recent congressional report noted that Vietnam's textile industry, if it expands rapidly enough, could even compete with U.S. textile exports to Mexico, which is also part of the Pacific trade discussions.

Under pressure from U.S. brands, the trade agreement would allow Vietnam to continue to source from any country textiles and yarns on a "short-supply list"--inputs that aren't produced in sufficient quantities inside the proposed trade zone.

Ms. Hughes, of the fashion industry association, said the list is too restrictive, and can't be changed in the future, which will hamper U.S. brands' operations.

Vu Trong Khanh contributed to this article.

 
U.S. airs deep concerns over cyber security in China meetings 
By Jason Lange and David Brunnstrom 
 
WASHINGTON, June 23 (Reuters) - The United States said on Tuesday that cyber theft sponsored by the Chinese government was a major problem and stressed the need to keep Asian sea lanes open as the world's two biggest economies held annual talks aimed at maintaining working relations in spite of rising tensions. 
 
At the wide-ranging Strategic and Economic Dialogue in Washington, both sides expressed a desire for constructive relations, with China saying the two countries could manage differences and should avoid confrontation. 
 
But tensions over security matters, including cyber attacks on U.S. government computers that U.S. officials have blamed on Chinese hackers and China's pursuit of territorial claims in the disputed South China Sea, have threatened to hamper efforts to deepen economic ties worth $590 billion in two-way trade last year. 
 
"On cyberspace, in particular, we remain deeply concerned about Chinese government-sponsored cyber-enabled theft," U.S. Treasury Secretary Jack Lew said at the forum, which has brought together more than 400 Chinese officials and eight U.S. Cabinet secretaries. 
 
Lew said the targets of this hacking were U.S. firms and did not mention recent attacks on computers of the Office of Personnel Management. 
 
U.S. Vice President Joe Biden said the two sides might not resolve all of their differences in the meetings, which began on Monday and continue until Wednesday, but should commit to working on them. 
 
"We have to keep at it, day after day after day after day," Biden said. "This relationship is just too important. Not only do we depend on it, but the world depends on our mutual success." 
 
China's Vice Premier Liu Yandong said differences could be managed "as long as our two countries adopt an overall perspective, respect and accommodate each other's core interests." 
 
The talks come at a time of rising concern in Washington about China's exercise of its growing power, including Beijing's challenge to American dominance of global finance. 
 
The two sides have sought to ease tensions by stressing areas of cooperation, including climate change, shared concerns about Iran and North Korea's nuclear programs, the fight against Islamist militancy, and support for global development. 
 
However, significant practical progress is not expected, with China especially seeing the talks as a preparation for a visit to Washington by President Xi Jinping in September. 
 
The two sides did discuss Beijing's bid to include the yuan in the International Monetary Fund's basket of currencies, and both recognized the importance of an IMF review underway, a senior U.S. Treasury official said. 
 
They also addressed a Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT) already seven years in discussion. 
 
Zhang Xiangchen, a Chinese deputy trade minister, said Washington should remove investment barriers imposed for security reasons, although he acknowledged that China had further to go than America in improving its investment climate. 
 
Zhang said he hoped Washington would conclude a pan-Pacific trade pact it has been negotiating with 11 nations as quickly as possible so it could focus on BIT talks. 
 
 
China's Zhang hopes U.S. removes barriers to investment 
 
WASHINGTON, June 23 (Reuters) - The United States should remove barriers to Chinese investment for national security reasons, said Zhang Xiangchen, a deputy trade minister at the Ministry of Commerce.

"That's what we call a swing door; these doors are invisible but they are there when Chinese companies want to operate in the United States," Zhang told reporters on Tuesday after meetings with U.S. officials at annual talks on security and economic policy.

He said infrastructure and state-owned companies in particular may face obstacles in the United States, though he acknowledged China had further to go than America in improving its investment climate.

Zhang said the world's two largest economies are committed to further improve market access to each others' investors as part of talks on a Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT), though both economies have further to go.

He also said during the latest round of talks, the United States has not welcomed China joining an Asia trade pact in the future.

Washington is negotiating the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) with 11 other countries this year, and has said in the past that China could join later if it commits to high standards.

"We hope the TPP negotiations will be concluded as quickly as possible so that the United States can pay more attention to BIT negotiations with China," he said, when asked about the TPP. "Because for any country, the number of negotiators is limited." (Reporting by Anna Yukhananov; Editing by Bernard Orr) 
 
 
Ukraine Expects To Resolve Issue Of Dairy Supplies To Kazakh Market Through WTO 
Oksana Tymoschuk 
23 June 2015
Ukrainian News
 
Ukraine expects to resolve the issue of supply of dairy products to the Kazakh market through the World Trade Organization (WTO).

Prime Minister Arsenii Yatseniuk announced this during a meeting at the Ministry of Economic Development and Trade.

According to him, the government has managed to sign a protocol on cooperation between Ukraine and Kazakhstan within the framework of the WTO, which the two previous governments were unable to do.

"Within the framework of a multilateral working group, we managed to sign with our Kazakh friends a protocol stipulating that as soon as Kazakhstan changes its trade regime in relation to Ukraine, Ukraine will immediately have the right to change its trade regime in relation to Kazakhstan. It has a second stipulation: access Ukrainian dairy products to the Kazakh market," said the prime minister.

He added that Ukraine considers Kazakhstan as a trading partner and congratulated both sides on Kazakhstan's recent accession to the WTO.

As Ukrainian News earlier reported, Kazakhstan has thanked Ukraine for facilitating its accession to the World Trade Organization.

 
Taiwan to share experience at WTO's aid review meeting 
 (By Elaine Hou) 
23 June 2015
 
Taipei, June 23 (CNA) A Taiwanese government-funded agency is scheduled to share its experience in conducting foreign aid programs in a side event at the upcoming World Trade Organization review meeting of aid for trade, the agency said Tuesday.

"We will share our experience in helping Latin American, African and Pacific allies," said Weber Shih, secretary-general of the Taipei-based International Cooperation and Development Fund (TaiwanICDF), at a news briefing.

At the event slated for July 1, Liu Shih-hung, deputy director of TaiwanICDF's Technical Cooperation Department, will talk about the agency's work in improving information and communications technology in Belize and a developing a tropical fruit and vegetable program in Fiji and a sweet potato program in Swaziland, Shih said.

The program in Belize is aimed at making customs clearance more convenient to facilitate trade, he said, adding that the other two programs are to improve production techniques and boost agricultural development.

The event will serve as an opportunity for Taiwan to share its experience in foreign aid with WTO representatives from other countries, Shih said.

The July 1 event is being organized by Taiwan's mission to the Geneva-based WTO and World Vision's Geneva office, according to TaiwanICDF.

It is being held in conjunction with the Fifth Global Review of Aid for Trade, which will be held at the WTO from June 30 to July 2 under the theme "Reducing Trade Costs for Inclusive, Sustainable Growth."

The three-day event will bring together participants from around the world to discuss how to reduce high trade costs, which act as a brake on the integration of many developing countries and least-developed countries into international trade.

It will also focus on what action could be taken by governments and the private sector to address the issue. 
 
 
U.S. export lender heads for partial shutdown 
By Alex Wilts and Krista Hughes 
 
WASHINGTON, June 23 (Reuters) - Democrats warned on Tuesday U.S. businesses face a "huge disruption" if the Export-Import Bank partially shuts down at the end of the month, putting new trade finance deals on ice. 
 
The U.S. Congress has no plans to hold a vote on extending the charter of the U.S. export credit agency before going on a week-long break, meaning it is likely to expire on June 30. 
 
Although the bank is funded through September, Democrat Heidi Heitkamp said, allowing the bank's charter to expire would stall $11 billion in credit in Ex-Im's pipeline and create a "huge disruption" for businesses across the country. 
 
"They cannot do any new credits during the time that the charter is expired," she said. 
 
Democrats have pushed for the bank, which provides support to U.S. exporters and the buyers of U.S. goods such as aircraft made by Boeing Co, to be kept open in the face of a concerted conservative campaign to close it down. 
 
Senate Republican leader Mitch McConnell said a highway bill that is scheduled to come for debate in July was a "pretty obvious" place to attach an extension for Ex-Im. 
 
But the Republican chairman of the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee, James Inhofe, said he would oppose his own highway bill if Ex-Im legislation were attached to it. 
 
"I'm going to do all I can to keep it from happening," said Inhofe, one of 31 senators to oppose Ex-Im in a test vote earlier this month. Sixty-five supported it, suggesting a Senate vote to reauthorize the bank would succeed. 
 
House Democratic whip Steny Hoyer said closing Ex-Im would cost jobs and noted the House also had enough support to pass an extension of Ex-Im's charter. 
 
 
Supreme Court says government seizure of raisins is unconstitutional
Published June 23, 2015
Associated Press
 
WASHINGTON –  The Supreme Court ruled on Monday that the government can't force raisin farmers to give up part of their annual crop for less than it's worth, a victory for conservative groups that hailed the decision as a win for private property rights.
 
The justices ruled 8-1 that a 1940s-era program born out of the Great Depression is unconstitutional because it allows federal officials to seize personal property from farmers without fully compensating them, even though the goal is to benefit farmers by stabilizing market prices.
 
The court sided with California farmers Marvin and Laura Horne, who claimed they were losing money under a program they called outdated and ineffective. They had been fined $695,000 for trying to get around it.
 
Writing for the court, Chief Justice John Roberts said the government must pay "just compensation" when it takes personal goods, just as when it takes land away.
 
Roberts rejected the government's argument that the Hornes voluntarily chose to participate in the raisin market and have the option of growing different crops if they don't like it.
 
"'Let them sell wine' is probably not much more comforting to the raisin growers than similar retorts have been to others throughout history," Roberts said. "Property rights cannot be so easily manipulated."
 
The case was considered one of the most important property disputes to reach the high court since 2005, when the justices ruled that the city of New London, Connecticut, could use the power of eminent domain to hand private homes or businesses to developers to help stimulate economic improvement. That case sparked a backlash in many states and led more than 40 state legislatures to pass laws protecting property rights.
 
By contrast, Monday's ruling in the raisin case was seen as a decisive win for property-rights advocates seeking to limit government power.
 
"The decision confirms what should be obvious: the government cannot come and take your personal property without compensation, whether raisins or other property, on the ground that the taking is for your own good," said J. David Breemer, attorney for the Pacific Law Foundation, a conservative group that backed the Hornes.
 
The program was authorized by a 1937 law that allows the U.S. Department of Agriculture to keep prices for raisins and other crops steady by helping to manage supply. A 1949 marketing order allowed farmers to form a committee that decides how much of the raisin crop handlers must turn over to the government each year.
 
These raisins would be placed into a reserve pool to be sold outside the open market, used for the school lunch program or given away to charities and foreign governments. Any profits from these reserve sales would go toward funding the committee and anything left over went back to the farmers.
 
The Hornes refused to participate in the program in 2003, when farmers were required to give up 47 percent of their crop but received far less in return than their costs of production. They also refused to cooperate in 2004, when other farmers gave up 30 percent of the crop in 2004 and were paid nothing.
 
The Hornes' lawyer, John O'Quinn, called the ruling "a personal vindication" for the couple and "an important win for personal liberty."
 
Raisin prices have been stable recently, and farmers have not been ordered to put crops in reserve since 2010.
 
Only a small number of other crops are regulated in the same way, though federal officials say most programs are not active. Those include California dried prunes, California dates, California almonds, tart cherries, walnuts and spearmint oil.
 
A USDA spokesman said agency officials were reviewing the ruling and had no immediate comment.
 
Roberts said the government could have restricted raisin sales by limiting production, which is how the vast majority of crops programs work.
 
In a separate opinion, Justice Stephen Breyer agreed that the Hornes were entitled to be properly paid for their crops, but he said the case should be sent back to a lower court to decide whether they would have been owed any money had they complied with the program.
 
Breyer's separate opinion was joined by Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Elena Kagan.
 
Justice Clarence Thomas took issue with Breyer's point and wrote separately to say that sending the case back to figure out compensation "in this case would be a fruitless exercise."
 
Justice Sonia Sotomayor was the only dissenter. She said the program did not deprive the Hornes of all property rights, it just limited the amount of potential income they could earn from it.
END


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.