Week Ahead: WTO Leaders to Mark Twentieth Anniversary in Marrakesh
L’OMC célèbre ses 20 ans par une conférence internationale à Marrakech
Nigeria, others hold Africa’s $350b real sector finance market
Goods Council Selects Chilean Envoy As New Chair, Approves CBERA Waiver
‘Incentives can’t go on forever; beyond a point, one has to be competitive’
Negotiation on Tariff Elimination of Environmental Products Regularized…Korea Proposes 43 Items Including LED Lighting
FOOTWEAR: Turkey imposes constraints to the imported footwear
Data manipulation: India contests EU charges against GVK Bio
Japan to impose 5-yr antidumping tariff on China chemical substance
Steel Ministry bats for higher duty to check China 'dumping'
Indonesia plays hardball with smartphone manufacturers
Alexis Tsipras’s soft fruit ploy with Moscow set to antagonise EU
ASEAN leaders aim to narrow economic gap in region, document says
Americas summit marks region’s historic changes
 
 
Week Ahead: WTO Leaders to Mark Twentieth Anniversary in Marrakesh
By Bryce Baschuk 
WTO Reporter, April 6, 2015
 
April 3 — Leaders of the World Trade Organization will mark the 20th anniversary of the body's existence at an event next week in Marrakesh, Morocco.
 
WTO Director-General Roberto Azevedo plans to deliver a speech at the April 8–9 Conference of African Trade Ministers in Marrakesh.
 
The event commemorates the April 15, 1995, Marrakesh Agreement to conclude the 1986 Uruguay Round and create a permanent WTO with a strong legal trade dispute mechanism.
 
Azevedo also will meet with senior Moroccan government representatives, parliamentarians and representatives from the private sector.
 
Participants at the event are expected to discuss the goals and expectations of African countries in the latest round of Doha trade negotiations.
 
April 6 is a WTO non-working day.
 
 
L’OMC célèbre ses 20 ans par une conférence internationale à Marrakech
lun, 2015-04-06 13:27
http://ani.mr/fr/node/486
 
Le Maroc accueille une conférence des ministres africains du commerce qui se déroulera les 8 et 9 avril à Marrakech, à l’occasion du 20ème anniversaire de la création de l’OMC qui a vu le jour à l’issue des négociations de l’Uruguay Round du GATT par la signature de l’accord de Marrakech.

A travers cette conférence-anniversaire, le Maroc met en avant le rôle croissant des 42 pays africains membres de l’OMC dans le processus de décision de l’Organisation. Une position d’autant plus importante que l’OMC regroupe aujourd’hui 160 pays à travers le monde, et gère 98% du commerce mondial.

L’objectif de la conférence ministérielle de Marrakech est d’évaluer le bilan de 20 ans d’engagement de l’Afrique dans le système commercial multilatéral. La rencontre vise aussi à encourager les pays africains membres de l’OMC à une plus grande coordination, une position qui s’inscrit dans le sillage de la politique de coopération Sud-Sud défendue par le Maroc sur le Continent.

A l’ordre du jour de cette conférence à laquelle prendra part notamment le directeur général de l’OMC, Roberto Azevedo, l’examen des priorités des Etats africains en prévision de la reprise des négociations du Programme de Doha pour le Développement (PDD) et de la 10e conférence ministérielle de l’OMC, programmée du 15 au 18 décembre au Kenya.

Parallèlement, les participants débattront d’autres questions en rapport avec les défis qui se posent à l’Afrique à l’ère de la globalisation, le renforcement des capacités de production et d’exportation pour une meilleure intégration de l’Afrique dans l’économie mondiale, les difficultés de l’investissement dans les infrastructures, etc.

Cette conférence à laquelle prendront part plusieurs ministres africains du commerce, parmi lesquels le ministre marocain Moulay Hafid Elalamy, se déroulera en présence de représentants des autres organisations internationales chargées du commerce, des finances et du développement, en plus de parlementaires, d’opérateurs du secteur privé et d’acteurs de la société civile.
 
 
Nigeria, others hold Africa’s $350b real sector finance market
By Femi Adekoya on April 7, 2015 
The Guardian
 
Citing a survey by the African Development Bank of 300 banks operating in 45 African countries, the World Trade Organsiation (WTO) has described the market for trade finance in Nigeria and other developing countries in the continent to be hovering around $350 billion.
Indeed, the WTO noted that the figure could be markedly higher if a significant share of the financing requested by traders had not been rejected, noting that based on such rejections, the estimate for the value of unmet demand for trade finance in Africa is about $120 billion, representing one-third of the gap in the existing market.

Comparing the situation in Africa to that of Asia, the WTO stated that the Asian Development Bank, in a similar survey in Asia, found preliminary estimates showing an unmet demand of about $800 billion.

Based on the outcome of the surveys, the WTO stated that a lack of capacity in the financial sector to support industries, and also a lack of access to the international financial system could be a significant trade barrier for developing countries.

According to the WTO, up to 80 per cent of global trade is supported by some form of financing or credit insurance noting that the impact of financial limitations on a country’s trading potential can be very, very significant.

The Director-General, WTO, Roberto Azevêdo in a statement stated that in many countries there is a lack of capacity in the financial sector to support trade, therefore limiting the ability of these countries to use simple instruments such as letters of credit for trade.

He said: “After the financial crisis, the supply of trade finance has largely returned to normal levels in the major markets — but not everywhere and not for everyone.

“The structural difficulties of poor countries in accessing trade finance have not disappeared — indeed the situation may well have declined due to the effects of the crisis.
“There are indications that markets are even more selective now. Under increased regulatory scrutiny many institutions have lowered their risk-appetites and are focusing more on their established customers.

Some are deliberately decreasing their number of clients in a so-called “flight to quality”. “In this environment, the lower end of the market has been struggling to obtain affordable finance, with the smaller companies in the smaller, less-developed countries affected the most.

“Members asked us to provide more evidence of this phenomenon last year. I was particularly struck by the fact that the financing gaps are the highest in the poorest countries, notably in Africa and Asia.

And I was struck by the size of those gaps”. Azevêdo explained that the main reasons for the rejection of requests for financing include, the lack of creditworthiness or poor credit history, the insufficient limits granted by endorsing banks to local African issuing banks, the small size of the balance sheets of African banks, and insufficient US dollar liquidity.

According to him, some of these constraints are structural, and can only be addressed in the medium to long term adding that the retreat of global banks from Africa, and from other poor countries, is one such issue.

“Small and medium-sized enterprises are the most credit constrained as 50 per cent of their requests for trade finance are estimated to be rejected. This is compared to just 7% for multinational corporations.

“Moreover, two-thirds of the companies surveyed reported that they did not seek alternatives for rejected transactions. “Therefore these gaps may be exacerbated by a lack of awareness and familiarity among companies — particularly smaller ones — about the many options, which exist. A large majority of firms stated that they would benefit from greater financial education”.

He lamented that the findings are particularly striking as Africa and developing Asia are two areas of the world in which trade has grown fastest in the past decade, stating that the potential evolution of new production networks is faster than the ability of the local financial sectors to support them.

“This way, the lack of development of the financial sector can be a significant barrier to trade. It can prevent developing countries from integrating into the trading system and accessing further trade opportunities.

And it can therefore prevent them from leveraging trade as a powerful source of development. “So we need to respond to this problem. At the WTO we are doing everything we can to help developing countries to integrate into the global trading system. This is reflected in our technical assistance work.

It is reflected in the outcomes of the Bali Package, which we are implementing now. And it is reflected in the current negotiations on the work programme to conclude the Doha Round. “But the effectiveness of all this work will be lessened if proper access to trade finance is not secured”, the WTO boss added.
 
 
Goods Council Selects Chilean Envoy As New Chair, Approves CBERA Waiver
Inside U.S. Trade - 04/03/2015
 
The World Trade Organization Goods Council selected Hector Casanueva of Chile as its new chairman on March 26 along with 13 chairmen for its subsidiary bodies, according to a WTO press release.
 
Casanueva replaces Joakim Reiter of Sweden, who was selected to become the deputy secretary-general of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development effective April 1. Atanas Atanassov Paparizov of Bulgaria served as chairman on an interim basis after Reiter departed last fall, according to a WTO spokesman.
 
Newly selected chairmen of the goods council subsidiary bodies include Krizia Denisse Matthews of Panama on the Market Access Committee, Michael Wamai of Uganda on the Agriculture Committee, Felipe Hees of Brazil on the Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures Committee, and Andrew Staines of the United Kingdom on the Information Technology Agreement committee. A WTO spokesman said these chairmanships turn over annually, unlike those for Doha negotiating groups.
 
The Goods Council at its March 26 meeting also approved a waiver extension allowing the U.S. to continue the Caribbean Basis Economic and Recovery Act (CBERA) until Dec. 31, 2019, according to the WTO press release. The decision now goes to the General Council for final approval.
 
The release said India supported the waiver extension, but also urged the U.S. to remove an existing requirement that CBERA beneficiaries use U.S. textile inputs in the production of apparel in order for their exports to enter the United States duty free.
 
 
‘Incentives can’t go on forever; beyond a point, one has to be competitive’ 
Nayanima Basu 
7 April 2015
Business Standard
 
PRAVIR KUMAR, the Union government’s director general of foreign trade, clarifies aspects of the Foreign Trade Policy 2015-2020, in an interview with Nayanima Basu. Edited excerpts:

Was it a conscious effort by the government to make the Foreign Trade Policy (FTP) in line with the country’s commitments at the World Trade Organization (WTO) or were you under pressure by the developed countries? Either way, this stance seemed to have not gone sown well with exporters.

There is no question of pressure but of honouring your commitments. Once you are party to an agreement, it is expected of a responsible nation to come up with policies in tune with these. We cannot say one thing and sign on to something else. Its has to be cohesive. There is now a greater realisation that if we have to really boost exports, we need to improve internally. That’s why a lot of effort has gone into simplifying of processes. The external environment is out of our control.

One aspect that has come out very clearly in the FTP is that the days when exporters can expect sops to become competitive are gone. Is this, again, due to commitments to global norms or to fiscal constraints?

Both. Incentives cannot go on forever. We have to gradually take these away. We can justify and continue with those we can afford but beyond a point, we have to think of our own competitiveness. We can prop things up artificially but cannot make them run a marathon.

The FTP has come after almost a year. Since there was no mention on an interest subvention for exporters in the (Union) Budget, it was highly anticipated that the announcement would be done with the FTP release. Now, it seems, you will take a couple of more months to clearly come out with it.

That is a budgetary announcement. So, the legislative decision is already there. We will come up with the scheme; right now, we are in the process of finalising a proposal. Once that is done, it will finally go to the CCEA (Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs). It will take at least two months.

The FTP statement categorically mentions that the thrust will be on sectors performing well, as well as labour-intensive ones. Will those sectors get the three per cent interest subvention boost?

That analysis is going on. The guidelines of the scheme have to be finalised. This is anyway not linked with the FTP. It will come after necessary approvals are taken.

Applicable retrospectively or prospectively?

It is generally done prospectively. But we have not yet taken a call on it.

Will the Services Export from India Scheme (SEIS) be given to Special Economic Zone units? The policy says SEZ units are ineligible.

SEZ units will get SEIS benefits. We will soon issue a corrigendum.

The additional revenue outgo the government will have to bear for doing so?

We have not calculated it. Ultimately, we were able to convince the finance ministry. There will be some outgo but then, we have taken into account all physical exports made from the country as a whole.

Was it not an indirect way to pacify the SEZ units, in lieu of imposition of MAT (Minimum Alternate Tax), DDT (Dividend Distribution Tax)?

Government has taken an overall view. It is part of the bigger picture.

Also, it will not be given to information technology or IT-enabled services' SEZs?

IT-ITeS is, in any case, out of the purview of SEIS. The rule is the same, whether for DTA (Domestic Tariff Area) or SEZs.

The duty scrips you are giving under MEIS and SEIS have basically become tradable.

Earlier, exporters complained that by issuing duty scrips which were non-transferable, the government was incentivising imports. Now, we are also incentivising exports, as we have made it freely tradable. Now, our scrips are as good as cash.

How will this check revenue loss?

Earlier, middlemen were making money; now, they are eradicated. If an exporter who earns it has no excise duty to pay, no service tax to pay, he can simply encash it from any other exporter. There is no more restriction to it. By this, we have effectively checked the root cause of corruption, by eliminating the middlemen.

Now that you have substantially reduced the export obligation under the EPCG (Export Promotion Capital Goods) scheme from 90 per cent to 75 per cent, do you feel there will now be less of defaulters?

Under the EPCG scheme, the government is allowing import for local procurement of certain items needed for making export products, some capital goods that are required to manufacture certain exports. Now that we have to promote exports, we are looking at making import of those items easier, that help in producing such exports.

So, this will help in both manufacturing and export.

 
Negotiation on Tariff Elimination of Environmental Products Regularized…Korea Proposes 43 Items Including LED Lighting
6 April 2015
The Electronic Times
 
The negotiation of the World Trade Organization(WTO) Environmental Goods Agreement(EGA) for tariff elimination of environmental goods has been regularized. The Korean government proposed 43 items for tariff elimination including LED lighting, lithium ion accumulators, metal silicon, etc.

According to the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy on April 5th, as a result of the EGA pre-negotiation stage 1, 10 fields and over 580 items have been classified as potential candidates for tariff elimination. Based on this, EGA member states begin negotiations by item next month.

EGA is a environmental product liberalization negotiation that 14 countries including Korea started since last year’s Davos Forum in January. The U.S.A.·EU·Japan·Australia·China etc. have participated from the beginning. Israel·Turkey·Iceland have joined later on, and thus, 17 countries are currently proceeding the negotiation.

EGA member states have singled out 10 fields and around 580 items through five pre-negotiations since last July. The 10 fields include ?Air Pollution Management ?Fluid·Solid Waste Management ?Environmental Restoration·Purification ?Clean·Renewable Energy ?Energy Efficiency ?Eco-friendly Products etc.

The Korean government submitted 43 candidate items for tariff elimination that have industrial competitiveness and technical skills based on environmental benefits. LED lighting, carbon fiber, gas boiler, lithium ion accumulator, metal silicon, and more were included.

Member states begin negotiation by item next month. After that, there are additional negotiations in June and July. Tariff eliminated items are selected by examining their environmental credibility and the approval of member countries. Without a particularly targeted amount, all items that arrive at an arrangement will be listed for tariff elimination.

Once an item is listed for tariff elimination, the 17 member states eliminate its tariff immediately or in stages. Non-member countries may also enjoy the non-tariff benefit when exporting to EGA member countries.

Member states have set settlement through the 10th WTO Ministerial Conference, which will be held in December, and the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change Conference of the Parties as their goal. Some say settlement within the year seems difficult, as opinions differ on opening certain items.

The government has organized a public and private joint Task Force(TF) centering the Ministry of Commerce & Industry and the Ministry of Environment to effectively respond to EGA negotiations. They had a meeting on April 3rd and discussed negotiation strategies for each item.

The government has announced that they will actively participate in the liberalization negotiation for environmental goods and specify negotiation strategies maximizing our actual profit. 
 
 
FOOTWEAR: Turkey imposes constraints to the imported footwear 
6 April 2015
Investimentos e Notícias (Real Time)
 
SÃO PAULO, 4/6/15 - One more important character appears in the list of countries which impose barriers to Brazilian footwear. The Turkey, that since 2012 has been imposing restrictions on imports of footwear, is stepping up the barriers to domestic products since last year, as instituted a 30% rate to 50% for the imported footwear that were not from the European Union, Israel, Macedonia, Bosnia, Morocco, the West Bank, Tunisia, Egypt, Georgia, Jordan, Chile, Albania, Serbia, Montenegro, Kosovo, South Korea and Mauritius.

Despite the Turkey does not represent a significant volume of Brazilian footwear exports, the Brazilian Association of footwear Industries (Abicalçados) sees with concern the protectionist movement, which considers illegal for being discriminatory. ' The World Trade Organization (WTO) grants the right of a nation to establish measures aimed at the protection of human health and also temporary safeguards, provided that they are not applied in a discriminatory manner ', explains the Chief Executive of Abicalçados, Hector Klein. In addition to the tariff applied from 2014, the national footwear has lived since the end of 2012, with technical barriers of inspection of the chemical Phthalate. The inspections, which are carried out by Turkish laboratories before shipment, at the source, and also at the destination end up delaying and making business. ' Are subject to contestation barriers at the WTO ', says Klein.

According to the Executive, the search through Abicalçados with his associates, found that large exporters of footwear have reduced or eliminated their negotiations with Turkey due to barriers beyond the negotiations. Account Executive, still, that many companies have already dropped out of that market and others are ' thinking ' to remain competitive in that country. ' We have decreased their exporting shipments in more than 40% for there due to the restrictions. Others report that found themselves forced to reduce prices and increase the marketing investment to offset the effects of the barriers ' laments Klein, adding that all associated ears by the entity were emphatic in stating that have great interest in doing business with Turkey and believe in the potential of that market, provided that it is competitive or even impartiality vis-à-vis other countries which are not subject to the restrictions.
(Newsroom - Agência IN)

 
Data manipulation: India contests EU charges against GVK Bio 
Amiti Sen 
6 April 2015
Business Line (The Hindu)
 
 
Submits evidence to prove trials were clean; ready to take legal action if proof is rejected India has challenged the allegations of data manipulation levelled by European and French drug regulatory agencies against GVK Biosciences.

New Delhi is ready to take “commercial and legal action” against the European Union (EU) if it does not react positively to evidence, a senior official told BusinessLine . It has supplied evidence to establish that the clinical trials were authentic.

“We have met the European Medicines Agency (EMA) and the French agency and given them evidence to show the tests by GVK Biosciences were not manipulated,” Commerce Secretary Rajeev Kher said.

Moving WTO an option

If there is no response soon, India will be constrained to take commercial or legal action against the countries, Kher said. “Legal action could be in the form of action at the World Trade Organisation,” he said.

Late last year, French medicines agency (ANSM) alleged that its inspection of GVK Biosciences, Hyderabad, an Indian contract research organisation, revealed data manipulation of electrocardiograms (ECGs), over five years, during research on generic medicines.

In January, the EMA gave its harsh recommendation that a number of medicines for which authorisation in the European Union (EU) were primarily based on clinical studies conducted at GVK Biosciences in Hyderabad should be suspended.

“The European agencies have suspected the clinical trials on grounds that are absolutely flimsy. Not just GVK, but the companies for which the clinical trials were done, which include several multinationals, have given a plethora of evidence to show that there was no manipulation,” Kher said.

The government has even got independent cardiologists to examine the ECGs, and they have given GVK a clean chit. “We have asked EMA and some other European agencies to cross check the ECGs and get back to us,” Kher said.

The Secretary said that there were just a few big multinationals that were driving an agenda against the generic (off-patent drug) industry, affecting India’s annual drug exports of $15 billion. “It is important for us to take the matter to its logical conclusion,” Kher said.

India’s strong retaliation against the EU action comes at a time when both the US and EU are taking an unprecedented number of measures against Indian pharmaceutical companies over quality issues.

“The past few years have seen a lot of action where the fault was not seen in the substance of the medicines but in the processes. We feel that this approach needs to be tempered,” Kher said.

 
Japan to impose 5-yr antidumping tariff on China chemical substance 
Kyodo News
 
TOKYO, April 7 -- The Japanese government plans to impose a five-year antidumping tariff on a chemical substance used to produce car seats and bedding imported from China, Finance Ministry officials said Tuesday.

Under the measure to be subject to Cabinet approval, Japan will slap a 69.4 percent antidumping tariff on import prices of toluene diisocyanate from April 25, as Japanese manufacturers were likely to have suffered damage as a result of the suspected dumping.

Japan currently imposes a four-month provisional antidumping tariff on the substance, with the term set to expire on April 24. The ministry aims to have the plan approved by the Cabinet before the deadline, a ministry official said.
 
 
Steel Ministry bats for higher duty to check China 'dumping' 
 
New Delhi, Apr 2 (PTI) Alarmed by the "dumping" from China, the steel ministry today pressed for raising the import duty to protect the domestic industry.

"The steel industry and the government, both are worried over dumping from China. We have discussed increasing the import duty with the Finance Minister, and we hope that we will get favourable results," Steel and Mines Minister Narendra Singh Tomar told a press conference here.

The steel imports from China in April-January 2014-15 rose to 2.9 million tonnes (MT) against 1.08 MT for the entire 2013-14.

During the same period, carbon steel imports from the neighbour stood at 1.52 MT while stainless/alloy steel imports came in at 1.37 MT.

Steel imports went up cumulatively to 8.38 MT in April-February 2014-15, registering a whopping 67.3 per cent rise over the same period last fiscal.

In the Budget 2015-16, the government has opened up the possibility of increasing import duty for finished and semi-finished steel to 15 per cent from 10 per cent, designed to shielding home-grown firms from rising imports.

The Commerce Ministry has already recommended an anti-dumping duty of up to USD 316 per tonne on imports of a certain variety of steel from China, Korea and Malaysia.

However, Minister of State for Steel and Mines Vishnu Deo Sai had earlier clarified that the government is not planning a ban on steel imports. PTI SOM MEG RR ARD NS BJ
 
 
Indonesia plays hardball with smartphone manufacturers 
By Charlotte Greenfield 
 
JAKARTA, April 3 (Reuters) - When Polytron became the first Indonesian company to produce 4G-capable smartphones last year, it changed the 'Manufactured in China' inscription on its handsets to 'Made in Kudus,' a town in Central Java.

Polytron relocated production from China to comply with 'local-content' rules introduced in 2012. The regulations have raised concerns about higher manufacturing costs and hung question marks over an industry championed by the Indonesian government.

The United States has pressed Indonesia to relax the rules, which it says will hamper efforts of tech giants such as Apple Inc to expand into one of the world's last big markets where use of smartphones has yet to truly take off.

Assembling far from China's electronics supply chain means it costs up to 50 percent more to manufacture a mobile phone in Indonesia, according to Polytron, a smaller player among local phone brands.

"Honestly, we are doing it because of the regulation, to be in compliance," Polytron spokesman Santo Kadarusman told Reuters.

The government ramped up enforcement of the rules last year. The regulations are part of a push under President Joko Widodo to transform Indonesia from an economy that consumes products into one that produces them, in his attempt to boost economic growth and eliminate the country's trade deficit.

Most mobile phones sold in Indonesia are made in China. There was no phone manufacturing industry in Indonesia until last year when 15 companies submitted plans to the Industry Ministry to start production. Among them was Samsung Electronics Co Ltd, which opened a factory near Jakarta.

The regulations require importers of smartphones to manufacture in Indonesia or have their import licenses revoked by 2016 or 2017, depending on when they received their license.

The ministry is working on a new regulation targeting 4G smartphones. It is expected to be completed in June and come into force on Jan. 1, 2017. The rule will require all companies that sell 4G-capable devices, including Apple and Samsung, to produce a certain percentage of 'local content' in Indonesia.

Apple did not immediately respond to requests to comment on the local content rule. Samsung declined to comment.

It is unclear as to whether this regulation will replace existing requirements or how local content will be measured.

Indonesia needs a bigger share of the $3 billion in annual phone imports to reduce its trade deficit, said Minister for Communications Rudiantara, who like many Indonesians goes by one name. "This phone is $600-$700, so we want $250-$300 of that to go to Indonesia," he said, pointing to his iPhone.

LOCAL CONTENT

Local content could include design through intellectual property fees in addition to manufacturing of handsets, Rudiantara said. He declined to give further details on the way the percentage of local content would be calculated.

Around a fifth of local content would have to be research and development, meaning companies would need to have a design development centre in addition to manufacturing, said Industry Minister Saleh Husin.

Critics of the 'Made in Indonesia' rule, including the American Chamber of Commerce, say the requirement is confusing and could increase costs, restrict access to technology and violate World Trade Organization (WTO) obligations.

The U.S. Trade Representative is raising these concerns with the Indonesian government and the WTO.

But Polytron is optimistic about the move, and expects its mobile division to make its first profit since it started in 2011 by the end of the year.

"Our support from the government is the promise that other 4G brands cannot sell in Indonesia if local content is not 30 percent. Polytron is already at 35 percent. If Polytron gets to 40 percent local content, [the government told us] there is a possibility the local content requirement will go to 40 percent," Polytron spokesman Kadarusman said.

He declined to comment on how the local content percentage was calculated.

Rudiantara said that after hearing of complaints, he was "undecided" on whether the required local content would be 40 percent, which he previously told companies. He planned to release a draft of the regulation in mid-April to give companies time to raise concerns.

He said higher costs would make it difficult for Indonesia to compete purely on manufacturing, but hoped his switch to include research and development would help.

"I'm not crazy. Ministers should have nationalism, but not chauvinistic nationalism," Rudiantara said. "If Indonesia competes only on producing hardware, it's going to be difficult." (Editing by Ryan Woo) 
 
 
Alexis Tsipras’s soft fruit ploy with Moscow set to antagonise EU
By Alex Barker in Brussels, Kerin Hope in Athens and Kathrin Hille in Moscow 
April 6, 2015 4:19 pm
Financial Times
 
When Alexis Tsipras visits Vladimir Putin’s Kremlin on Wednesday there is a chance the Greek premier’s eastern manoeuvre will immediately bear fruit: kiwis, peaches and strawberries to be precise.

Athens is hopeful that Moscow will lift a retaliatory ban on Greek soft fruits to demonstrate the abiding strength of Russo-Greek relations, just as both leaders feel a diplomatic chill with Europe over the Ukraine crisis and Athens’ bailout saga respectively.
 
But what worries European diplomats is that the Putin-Tsipras gladhanding amounts to something more significant than fruit trade. The big fear, in the words of one suspicious senior official, is a “Trojan horse” plot, where Russia extends billions in rescue loans in exchange for a Greek veto on sanctions — a move that would kill western unity over Ukraine. 
 
No such shock is expected this week. But as Athens nears the brink of insolvency there is growing alarm that Mr Tsipras’s radical left government might turn to Moscow in desperation. It would set off the biggest panic over Greece’s strategic alignment since the 1947 US Marshall Plan, initiated to save the country from communist fighters that Mr Tsipras’ Syriza party lionise to this day.

Others argue that Mr Tsipras’ Russia card is but a ploy in bailout talks with Germany and the eurozone. In spite of historic cultural ties and Syriza’s Soviet romanticism, analysts think Greece is too tied to the west – through EU and Nato membership – and too deep in debt for sanctions-damaged Russia to buy it off as a reliable ally. 
 
“The Greeks are using Russia as a way to piss off Berlin, to frighten them. Tsipras wants to show he has other options,” said Theocharis Grigoriadis, a Greece-Russia relations expert at the Free University of Berlin. 
 
“But he has no intention of making Greece a Russian satellite. The Russians know that. The Germans know that. It is pure theatre, a Greek game, and I’m afraid it looks like a poodle trying to scare a lion.”

From his first day in office Mr Tsipras’ administration has stoked Russian paranoia in western capitals. During his debut at an EU foreign ministers meeting, Greece’s Nikos Kotzias angrily waved a rolled-up Russian sanctions proposal in his hand as he condemned the measures. “We argue and squabble but it is like a family, we’re supposed to share the same world view,” said one official present. “That meeting was something else — it felt like the UN Security Council.” 
 
Since then Greece has showed restraint and tempered its position. But last week Mr Tsipras made waves by telling Russian news agency Itar-Tass that sanctions were an unwise “road to nowhere”. Ticking off another Moscow complaint, Mr Tsipras added that a “new European security architecture should also include Russia”.

Mr Kotzias, a former Piraeus university professor turned Greek foreign minister, is dismissive of sinister speculation over the Tsipras Moscow trip. “There are circles that react as if Greece were abandoning the west or wanted to engage in back-stabbing,” he said at the weekend. “There are mistaken stereotypes.” 
 
Greece’s affinity for Russia stretches from religion to politics and dates from the late 18th century, when Catherine the Great briefly acted as protector to some Aegean islands during an imperial Mediterranean push. A tax break was part of the deal: Greek shipowners could circumvent the Ottoman taxman by flying the Russian flag. 
 
Almost as longstanding is Greece’s track-record of flirting with Moscow when its western alliances come under strain. When Nato was seen as too friendly to Turkey in the early 1980s, Andreas Papandreou, Greece’s first socialist prime minister, offered Syros island’s port facilities to the Soviet navy. Tellingly, that deal was never sealed; a fate shared by many Russo-Greek plans. 
 
For now, the Kremlin is careful not to feed speculation over loans. Dmitry Peskov, Mr Putin’s spokesman, said Greece’s economic situation and “Athens’ quite tepid attitude towards this [EU] sanctions policy” would be on Wednesday’s agenda. But he said Russia’s readiness to offer Greece financial support was uncertain and would depend on Athens’ request.

Russia loaned €2.5bn to Cyprus during its economic travails, a country with which Moscow maintains even closer economic and political ties. Yet to the Nicosia’s embarrassment, Mr Putin rejected pleas for a bigger loan to avert its full eurozone bailout two years ago. 
 
The scale of Greece’s economic hole is on a different scale: it is already in receipt of a €172bn bailout programme. 
 
“The Russians won’t want to risk serious money given the possibility of another Greek default and their own present situation,” said one senior banker in Athens. “But they may agree to buy some Greek treasury bills as the Chinese did recently, as a gesture of support.” 
 
Moscow says that, although it wants to soften the blow of the fruit ban, a full Greek exemption may be impossible because of global trade rules. Russia’s food hygiene regulator says planned inspections of Greek producers should not be seen as a sign that the embargo will be lifted early.

So far, Moscow’s main focus is on Turkish Stream, a Putin-backed pipeline to replace the collapsed South Stream, potentially entering the EU through Greece. After a recent Moscow visit, hard-left Greek energy minister Panagiotis Lafazanis hailed a “new chapter” in relations, boasted of securing cheaper gas and Russian bids for deep-sea oil prospects in Greece — just the kind of exploration EU sanctions are trying to curb. 
 
Mr Tsipras’ Moscow gambit will play well with Greeks cheering his defiance of Brussels and please Syriza’s hard-left faction. But Greek analysts doubt Mr Tsipras will agree to anything that would seriously alienate Berlin or Nato. Mr Tsipras, for instance, moved forward his Moscow trip by a month to avoid upsetting EU allies by appearing at Russia’s second world war victory parade on May 9. 
 
“There are economic and political advantages for both sides in getting closer but not too close,” said Costas Iordanides, a veteran commentator on Greek foreign relations. 
 
“Typically, the Russians stir things up in Greece whenever there’s an opportunity. But they haven’t ever challenged Greece’s relationship with Nato.”
 
 
ASEAN leaders aim to narrow economic gap in region, document says 
Vivian Ho 
Kyodo News
 
KUALA LUMPUR, April 6 -- Leaders from the Association of Southeast Asian Nations will push for more engagement with the private sector to narrow the gap among their countries as the bloc strives toward a common market by the end of this year, according to a draft declaration set to be adopted by the leaders at a summit later this month.

Leaders from the 10 member countries in ASEAN are expected to meet in Kuala Lumpur for their annual summit on April 26 before heading to the northern island resort of Langkawi for an informal gathering the next day.

Malaysia plays host at a crucial juncture in ASEAN developments as this year marks the deadline for the formal establishment of the ASEAN Community, a project which entails closer integration through political security, and closer economic and socio-cultural relations.

On economic ties, the leaders agree to "encourage more engagement and interaction between ASEAN leaders and business leaders including small and medium enterprises to narrow the gaps within and among ASEAN as well as promote the free movement of peoples and skilled labor," according to a draft obtained by Kyodo News titled "Kuala Lumpur Declaration on a People-Centered ASEAN."

The ASEAN Economic Community blueprint envisaged an integrated market and production base with free flow of goods, services and investments, skilled labor and capital.

But there is a startling development gap among member countries. For example, Singapore's gross national income per capita is 56 times bigger than that of Cambodia.

Skeptics have long voiced doubts over ASEAN's ambition for closer integration given the grouping's sacred stance on sovereignty and the increase in protectionism as national interest trumps regional ambition.

But host Malaysia has a plan to integrate the private sector, helping companies to expand across borders.

At the ASEAN economic ministers meeting last month, Idris Jala, minister in the Prime Minister's Department, presented his "pathfinder project" proposal to the ministers where each country identifies 10 companies and gets all 100 to sit together and thrash out their problems trying to expand in other ASEAN member countries.

"Those are basically companies from ASEAN countries that want to expand but have encountered problems such as with approvals and other nontariff barriers. You will only know if you look at it company by company," the official news agency Bernama quoted Idris as saying.

In addition to the Kuala Lumpur declaration, the ASEAN leaders are also expected to adopt the "Langkawi Declaration on the Global Movement of Moderates."

The declaration calls for "a commitment to democratic values, good governance, equitable economic growth and adherence to social justice" as a way "to counter and address the root causes of terrorism, violent extremism and radicalism," according to a draft obtained by Kyodo.

Southeast Asia has not been spared by extremists' violence. Groups like the Indonesia-based Jemaah Islamiyah and the Abu Sayyaf based in southern Philippines have wrought terror.

And now, the latest threat is the growing influence of Islamic State militants. Officials say dozens of people in Southeast Asian countries have headed to Syria and Iraq to join IS.

ASEAN groups Brunei, Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Vietnam.

 
Americas summit marks region’s historic changes
But more decisive than US-Cuba talks is the end of commodity boom
Financial Times
6 April 2015
 
Economic shift: some of the loudest anti-US voices, such as Venuzuela's President Nicolás Maduro, could be damped by slowing commodity boom
 
Corruption scandals taint the presidencies of Argentina, Brazil and Mexico. Chile is squabbling with Bolivia. Venezuela is in a protracted state of crisis, while its border with Colombia is rife with smugglers plying a lucrative trade in contraband gasoline. Central America is the most murderous place on earth, thanks to drug-trafficking. The dispute over the Keystone XL pipeline has chilled Canada’s relations with the US, while the Caribbean remains a collection of financially precarious states. These are only some of the neighbourly problems that the hemisphere’s leaders take to Panama this week for the Summit of the Americas. It also makes the meeting’s theme, “the challenges of American co-operation”, doubly ironic. Indeed, it has already been agreed that nobody will agree, and therefore there will be no final communiqué — an interesting take on mutual support. 
 
Nonetheless, this year’s meeting, a once-every-four-years gathering, is genuinely historic. It will be the first time since the days of Dwight Eisenhower that the US and Cuban presidents will formally meet. Their double billing, at Latin America’s insistence, accompanies moves begun by the US and Cuba to re-establish diplomatic relations. The prospect of rapprochement, and an end to the US trade embargo, has weakened the summit’s usual anti-Yankee animus — one of the few things Latin Americans agree on.

More importantly, the summit coincides with a significant change in the world economy. For the first time in a decade, the forces shaping global capitalism are in the US’s favour rather than in South America’s. The commodity “supercycle” is ebbing as China’s economy slows, and what had seemed to be an elixir guaranteeing endless growth has proved a chimera. Even well-managed economies, such as Chile’s and Colombia’s, have slowed sharply. Spendthrifts such as Argentina, Brazil and Venezuela have meanwhile suffered more as the mismanagement masked by the commodity boom has been exposed.

This economic shift will have powerful political effects, too. It should deflate some of the region’s loudest anti-US voices, particularly the Venezuela-led Alba bloc of leftwing countries. It could also mark a reconsideration of US relations among the rest. Much recent Latin American diplomacy has focused on Beijing. It may be a sign of the times that Dilma Rousseff, Brazil’s embattled president, has said she wants to resume the US state visit that she cancelled two years ago due to US electronic snooping on her emails.

By and large, the Americas today enjoy resilient political democracies with reasonably well-managed economies, and thriving commercial links. Sadly, Venezuela is an exception. Worse, attempts by its Latin American peers to hold Caracas to their own democratic standards have been meek at best, and more often non-existent. This pathetic spectacle has sapped arguments for the larger world role that Latin America often claims.

US diplomacy, though, has done little better. On March 9, under the legal rubric that it faced an “extraordinary threat to?.?.?.?national security”, Washington slapped sanctions on seven Venezuelan officials it deemed guilty of human rights abuses. Such unfortunate language gave Nicolás Maduro, the Venezuelan president, a sympathy bump across the region. 
 
This is doubly absurd. Venezuela is a national security threat only to itself. And if Washington can only sanction foreign officials by declaring a whole country is a threat, then those legal requirements should be changed. Everywhere, the best way to improve co-operation is to begin at home.
END