WTO members discuss way forward to resolve global trade issues
WEF 2015: les ministres de l’OMC renforcent leur engagement sur Doha
Les ministres de 21 membres de l'OMC prêts à faire avancer les négociations du Cycle de Doha
OMC: des ministres renforcent leur engagement sur Doha
Davos : peut-être un déblocage après la mini-ministérielle de l'OMC
Modi determined to make Obama visit a 'landmark event' for food security and nuclear deal 
Smoking stuck in the last chance saloon
Japan offers compromise on rice in Asia-Pacific trade talks -Nikkei
Junk food, booze may follow tobacco in plain-wrapper push
 

WTO members discuss way forward to resolve global trade issues
24 January 2015
Press Trust of India
Davos, Jan 24 (PTI) More than 21 HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members, including China and the US, have expressed their readiness to engage constructively for a clearly defined work programme by July to address remaining Doha issues.
As many as 21 HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members attended a ministerial-level meeting on the sidelines of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Economic Forum (WEF) annual meet here.
The Ministers discussed about the importance of achieving progress on global trade talks, especially in the areas of agriculture, industrial products and services.
In a statement, Swiss government today said the participants at the meeting talked about the need of achieving progress on the 'Doha Development Agenda' issues that had remained unsolved at the Bali Ministerial Conference in December 2013.
The main issues that were discussed pertain to areas of agriculture, industrial products and services.
"Ministers underlined their readiness to engage constructively towards a realistic and clearly defined 'work programme' by July, framing the negotiations on the remaining Doha issues," the statement said.
At the invitation of Federal Councillor Johann N Schneider-Ammann, ministers in charge of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO affairs and WTO Director General HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevedo met here today.
The informal gathering was to discuss the negotiating agenda for 2015 in view of a conclusion of the Doha Round.
The US, China, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Russia, Brazil, Canada, South Africa and Indonesia, among other members participated in the meeting. PTI BJ RAM KSR
Press Trust Of India Limited
WEF 2015: les ministres de l’OMC renforcent leur engagement sur Doha
24 January 2015
Le Temps
Les ministres de l’Organisation mondiale du commerce (OMC) ont renforcé leur engagement pour la conclusion du cycle de Doha. Réunis en marge du Forum économique mondial (WEF) à Davos (GR), ils ont convenu de définir d’ici à juillet une feuille de route autour des points d’achoppement.
«Nous avons eu une bonne discussion aujourd’hui», s’est félicité Johann Schneider-Ammann devant la presse samedi à Davos. Le chef du Département fédéral de l’économie a invité 21 ministres à cette rencontre informelle, destinée à faire progresser les thèmes du Programme de Doha pour le développement restés en suspens.
Les ministres ont convenu de définir d’ici à fin juillet une feuille de route «crédible et réaliste» autour de ces sujets de négociation non résolus, a indiqué le directeur général de l’OMC Roberto de Azevedo. «Nous souhaitons que ce programme soit aussi détaillé que possible», a souligné le Brésilien.
Et pour progresser rapidement dans cette voie, «nous devons changer la nature de nos conversations». Les ministres doivent pouvoir exprimer ce qu’ils souhaitent, mais aussi «ce qu’ils sont prêts à donner», a déclaré Roberto de Azevedo, affirmant avoir reçu des signaux positifs de leur part.
Et le conseiller fédéral Johann Schneider-Ammann de souligner que «depuis cinq ans que je participe à cette réunion, j’ai aujourd’hui assisté à l’engagement le plus clair.» (ATS)
Le Temps
Les ministres de 21 membres de l'OMC prêts à faire avancer les négociations du Cycle de Doha
Shi Jianguo 
24 January 2015
Le Service en français de Xinhua
DAVOS (Suisse), 24 janvier (Xinhua) -- Les ministres de 21 membres de l'Organisation mondiale du commerce (OMC) et le directeur général de cette organisation, Roberto Azevêdo, se sont réunis samedi à Davos, dans l'est de la Suisse, pour discuter des voies et moyens pour faire avancer les thèmes du "Programme de Doha pour le développement".
Invités par le chef du Département fédéral de l'économie de Suisse, Johann N. Schneider-Ammann, les participants ont notamment discuté du programme des négociations pour 2015, dans la perspective de la conclusion du Cycle de Doha.
Les participants ont souligné à cette occasion l'importance de stimuler les négociations en suspens surtout dans les domaines de l'agriculture, des produits industriels et des services, tout en affirmant leur volonté de s'engager de manière constructive.
Un total de 21 membres de l'OMC étaient représentés à l'échelon ministériel à cette rencontre tenue en marge du Forum économique mondial à Davos.
La 45ème édition du forum de Davos a accueilli quelque 2.500 participants des milieux politique, économique, académique, des médias, des arts, des organisations internationales et de la société civile. Ils sont venus d'environue 140 pays et régions, selon le Forum économique mondial, organisateur de la réunion. Fin
OMC: des ministres renforcent leur engagement sur Doha
24 January 2015
ATS - Agence Télégraphique Suisse
Des ministres de l’Organisation mondiale du commerce (OMC), dont Johann Schneider-Ammann, renforcent leur engagement pour la conclusion du cycle de Doha. Réunis en marge du Forum économique mondial (WEF), ils ont convenu de définir d’ici à juillet une feuille de route autour des points d’achoppement.
"Nous avons eu une bonne discussion aujourd’hui", s’est félicité Johann Schneider-Ammann devant la presse samedi à Davos. Le chef du Département fédéral de l’économie a invité 21 ministres à cette rencontre informelle, destinée à faire progresser les thèmes du Programme de Doha pour le développement restés en suspens.
Les ministres ont convenu de définir d’ici à fin juillet une feuille de route "crédible et réaliste" autour de ces sujets de négociation non résolus, a indiqué le directeur général de l’OMC Roberto Azevedo. "Nous souhaitons que ce programme soit aussi détaillé que possible", a souligné le Brésilien.
Changer de discours
Et pour progresser rapidement dans cette voie, "nous devons changer la nature de nos conversations". Les ministres doivent pouvoir exprimer ce qu’ils souhaitent, mais aussi "ce qu’ils sont prêts à donner", a déclaré Roberto Azevedo, affirmant avoir reçu des signaux positifs de leur part.
Et le conseiller fédéral Johann Schneider-Ammann de souligner que "depuis cinq ans que je participe à cette réunion, j’ai assisté aujourd'hui à l’engagement le plus clair."
Un pas vers Bali
Un autre pas a été franchi la veille, dans le dossier de l'accord douanier, appelé accord sur la facilitation des échanges, que l'OMC est parvenue à boucler l'année dernière à Bali. Le représentant américain au commerce, Michael Froman a remis formellement à Roberto Azevedo la lettre d'acceptation officielle de cet accord douanier.
"La remise de cette lettre est la dernière étape que les Etats-Unis étaient obligés de franchir pour l'entrée en vigueur de cet accord", selon un communiqué officiel américain. Les Etats-Unis sont le troisième pays membre de l'OMC à remettre cette lettre d'acceptation, après Singapour et Hong Kong.
Pour mémoire, le cycle de Doha est un programme démarré en 2001, visant à libéraliser le commerce mondial. Prévues sur une durée de trois ans au départ, les négociations ont achoppé en raison de fortes divergences entre pays riches et pays en développement.
Les négociations avaient été suspendues en 2006, mais des discussions étaient toujours en cours. Elles avaient abouti au paquet de Bali, en décembre 2013, une étape dans la réalisation du programme de Doha.
Schweizerische Depeschenagentur AG
Davos : peut-être un déblocage après la mini-ministérielle de l'OMC
24 January 2015
Agence France Presse ECOFI
La mini-conférence ministérielle de l'OMC (organisation mondiale du commerce), qui s'est tenue samedi à Davos, a peut-être permis de grandes avancées concernant l'agenda du Doha Round, selon leurs participants.
"Depuis 5 ans que je suis les questions de l'OMC, je n'ai jamais eu un tel sentiment de progrès", a déclaré le ministre suisse du Commerce Johann Schneider-Ammann, qui présidait la réunion.
De son côté, le directeur général de l'OMC, le Brésilien Roberto Azevedo a indiqué qu'il était "positif", car il avait perçu "une volonté" d'arriver à conclure un programme de travail d'ici le 31 juillet prochain.
"Il faut arrêter de parler en termes généraux ou de se montrer mutuellement du doigt, il faut mettre les cartes sur la table, je l'ai dit aux ministres présents à Davos et cette réunion a été très encourageante", a ajouté le directeur général.
Les 160 pays membres de l'OMC doivent fixer un agenda précis des négociations du Doha Round, destiné à libéraliser le commerce mondial d'ici fin juillet.
Il s'agit notamment des questions liées à l'agriculture, aux produits industriels et aux services.
Dans un communiqué publié à l'issue de leur réunion, les ministres présents à Davos ont souligné "leur disposition à s'engager pour un programme de travail réaliste et clairement définis, donnant un cadre aux négociations sur les questions encore en suspens du Doha Round".
Parmi les ministres présents à Davos figuraient ceux du Brésil, du Canada, de la Chine, de la Colombie, du Costa-Rica, de l'Egypte, de l'UE, de l'Indonésie, du Japon, du Kenya, de la Corée du Sud, de la Malaisie, du Mexique, de la Nouvelle-Zélande, de la Norvège, de la Russie, de l'Afrique du Sud, de la Suisse, de la Thaïlande, de la Turquie, et des États-Unis.
mnb/fz/nas
OMC-économie-gouvernement-commerce
Modi determined to make Obama visit a 'landmark event' for food security and nuclear deal 
MAIL TODAY BUREAU 
25 January 2015
Most observers are expecting US President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Barack Obama’s New Delhi visit to achieve little and be merely of symbolic importance. 
In their view, all that will happen is that the two countries will take decisions to push ahead some of the outstanding issues in the agenda. 
However, sources in the Government say that that could be an inaccurate reading of the situation. 
The sources say that Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Narendra Modi is determined to make the visit a landmark event. 
As for the Americans, they have been waiting for an Indian leader with whom they could do business. 
Modi showed this by getting the Indian bureaucracy to move swiftly, after his first meeting with Obama, to resolve the dispute over food security issues to pave the way for the trade facilitation agreement under the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO. 
The key breakthrough expected is in easing the deadlock arising from India’s nuclear liability act which has prevented foreign companies from investing or providing technology for civil nuclear trade with India. 
Insurance pool 
The draconian provisions relating to suppliers’ liability, well in excess of international norms, is likely to be taken care of by creating an insurance pool backed by the government of India. 
The sources say that there will be no change in the legislation, something which would have required the cooperation of the Opposition in the Upper House. 
Another area where we could see forward movement is in the defence relationship between the two countries. 
New Delhi and Washington will renew the Framework Agreement and could move swiftly in several of what are termed “foundational agreements” that would allow US forces to access Indian facilities and build inter-operability with the Indian armed forces. 
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WikiLeaks cables relating to the issue revealed a pattern of delaying tactics in relation to the Logistics Support Agreement (LSA) and the Communications Interoperability and Security Memorandum of Agreement (CISMOA) and the Basic Exchange for Geospatial Cooperation (BEGC). 
These have been laid at the door of former defence minister A.K. Antony who was dead against deepening cooperation with the US who was afraid that such agreements would imply that India had become an American ally. 
Having put the Congress era to an end, Modi also intends to give a final burial to its defence and foreign policies. 
These foundational agreements are a logical outgrowth from the decision of India and the US to establish a strategic partnership. 
While some elements of the partnership such as easing of military sales as well as joint exercises have progressed, India has not been able to push the US into higher levels of technology transfer and joint technology development. 
Of course, there is another outstanding problem here — India is not a member of the four key western technology denial cartels, the Nuclear Suppliers Group, the Australia Group, the Wassenaar Arrangement and the Missile Technology Control Regime. 
But once the two countries clinch an agreement in the nuclear liability issue, the way will be open for the US to push for India to be made a member of these cartels. 
Only when this happens will there be a qualitative movement in the Defence Trade and Technology Initiative where the Americans have identified 17 items for co-production and co-development. Progress in this area has been slow, but the Obama visit has given the opportunity for the two sides to accelerate the process of moving ahead. 
Climate change 
As far as the economic relations are concerned, the two countries haven’t applied themselves with the kind of effort that has gone into untangling their strategic ties which were hit by the nuclear liability act. 
But the one area where Obama is pushing hard is that of a bilateral treaty on controlling emissions as a prelude to Paris Climate Change Conference later this year. For Obama, getting a treaty is a legacy issue. 
The gap between US and Indian positions is wide, but perhaps the Modi magic may cover it. 
Much-talked about visit to Taj Mahal cancelled 
US President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Barack Obama’s much-publicised visit to the Taj Mahal has been cancelled. 
Just before he boarded Air Force One at Andrews Air Force Base with his wife Michelle for India, the White House said in a statement that the visit has been cut short as the US president will be flying to Saudi Arabia on January 27 instead of Agra. 
Obama was scheduled to visit Agra to see the Taj with Michelle on Tuesday. A White House statement on Saturday said: “We adjusted the schedule in coordination with the Indian government so that the president would be able to depart India following his speech on Tuesday to stop in Riyadh during the return trip to meet King Salman (new Saudi ruler) and other officials and offer his condolences.” 
Obama, meanwhile, expressed regret for being unable to visit Agra. However, there were strong rumours that the US president’s programme was cancelled due to security reasons.
Associated Newspapers
Smoking stuck in the last chance saloon
Matthew Goodman 
25 January 2015
The Sunday Times
The tobacco giants could see their brands wiped out with plain packaging. They will fight back hard, says Matthew Goodman
How hard would it be to go for six months without trying a cigarette? Millions of German schoolchildren have faced that challenge, under the slogan "Be Smart, Don't Start". Pupils aged 12 to 15 take part in an annual competition designed to discourage them from picking up the habit. It is one of several initiatives set up to educate youngsters about the dangers of cigarettes.
According to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Imperial Tobacco, the FTSE 100 company behind brands including Lambert &Butler and Gauloises, schemes such as this offer a model for how the government should tackle the take-up of smoking by young people. The ideas have fallen on deaf ears.
Last week, ministers announced a much blunter plan to stop tobacco companies in their tracks. Manufacturers will be forced to drop all branding from cigarette packs, thus denting the appeal, particularly to impressionable teens. The desert camel and the distinctive red Marlboro logo will disappear. Instead, smokes will come in plain boxes bearing only health warnings.
Parliament will vote on the proposal before the general election in May and it could become law a year later. Other recent proposals include making it illegal to smoke in a car with children inside.
Jane Ellison, the public health minister, described the longmooted packaging plan as "a proportionate and justified response" to the risks associated with smoking. The manufacturers reacted with fury.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" British American Tobacco, maker of Lucky Strike, described it as a "serious error of judgment", while Marlboro maker HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Philip Morris International said it was "legally questionable" and amounted to "government censorship".
To date, just one other country has imposed restrictions on cigarette packaging. In 2012 Australia ordered manufacturers to use identical olive-green boxes. The only way to spot one brand from another is to check the name typed on the box in small letters underneath an explicit health warning. There are also gruesome photographs.
The law is the subject of a number of legal challenges. Several countries, including Indonesia, Cuba and Ukraine, have appealed for the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) to take action against it. They argue that restricting the use of trademarks is a violation of international trade agreements. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO is expected to give its ruling during the second half of next year.
Britain has decided that it cannot afford to wait. The policy has been on and off the agenda for several years. It is now expected to garner enough support to become law, despite opposition from some Conservative MPs who argue that it and the other proposals smack of the nanny state.
If the changes are voted through, there will inevitably be legal challenges here too. In a submission to the government, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Philip Morris said it was "prepared to protect its rights in the courts and to seek fair compensation for the value of its property". Imperial has not ruled out taking legal action against the government — Britain accounts for about a fifth of its sales.
Analysts at the investment bank HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Citigroup predicted that tobacco companies could potentially seek compensation running to "hundreds of millions and possibly billions of pounds".
The manufacturers have also warned that the packaging ban would be an open invitation to cigarette smugglers.
The illicit trade is said to account for about 10% of cigarette sales in Britain already, a figure likely to increase if standardised packs become the norm. Manufacturers point out that those peddling contraband will not worry whether the buyers are legally old enough to smoke.
A report published last year by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" KPMG, which was commissioned by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Philip Morris and the Australian arms of Imperial and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" British American Tobacco, said that consumption of illegal cigarettes rose down under after the branding ban started. It concluded that black market products had grown from 13.5% to 14.3% of total consumption, depriving the Australian government of more than £630m in tax revenues.
Tobacco companies and the government appear to be at odds over the impact of the Australian ban on smoking levels. The country's health department stated that consumption "fell by 3.4% in 2013, relative to 2012 when plain packaging was introduced".
In the first quarter of last year, the most recent figures available, consumption was said to be the "lowest ever recorded". Some argue that this is the continuation of a trend already under way, reflecting life- style changes and tax increases on tobacco products.
The industry's supporters point to other data to support their argument that plain packaging has had no effect, such as a survey that found 3.4% of Australians aged 12 to 17 said they smoked daily in 2013, up from 2.5% in 2010.
The big players in Britain insist there is no proof that plain packaging has had any useful impact. "There's no evidence that it will have any benefit to public health," said Imperial.
So far, the markets have remained relatively sanguine about the likely impact on the two listed manufacturers.
Imperial shares closed up 0.4% on Thursday, having earlier fallen just 1% when the market opened the morning after Ellison's statement to parliament about the new measures. The share price of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" British American Tobacco climbed 1.2% on Thursday.
Partly, this was a reflection of the market already having factored in the prospect of tougher regulation on the industry.
Mark Barnett, head of UK equities at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Invesco Perpetual, a leading shareholder in Imperial and British American, said: "[A ban on branded packs] has been on the fringes of the political landscape for a while so it's not something we have not had a chance to think about."
Analysts pointed out that the branding ban does not necessarily spell bad news for all. Martin Deboo, consumer goods specialist at the investment bank Jefferies, said that Imperial had won market share in Australia because plain packaging helped to fuel sales of cheaper brands such as its JPS.
"Imperial has demonstrated it can be a winner in a plain packaging environment," he said. The question remains as to whether the company could repeat the trick in this country, where it has a much larger slug of the market than in Australia.
There is also the worry that if legal action fails to overturn the ban in Australia, and Britain follows suit, other countries around the world will be encouraged to do likewise.
Analysts at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Citigroup said: "We expect the policy to spread to many markets over the following five years, just as graphic health warnings and smoking bans have." Countries such as Ireland, France and New Zealand have already stated that they favour the introduction of plain packs.
The battle is only just beginning.
News UK & Ireland Limited
Japan offers compromise on rice in Asia-Pacific trade talks -Nikkei
25 January 2015
Reuters News
TOKYO, Jan 25 (Reuters) - Japan has offered to import more rice from the United States in a compromise aimed at pushing forward the Asia-Pacific regional trade talks, the Nikkei reported on Sunday.
A stand-off between the United States and Japan over access to farm and auto markets has been holding up negotiations over the 12-nation trade pact, known as the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP).
The Nikkei business daily, citing unidentified sources, said Japan was offering to increase its tariff-free quota for imported rice and import some "tens of thousands" of tonnes of additional rice from the United States. It plans to maintain existing rice tariffs, it said.
In turn, the United States has dropped its request that Japan ease safety standards on car imports, the report said, adding that such moves were likely to help the two countries reach an agreement in the spring and conclude the TPP deal.
U.S. President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Barack Obama's top Asia adviser said on Wednesday the administration's goal was to complete the trade pact this year.
In his State of the Union address, Obama called on Congress to approve "fast track" authority for big trade agreements with Asia-Pacific and European countries, which allow only a "yes" or "no" vote on the finished product. (Reporting by Ritsuko Ando; Editing by Clarence Fernandez) 
Released: 2015-1-25T02:28:47.000Z
Junk food, booze may follow tobacco in plain-wrapper push
Matthew Boyle 
24 January 2015
Postmedia Breaking News
Plain packaging laws for cigarettes have thrown the Marlboro Man off his horse in Australia and now the U.K. is set to follow. Junk food and alcohol could be next.
The U.K.'s plan to force tobacco companies to sell their wares in standardized packs starting next year has revived concern among consumer-product makers that other goods deemed unhealthy by health campaigners could face similar legislation. Alcohol in Indonesia, infant formula in South Africa, and fatty foods in Chile are among the items already being targeted.
The food and drink industries may have to consider adopting new marketing strategies for well-known international brands if the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization rules in Australia's favour in cases challenging the country's 2012 plain packaging law for cigarettes. Such a development would be far reaching for consumergoods makers, one industry group has said.
"I think it's highly likely that plain packaging extends into other categories, especially alcohol and junk food," said Erik Bloomquist, an analyst at Germany's HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Berenberg Bank. "By the time tobacco plain packaging is established, it will be too late for the others to push back as the precedent will be set."
Food and beverage companies are aware of this. In 2012, closely held candy maker HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Mars Inc. wrote to the U.K. Department of Health, saying the consequences of tobacco plain packaging would be "dramatic" as it would "set a key precedent for the application of similar legislation to other industries." A spokeswoman for Mars, the maker of MMs and Snickers chocolates, declined to comment further.
The U.K.-based Consumer Packaging Manufacturers Alliance, which represents brand owners and packaging companies, has said plain packaging would have "catastrophic effects," shifting investment and manufacturing jobs outside of Britain. Marques, a European body representing companies such as HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Unilever and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Anheuser-Busch InBev NV, said "any plain-packaging requirements would be setting a precedent for other products."
"Tobacco was the focus of regulators and now there will be more attention on the next wave of products seen as less healthy," Richard Webster, a partner at management consultancy Bain Co., said in an interview in London. "Plain packaging would remove the incentive to innovate, if all the packages looked the same. It would be a race to the bottom."
Companies also contend that plain packaging violates their intellectual property rights, which are laid out in an international treaty commonly known as Trips. While Article 20 of Trips says the use of trademarks "shall not be unjustifiably encumbered," a separate part of the agreement, Article 8, says countries can amend laws to "adopt measures necessary to protect public health and nutrition."
"If you can come up with a justifiable reason for public health, that will give a government allowance to restrict intellectual property," says Sarah Wright, a partner specializing in intellectual property at law firm Olswang in London. "Article 8 is an exception to Article 20."
Governments are already acting upon that exception. Indonesia, Southeast Asia's largest economy and home to the world's biggest Muslim population, last year proposed legislation that would require alcohol manufacturers to either use plain packaging or place graphic warnings on labels to curtail consumption. Indonesia, a big exporter of cigarettes, is one of the five countries challenging Australia's plain packaging of tobacco at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO. A decision is expected next year. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Diageo Plc, the world's biggest distiller, has targeted Indonesia as a key growth market, and net sales there last year grew by more than 10 per cent, boosted by growing demand for Guinness stout.
"Alcohol and tobacco are very different products and warrant different approaches," Diageo spokeswoman HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Cecilia Coonan said in an email. "But plain packaging strips legitimate companies of their ability to brand and market their products. In the case of alcohol, there is no evidence that it would reduce harmful drinking."
In December 2012, South Africa prohibited "aggressive or inappropriate marketing of breast milk substitutes" such as formula milk. The regulations allowed company and brand logos, as long as they did not contain a picture of an infant "or other humanized figure."
That would prohibit the logo of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Nestle SA's Gerber brand, which depicts an infant with mouth agape. The world's biggest food company does not sell infant formula in South Africa due to "the recently revised codes that govern" the industry, spokesperson Ravi Pillay said via email.
Chile has proposed regulations that would place images of "Stop" signs on food high in fat, sugar and salt. Higher taxes, additional nutrition information and restrictions on the marketing and display of products are among other measures governments can impose short of plain packaging.
The U.K. in 2007 banned the advertising of unhealthy foods during children's television programs, and the U.S. has removed such ads from schools. Advocacy groups including the U.K.'s Alcohol Health Alliance have proposed minimum pricing for a unit of alcohol, not plain packaging.
"Plain packaging is a very extreme course - there is a whole range of possible interventions legislators could take," Wright, the intellectual property lawyer, said. "It's unlikely they would go there unless they have exhausted other options."
