Partner states to implement WTO trade deal 
Activating NTM desks in South Asia for more trade 
Turkey adding 25% tariff on hand tools 
Political stability to drive investment in Oman
Global manufacturing: Made in China? 
Make in India: Adding Man to Manufacturing 
 
 
Partner states to implement WTO trade deal 
CHRISTABEL LIGAMI 
14 March 2015
The East African
 
The East African partner states have taken the final step towards implementing the HYPERLINK "https://mail-casht.cwr.wto.org/owa/UrlBlockedError.aspx" World Trade Organisation Trade Facilitation Agreement, which is expected to widen the market for the region’s goods and services.
The five partner states are expected to ratify the WTO protocol before March 31 in order to show their commitment to the trade pact they recently signed with the US.
It is expected that once the protocol is implemented, it will help reduce the cost of doing business between the EAC and other economies by almost 14.5 per cent, adding to trade reforms already underway in the region.
READ: Africa to present unified stand on issues at WTO meeting in Kenya
James Kiiru, an external trade officer at HYPERLINK "https://mail-casht.cwr.wto.org/owa/UrlBlockedError.aspx" Kenya’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Trade, said final preparations are underway to ratify the protocol not only because of the deadline but also because Kenya will be hosting the WTO summit towards the end of the year.
“A well-functioning trade facilitation regime will allow easier and faster flow of goods across borders. The EAC will be viewed as progressive and ready to attract investments and also promote intra-regional trade,” said Mr Kiiru.
In the new deal, recently signed in the US, the two parties agreed to adopt the WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement signed in Bali in 2013, which commits countries to ensure that trade issues, including Customs, documentation procedures along their transport corridors and ports are completely abolished to reduce the cost of doing business.
“The US has committed to supporting the member states to implement the WTO agreement and to team up with other governments and the private sector on trade issues,” said Mr Kiiru.
In November last year, WTO members adopted a protocol to add the Trade Facilitation Agreement to the WTO deal opening the process up for individual WTO members to formally accept the agreement. So far, only China, Korea, Russia, Mauritius and the US have ratified the protocol.
The WTO agreement will enter into force only when two-thirds of WTO’s members have completed their domestic legal procedures and submitted their instruments of acceptance.
“The focus of the US-EAC trade agreement is on trade and investment,” said Mr Kiiru, adding that US companies like HYPERLINK "https://mail-casht.cwr.wto.org/owa/UrlBlockedError.aspx" IBM, HYPERLINK "https://mail-casht.cwr.wto.org/owa/UrlBlockedError.aspx" Fedex and DHL are keen on investing in the region while the ones already here plan to expand.
In the agreement, the US will provide access to its markets for East Africa’s agricultural produce and in return the region will cut tariffs on imported manufactured goods from the West.
Currently, the EAC products access quota-free markets in the US through the the Africa Growth and Opportunity Act (Agoa), which is expected to be renewed after the September expiry for another 15 years.
“We are however not utilising this opportunity as the region is only able to export up to five products to the US,” said Mr Kiiru, adding, “The challenge the partner states have is on poor product standards, which hinder them from selling more products in the US.”
The two parties will work together to develop and advance trade facilitation initiatives on sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) measures to meet international standards and guidelines.
“No later than 18 months after the coming into force of this agreement, each EAC partner state shall establish an effective process to ensure that it notifies all proposed SPS measures to WTO,” read the EAC-US trade agreement.
The main exports from East Africa to the US are agricultural goods and textiles, while US exports have so far consisted of heavy machinery and aircraft.
Jane Ngige, the CEO of the Kenya Flower Council, said the main challenge for horticultural products in accessing the US market is lack of direct flights.
“We currently have no direct flights and as a result of routing through Holland it takes longer for our fresh produce to get to the US market,” said Ms Ngige, adding that the EAC partners need to also negotiate for direct flights.
Andrew Luzze, executive director of the East African Business Council (EABC), said that by adopting the WTO trade agreement, the region will build on the reforms being pursued by the partner states, which have resulted in substantial reductions in the time and cost of moving goods across borders within the EAC.
“The US has had bilateral partnerships with individual EAC states since 2013 but this agreement marks the first of its kind with the regional trading bloc,” said US trade representative Michael Froman.
Trade between the US and the EAC countries in 2014 increased by 52 per cent to $2.7 billion. Imports from the US totalled $2 billion; Exports totalled $743 million.
According to Eric Musau, a business analyst at Stanbic Investment Bank, the US wants to maintain its presence in Africa since China, India, and the EU have all increased their economic links and trade deals with African countries over the past decade.
“This will not have much impact on economic development in the region but will help with capacity building on the areas of transport and trade facilitation,” said Mr Musau.
 
Activating NTM desks in South Asia for more trade 
Asjadul Kibria 
15 March 2015
The Financial Express (Bangladesh)
Bangladesh, March 15 -- The problems of non-tariff barriers (NTBs) and non-tariff measures (NTMs) in trading within South Asia are not new. Thus the effort to address the problems needs to be a continuous process as a part of smooth trade facilitation across the region. But identifying NTBs and NTMs is always a challenging task due to complexity of their nature. Without rightly identifying any NTB or NTM, it is not possible to take appropriate remedial steps.
Against such a backdrop, the SAARC Trade Promotion Network (TPN) has come up with an initiative to establish a 'NTM Desk' in leading trade bodies of all the SAARC countries two years ago. The initiative has followed a recommendation of a study titled 'NTMs in South Asia: Assessment and Analysis' carried out by three trade experts of Bangladesh with the support of Dhaka-based Metropolitan Chamber of Commerce and Industry (MCCI).
The SAARC TPN is a regional platform consisting of 28 public and private institutions from the eight member-countries of the regional bloc. While public sector members are national commerce or trade ministers or departments or promotion agencies, private sector members are leading trade bodies of the member-states. So, the platform is a kind of private-public partnership.
The core idea of NTM desks is to set a mechanism for regular monitoring and reporting non-tariff measures being faced by respective countries in regional trade and to exchange information among them. Through this process, all the desks across the eight countries would be able to identify NTMs and also recommend ways to remove those. As trade bodies have a lot of functions, a dedicated desk for NTMs is more helpful for reducing or removing the problem.
On a pilot basis, three NTM desks were established in Bangladesh, Pakistan and Nepal. In Bangladesh, the MCCI set up the desk in early 2014. In December 2013, similar desks were established in the Federation of Pakistan Chamber of Commerce and Industry and later in the Confederation of Nepalese Industries (CNI). Following the pilot initiative, all the member-countries have established such desks in their leading trade bodies. In Bangladesh, besides the MCCI, the Federation of Bangladesh Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FBCCI) has also established a NTM desk.
NTBS AND NTMS: There is a difference between NTBs and NTMs although it is not always easy to differentiate between the two. One NTM may be a NTB for a particular country, but not for the other although NTBs are recognised as a sub-set of NTMs. The SAARC member-countries are also divided in many cases over identification of NTMs.
The HYPERLINK "https://mail-casht.cwr.wto.org/owa/UrlBlockedError.aspx" United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (HYPERLINK "https://mail-casht.cwr.wto.org/owa/UrlBlockedError.aspx" UNCTAD) has set a definition of NTMs which has now been accepted by HYPERLINK "https://mail-casht.cwr.wto.org/owa/UrlBlockedError.aspx" the International Trade Centre (ITC) and other international bodies. The definition identifies all the policy measures except customs tariffs as NTMs if those have adverse effects on international trade. The HYPERLINK "https://mail-casht.cwr.wto.org/owa/UrlBlockedError.aspx" World Trade Organisation (HYPERLINK "https://mail-casht.cwr.wto.org/owa/UrlBlockedError.aspx" WTO) has allowed the use of NTMs under certain circumstances. For instance, Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT) and Sanitary and Phyto-Sanitary Measures (SPS) are two recognised NTMs permissible under certain conditions.
For example, the Indian Plant Quarantine Order, 2003 (revised, 2011) regulates plant and plant products in India. Through this Order, the Indian authority wants to ensure that products imported for human consumption are free from pests and diseases and not harmful for India's food security. Thus, implementation of regulations has forced the exporters to maintain strict standards. These standards have posed barriers for some exporting countries. African exporters have already alleged that they are facing huge difficulties on getting their certificates after complying with Indian requirements. Thus, their exports to India have faced obstacles. But, it is also very difficult to term Indian strict regulation as a trade barrier as no sensible country will allow low quality and infected food or plant items.
According to the HYPERLINK "https://mail-casht.cwr.wto.org/owa/UrlBlockedError.aspx" ITC, NTMs are sometimes used 'as a means to circumvent free trade rules and favour domestic industries at the expense of foreign competition.' In such a case, they are known as NTBs. The HYPERLINK "https://mail-casht.cwr.wto.org/owa/UrlBlockedError.aspx" ITC, however, acknowledges that it is 'very difficult, and sometimes impossible, to distinguish legitimate NTMs from protectionist NTMs, especially as the same measure may be used for several reasons."
In case of export of food or beverage items to India, there are some lab testing and packaging requirements needed to be complied with. For example, dates of manufacturing and expiry have to be clearly mentioned on packets. This is an essential requirement for any kind of consumable item. But requirement of labelling the information on top or backside of packages some time appears as a NTB.
A Bangladeshi beverage company has faced such type of NTB. Indian customs officials in land custom stations some time blocked consignments of beverage on the plea that manufacturing and expiry dates were not tagged in the upper portion of the packages. Again, they some time asked for tagging such dates on lower or back portion of the packages. Such a change in labelling requirement is clearly a NTB. Again, there is a requirement that imported jute hessian bags, generally used for transporting items like sugar and fertilisers, need to be labelled with the words 'Made in (name of the country)' in significantly large fonts. As Bangladesh is the only country exporting these bags to India, it has to comply with this requirement. It is a NTM, not a NTB.
NEW WING OF COOPERATION: Despite slow implementation of SAFTA (South Asia Free Trade Area) agreement, countries of the South Asia have to gradually eliminate their customs tariffs for other regional trading partners. Already India has allowed tariff-free market access to all the Least Developed Countries (LDCs) of the SAARC including Bangladesh. Elimination of tariff wall will definitely drive the countries to adopt NTMs for a certain period of time in the name of protecting local industries and restricting low-quality imports from other countries.
The Consumer Unity and Trusts Society (CUTS), a Jaipur-based international research organisation, in a study three years back said, "NTMs including customs procedures and other procedural non-tariff measures account for more than 80 per cent of cost of doing trade. In South Asia, if non-tariff measures affecting the cost of doing trade are addressed properly, then gains to consumers from an enhanced intra-regional trade regime would be much than static gains. Further gains can be achieved from gradual liberalisation of intraregional trade in services and investment."
In this connection, NTM desks in SAARC countries need to work hard to clearly identify NTMs and NTBs. Exchange of information will also be helpful to narrow the differences over defining of NTMs and NTBs among the member-countries. Ultimately, it will help enhance regional trade which is still low compared to other regional trade blocks. Intra-regional trade ratio in SAARC has actually declined to 4.63 per cent in 2013 from 5.84 per cent in 2005. At the same time, intra-regional trade ratio in BIMSTEC is almost static at 5.3 per cent during the period under review.
The CUTS also mentioned 'a minimum consumer welfare gain of approximately US$2 billion a year by way of savings on aggregate consumer expenditure on imported products in selected categories.' The number is not small at all when intra-regional trade stood at $44.93 billion in 2013.
Thus, a small step like NTM desk can be a new wing of cooperation among the SAARC countries. Addressing NTBs and NTMs will reduce cost of trade across the region. Ultimately, consumers will be benefited.
 
Turkey adding 25% tariff on hand tools 
Staff writer, with CNA
15 March 2015
Taipei Times
The Ministry of Economic Affairs on Friday said that a move by Turkey to impose an additional 25 percent tariff on hand tool imports could have an adverse impact on Taiwanese exporters.
The ministry said that as hand tools, such as socket wrenches, vehicle repair tools, hammers, screwdrivers and building tools, are part of Turkeys unbound tariff lines under WTO rules, Taiwan would not likely seek relief from the WTO.
The ministry said that it has informed the Taiwan Hand Tool Manufacturers Association of the additional duties from Turkey and asked the association to help its members to deal with the new trade barriers.
According to government statistics, Taiwans hand tool exports to Turkey totaled US$46.55 million last year, up 5.47 percent from 2013, when hand tool exports to Turkey rose 4.55 percent year-on-year to US$36.88 million. In 2012, Taiwan sold US$31.03 million worth of hand tools to Turkey, up 4.01 percent from a year earlier, the data showed.
The nation faces another challenge resulting from the additional tariffs on hand tool sales, as it is expected to encounter increasing competition from its rivals, such as South Korea and the EUs HYPERLINK "https://mail-casht.cwr.wto.org/owa/UrlBlockedError.aspx" European Free Trade Association, which have signed free trade agreements with Turkey so that they are not to be affected by the new import duty, the ministry said.
The ministry said that the nations major rivals in the Turkish hand tool market are China, Germany, the US and Japan. Among them, Germany is expected to escape the additional tariff.
As Turkey has had a deficit in current accounts for years, the country has come up with trade protection measures, such as additional tariffs on hand tool imports, the ministry said.
The ministry said that under such unfavorable circumstances, the government is determined to assist Taiwanese exporters in dealing with Turkeys protectionism.
The ministry said that the nation would keep expressing its concerns to Turkey through every possible channel. Last year, Taiwans exports to Turkey totaled US$1.7 billion, making Ankara the 21st-largest buyer of Taiwanese exported goods, and Taipei posted a trade surplus of US$1.5 billion, the ministry said.
Political stability to drive investment in Oman 
14 March 2015
Times of Oman
Muscat: In a bid to attract local and foreign investments, Oman has devised various measures to improve the investment climate in the Sultanate.
The government's commitment to providing infrastructure such as Sohar Industrial Port, industrial estates, freezones besides free transfer of commodities, services and capitals are some encouraging factors for potential investors.
Oman joining many international organisations including HYPERLINK "https://mail-casht.cwr.wto.org/owa/UrlBlockedError.aspx" World Trade Organisation (HYPERLINK "https://mail-casht.cwr.wto.org/owa/UrlBlockedError.aspx" WTO) and free trade agreement (FTA) with the United States and amendments made to some laws in the country to meet the requirements of globalisation and integration in world economy are some of the other factors which make the country an attractive hub for investments.
Banks operating in Oman also provide loans at low interest rates for different industrial projects and guarantees for exports. The government also provides planned industrial land plots that are provided with the required infrastructure to meet the needs of the industrial projects.
International rating agencies have pointed out that political stability is one of attractive features in the Sultanate. They noted that political stability encourages a large number of foreign companies to invest in the different economic, production, service and business sectors.
As part of the export-based diversification plan, the Sultanate sought to ensure maximum utilisation of its resources, such as natural gas and to increase the benefit of these resources. To this end, the government intensified its promotion efforts, which resulted in signing of agreements to set up major industries with foreign capitals, such as fertiliser project in Sur, steel and iron factory, aluminum smelter and other projects.
The government encourages foreign capital to invest in the untapped resources in the Sultanate, impart technology, benefit from the administrative capabilities and benefit from communication with multinational companies by opening new markets for Omani products.
The country has been committed to opening the economic market as per the free competition rule. To this end, it has encouraged the private sector and provided it with facilities that help it play an active role in the growth of gross domestic product (GDP). It also provided a number of packages, incentives, guarantees, tax exemptions and simplified procedures. It promoted transparent management of investments.
The Sultanate, which adopts ambitious privatisation policy, has integrated infrastructure and advanced communication and banking networks. It also implements policies that are investor-friendly in a bid to attract foreign investments.
Oman has a well-regularised capital market that is provided with the latest systems and equipment. It also entered into agreements with some countries to encourage and protect investments. The Sultanate has also a stable monetary system that allows free exchange and transfer of capitals.
A survey study conducted by the National Centre for Statistics and Information (NCSI), in coordination with the HYPERLINK "https://mail-casht.cwr.wto.org/owa/UrlBlockedError.aspx" Central Bank of Oman (HYPERLINK "https://mail-casht.cwr.wto.org/owa/UrlBlockedError.aspx" CBO) on the foreign investment in the Sultanate during the seventh five-year plan (2007-2011), highlighted the remarkable growth in the foreign direct and indirect investments. As of the end of 2013, the value of foreign investments in the Sultanate stood at OMR12.7 billion.
Foreign reports point out that the Sultanate has integrated package of incentives for foreign investments, the most important of which are the social and political stability, availability of production factors, such as free economic zones and industrial estates equipped with world-class facilities and the strategic location on the world regional and international trade routes coupled with having many export ports.
The Sultanate, which adopts free economy policy, promulgates new laws and legislations and updates its existing laws to ensure proper implementation of the free market policy. The government imposes no custom burdens or restrictions on financial transactions or transfers abroad. It also promulgates some laws and legislations that aim at increasing profitability of the projects set up in the Sultanate.
Global manufacturing: Made in China? 
14 March 2015
The Economist
Asia's dominance in manufacturing will endure. That will make development harder for others
BY MAKING things and selling them to foreigners, China has transformed itself--and the world economy with it. In 1990 it produced less than 3% of global manufacturing output by value; its share now is nearly a quarter. China produces about 80% of the world's air-conditioners, 70% of its mobile phones and 60% of its shoes. The white heat of China's ascent has forged supply chains that reach deep into South-East Asia. This "Factory Asia" now makes almost half the world's goods.
China has been following in the footsteps of Asian tigers such as South Korea and Taiwan. Many assumed that, in due course, the baton would pass to other parts of the world, enabling them in their turn to manufacture their way to prosperity. But far from being loosened by rising wages, China's grip is tightening. Low-cost work that does leave China goes mainly to South-East Asia, only reinforcing Factory Asia's dominance (see pages 75-76). That raises questions for emerging markets outside China's orbit. From India to Africa and South America, the tricky task of getting rich has become harder.
Work to rule
China's economy is not as robust as it was. The property market is plagued by excess supply. Rising debt is a burden. Earlier this month the government said that it was aiming for growth of 7% this year, which would be its lowest for more than two decades--data this week suggest even this might be a struggle (see page 66). Despite this, China will continue to have three formidable advantages in manufacturing that will benefit the economy as a whole.
First, it is clinging on to low-cost manufacturing, even as it goes upmarket to exploit higher-value activities. Its share of global clothing exports has actually risen, from 42.6% in 2011 to 43.1% in 2013. It is also making more of the things that go into its goods. The HYPERLINK "https://mail-casht.cwr.wto.org/owa/UrlBlockedError.aspx" World Bank has found that the share of imported components in China's total exports has fallen from a peak of 60% in the mid-1990s to around 35% today. This is partly because China boasts clusters of efficient suppliers that others will struggle to replicate. It has excellent, and improving, infrastructure: it plans to build ten airports a year until 2020 (see page 65). And its firms are using automation to raise productivity, offsetting some of the effect of higher wages--the idea behind the government's new "Made in China 2025" strategy.
China's second strength is Factory Asia itself. As wages rise, some low-cost activity is indeed leaving the country. Much of this is passing to large low-income populations in South-East Asia. This process has a dark side. Last year an NGO found that almost 30% of workers in Malaysia's electronics industry were forced labour (see page 67). But as HYPERLINK "https://mail-casht.cwr.wto.org/owa/UrlBlockedError.aspx" Samsung, HYPERLINK "https://mail-casht.cwr.wto.org/owa/UrlBlockedError.aspx" Microsoft, Toyota and other multinational firms trim production in China and turn instead to places such as Myanmar and the Philippines, they reinforce a regional supply chain with China at the centre.
The third advantage is that China is increasingly a linchpin of demand. As the spending and sophistication of Chinese consumers grows, Factory Asia is grabbing a bigger share of higher-margin marketing and customer service. At the same time, Chinese demand is strengthening Asian supply chains all the more. When it comes to the Chinese market, local contractors have the edge over distant rivals.
Deft policy could boost these advantages still further. The HYPERLINK "https://mail-casht.cwr.wto.org/owa/UrlBlockedError.aspx" Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) is capable of snapping up low-end manufacturing. China's share--by volume--of the market for American shoe imports slipped from 87% in 2009 to 79% last year. Vietnam, Indonesia and Cambodia picked up all the extra work. But ASEAN could do far more to create a single market for more complex goods and services. Regional--or, better, global--deals would smooth the spread of manufacturing networks from China into nearby countries. The example of Thailand's strength in vehicle production, which followed the scrapping of restrictions on foreign components, shows how the right policies can weld South-East Asian countries into China's manufacturing machine.
Unfortunately, other parts of the emerging world have less cause to rejoice. They lack a large economy that can act as the nucleus of a regional grouping. The North American Free-Trade Agreement has brought Mexican firms into supply chains that criss-cross North America, but not Central and South American ones. High trade barriers mean western Europe will not help north Africa in the way that it has helped central and eastern Europe.
And even when places like India or sub-Saharan Africa prise production from Factory Asia's grasp, another problem remains. Manufacturing may no longer offer the employment or income gains that it once did. In the past export-led manufacturing offered a way for large numbers of unskilled workers to move from field to factory, transforming their productivity at a stroke. Now technological advances have led to fewer workers on factory floors. China and its neighbours may have been the last countries to be able to climb up the ladder of development simply by recruiting lots of unskilled people to make things cheaply.
Exports still remain the surest path to success for emerging markets. Competing in global markets is the best way to boost productivity. But governments outside the gates of Factory Asia will have to rely on several engines of development--not just manufacturing, but agriculture and services, too. India's IT-services sector shows what can be achieved, but it is high-skilled and barely taps into the country's ocean of labour.
Put policy to work
Such a model of development demands more of policymakers than competing on manufacturing labour costs ever did. A more liberal global regime for trade in services should be a priority for South America and Africa. Infrastructure spending has to focus on fibre-optic cables as well as ports and roads. Education is essential, because countries trying to break into global markets will need skilled workforces.
These are tall orders for developing countries. But just waiting for higher Chinese wages to push jobs their way is a recipe for failure.
Make in India: Adding Man to Manufacturing 
15 March 2015
Business Today
The Modi government's "Make in India" initiative is certainly overdue. Today, a large number of mass produced consumer goods, be it textiles, readymade garments, toys, handbags, luggage items, mobile phones, television sets, air conditioners or shoes, are mainly imported. They are made abroad, usually in China.In the last 15 years we have forgotten that everything sold in India in the second part of the last century had to be made in India, and manufacturing was taken for granted. How is it that the tables have turned 180 degrees? A few years after independence we had a foreign exchange crisis and strict import controls were levied. The import of consumer goods was totally banned. In fact, in the 1960s and 1970s, even raw material was not allowed to be imported freely.
Import licences had to be obtained and products like plastic raw material had an import duty of over 200 per cent.With the economic reforms in the early 1990s, imports became quite liberal, but only as recently as 2001, when under the rules of the HYPERLINK "https://mail-casht.cwr.wto.org/owa/UrlBlockedError.aspx" WTO agreement consumer goods were allowed to be imported. At the beginning of the century, we could import completely finished consumer goods for the first time after nearly 50 years. At first, the import duty on such goods was 80 per cent but since about 2007, the peak rate of import duty is only 10 per cent with a few exceptions, notably automobiles, where imports have been made quite prohibitive. Earlier, we also had a regime where a lot of consumer products were allowed to be made only by the small scale sector. This resulted in inefficient manufacturing, and thrived to some extent on tax evasion. There was a disincentive to grow and achieve economies of scale.Meanwhile, countries like China had developed an extremely efficient, and low-cost manufacturing environment. China has become virtually the factory for the world for not only low-wage, labour-intensive products, but also gradually the entire gamut of consumer products like televisions, mobiles, other electronic products and industrial machinery, moulds and dyes, etc.In India we have everything that China has: a huge young population which is largely uneducated, unskilled and unemployed. We also have a large manufacturing base and an entrepreneurial business culture. However, our labour policies offer such iron clad job security to the workers that it is virtually impossible to close down a factory employing more than 100 workmen under any circumstances. The only way such a factory closes down is if the company goes bankrupt. The consequence of such a labour policy is that the workers have no vested interest in the long-term success of the company, and there is a constant demand for increased wages.There are frequent disputes and disruptions and there is no emphasis on productivity. Highly productive and efficient units have become more the exception than the norm and in a free trade world regime, Indian factories cannot compete against other countries particularly China. As a result, with imports becoming so easy and so well-priced, manufacturing of such goods in India has become fairly unviable. The irony is that large-scale employment will come only from low-cost consumer goods.China has created a large manufacturing base by providing an entire ecosystem conducive to low-cost and high quality products. This results in a virtuous cycle, leading to further economies of scale. Countries like India find it difficult to compete with them.A lot of economists and political leaders make a defensive argument that India has become a service sector-intensive country, and we can also have knowledge-intensive industries like the IT sector. However, as long as we have large-scale unemployment, we have to explore all avenues of the economy, and it is imperative that we promote that sector of industry which has the maximum potential for employment, namely manufacturing.(Dilip Piramal is Chairman, HYPERLINK "https://mail-casht.cwr.wto.org/owa/UrlBlockedError.aspx" VIP Industries)


  ________________________________  
Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.