China Slow Down Worrying for Africa Says China Expert, Deborah Brautigam
Trade Boosts Imminent - As Liberia Gets Close to WTO Accession
WTO chief negotiators meeting next month to finalise agenda
Dumping duties of 54%-77% to be applied on Chinese blankets: EGypt
Asian nations focus on regional trade after TPP delay
No Trans-Pacific trade deal if auto parts sector threatened: Canada's trade minister
Argentina: Trade surplus falls 75% to USD 204mn in July 2015
New trade measures top Apec agenda in Cebu meetings
End of the world not at hand (yet) as the equity bubble bursts
 
China Slow Down Worrying for Africa Says China Expert, Deborah Brautigam
(Ventures Africa) 
25 August 2015
Ventures Africa
Six years after the global economic crisis, global stocks have again been hit by the recent crash of the Chinese financial markets and a possible slowdown in the Chinese economy. Globally, investors are currently moving away from assets, such as stocks and government bonds, as they seek to re-evaluate exposure to risk. As the global economy heads into a stormy period lead by a faltering China, how will African countries fair?
Earlier this year Ventures Africa spoke with China-Africa expert Deborah Brautigam, the Bernard L. Schwartz Professor of International Political Economy and the Director of the China Africa Research Initiative (CARI) at Johns Hopkins University’s School of Advanced International Studies (SAIS) in Washington, DC. We asked her what a slowdown in China means for African economies and the China–Africa story.
Here's what she had to say (responses have been edited for length and clarity):Professor Deborah Brautigam
Ventures Africa (VA): How will an economic slowdown in China affect the China Africa relationship?
Deborah Brautigam (DB): I think the obvious first level of answer is that the slowdown in China's economy will affect their demand for natural resources and so in the countries from which they are importing natural resources [there] will be fewer revenues going into those countries. That could have an impact on the revenues and the economic resources available to those governments. However there is a lot of other activity that's over and above the resources. For example the trade relationships of imports of Chinese goods into Africa – expect those to continue, maybe not the steeply rising curves that we've seen, but they should continue because the African middle class is growing, the people in the lower-middle class is also growing and they're ready to consume a wider variety of goods and services. But they still can't afford things that come from the United States or from Japan, so they're looking at the lower end of the market. That kind of demand is going to continue, and even if it slows down a bit, it's not going to slow down terribly. We can see some reflection of this from the specifics in the global economic crisis that happened around 2008 2009. There was a dip in trade. There was a dip in investment. It did recover pretty quickly, but that kind of slowdown is a little bit of worrying indicator of what might happen if things slowdown in China again.
On the other hand, there is a whole political relationship and I don't expect that to change. There is a political relationship between the Chinese government and a number of African countries that's been strong for decades. They've been exchanging visitors. They'd have Chinese presidents and prime ministers or premiers coming to African countries and vice versa… We have a number of their prominent state visits that happened in the 1960's, 1980's, 1990's and so on. That kind of activity will continue. Africa is important politically not just in terms of natural resources.
VA: Can you unpack the political importance of the African continent to China?
DB: There are 54 countries, 54 governments in Africa, and most of them have representation at the United Nations, and most of them are members of the WTO. Whenever the Chinese government wants to gather support, either to resist something that it’s been asked to do or to get votes in favor something that it wants, it likes to be able to have friends to call on, so having closer political relations in Africa matters to them.
Some people say that the Chinese – because they're an authoritarian dictatorship – they want to have more authoritarian dictatorships around the world to make it safe for their authoritarian dictatorship to continue. I don't see it that way. I don't think they really care a whole lot what the form of government is, as long as they could do good business. They care much more about the stability. So if the country is a democracy but they're always unstable and governments are flipping around and there's a lot of chaos, they wouldn't be happy with that. Nut they are perfectly happy to have South Africa or Mauritius or other very stable democratic countries as close partners with them. Political stability matters but I don't think the form of government matters to them.
VA: Let’s go back to what you said about the past economic crisis in 2008 as indicator for what might happen if China slows down again. Which countries do you think would be most exposed to a Chinese slowdown and what would we expect to see?
DB: A lot of countries, China has now become their primary trading partner and so you'd have to look country by country. But Angola— China consumes a lot of Angolan oil. Right now the demand is still strong but the price of that oil has dropped. I don't know how that trade relationship works in detail. They do have some arrangements where they prepaid for some of the oil and it could be they paid too much now that the price has dropped. But Angola would be one country that we would look at. Another would be South Sudan, certainly that's a precarious relationship. South Africa – also China is their largest trading partner and South Africa exports a lot of raw materials to China, so South Africa is one which you look at. Zambia again, a lot of copper from Zambia is going to China… The DRC, it's always prone to instability at various times — a lot of demand from China for the various minerals that they process… I think that's about it for right now. There's a lot of future development coming on stream – things like Mozambique and gas; Tanzania may have fossil fuel offshore. But I think those are probably the big ones. Nigeria's not a big exporter to China for example. They export more of their oil to the United States.
China Africa Trade — Renaissance Capital
VA: With the United States having essentially eliminated their need for Nigerian oil, do you think that China will play a bigger role there. Is that a possibility?
DB: It certainly is a possibility. I know there have been some purchases and acquisitions by Chinese companies of other companies in Nigeria as they've decided to move out of fields that are little bit more marginal but I think people are not quite sure – is this a game changer, the shale oil revolution has changed everything for good, or is this just temporary factor. I don't think we really know the medium term even what's going to happen in the energy market. I do think that Nigeria would be wise to continue to diversify its trading partners. No country should be tied up with just one major partner. That makes them a little more vulnerable, but a lot of countries in Africa are also exporting to Europe. So that still remains a market. That's important for them.
VA: If you had to outline what you think the most major points are in the development of a Chinese relationship with various countries on the African continent, what would say are the milestones we should be looking at over the past few decades?
DB: I'd say that there was a large milestone that a lot of people don't know about which is in the 1980's. I think it was Premier [Zhao Ziyang who] came to Africa and really, he’s the one who said that we're going to start putting our relationship on a more commercial footing – it's not just going to be about aid anymore. That was important for starting off the business engagement there. But then, I think we'd have to probably go up to 2006 to really look at a major milestone and that’s the Forum on China-Africa cooperation which happened in Beijing actually. That’s when you had almost every head of state in Africa showing up and walking the red carpet in Beijing. That was remarkable. No country had been able to do that so far, and that really is the start of the level of Chinese loans going into Africa, the investment, the trade. They start making the predictions about how trade would double, and it all came to pass just it was predicted in 2006.Former Chinese Premier Zhao Ziyang with Former Kenyan President Daniel Arap Moi
If there are others, I think the whole Darfur tragedy in Sudan was a milestone in that, it became that first time the Chinese set up a whole system of shuttle diplomacy and they got a diplomat involved in these negotiations in Africa. They’d certainly been doing something like that in North Korea, but you hadn’t really seen that kind of more intense engagement and partnering with Western Countries and an African political problem before.
VA: So China had its Forum on Africa Summit in 2006 and the United States hosted the US-Africa Leaders Summit in 2014. How you would compare those two events? There was a lot of commentary around how the US-Africa Leaders summit was a case of too little too late on the part of the Obama administration, and that the Chinese had already grabbed whole swathes of the African market?
DB: Well I think, the point that I make about the US-Africa Summit is not so much that it was all about China. It really [was] about Africa. The Japanese were the first to have a major summit … and they did that before the Chinese, and then Chinese had then their major summit, and then you had India having a major summit; you had Europe having a major summit and we [were] the last ones to do it. I don't know if Brazil's done one yet… It's not just about the Chinese; it's about Africa and it's about others recognizing that Africa is different now. It's a more available partner. A lot of countries are getting their act together and it's on the rise; it's on the move and the United States is late to realize that … It's about the U.S and other partners engaging with Africa and I'm glad that we finally looked at Africa as being important enough and interesting enough that we can hold a major summit, like everybody else has been doing.
VA: Can you speak about how you think the relationships between China and African countries are going to evolve?
DB: There are three countries that we should be looking at for relationship with China to change… One of them is Ethiopia. It's already pretty strong. I think it's going to continue get stronger. The second is Tanzania which has a very very long standing relationship. I think as they continue to find new resources off-shore in Tanzania, and as they continue to get there investment house in order, they're also going to be attractive. The third is Mozambique. This is also an area of a lot of interest to the Chinese … I don't see this happening as much in Southern Africa or in West Africa, this kind of interest, but Mozambique, Tanzania and Ethiopia are of interest…
Ventures Africa
Trade Boosts Imminent As Liberia Gets Close to WTO Accession
25 August 2015
All Africa
Aug 25, 2015 (The Inquirer/All Africa Global Media via COMTEX) -- Liberia is poised to immensely benefit from an influx of Global Trade when the country becomes a full member of the World Trade Organization (WTO) in December of this year. A high power WTO delegation that visited the country last week and engaged the private sector to review the business opportunities in the Liberia's Accession Package told a news conference last Friday that Liberia is on the way to becoming a WTO country in December.
The delegation said Liberia becoming a member of the WTO will increase regional and international trade and further increase the country's chance to benefit from a well-structured standard manner of carrying out trade.
The delegation which included Ambassador Joakim Reiter, Deputy Secretary General and Chair of the Working Party of Liberia's Accession to the WTO as well as Dr. Charles Osakwe, Director of the Accession Division at the WTO said Liberia has made some critical concessions in ensuring that the country completes its accession process to the WTO.
Dr. Osakwe said Liberia stands to benefit from access to international markets, rapid regional and global trade and improvement of goods standard.
He also said being a member of the WTO will lead to improvement in infrastructure to speed up trade in the country and enhance resources allocation.
Dr. Osakwe told the news conference that Liberia will also use the WTO process to invite investors to the country that will enhance infrastructural development because infrastructure is the lubricant for the realization of smooth and faster trade.
He informed journalists that Liberia's negotiators negotiated a high quality and professional agreement for Liberia's Accession to the WTO, saying, "Liberia with WTO is opened for business".
He stressed that with WTO membership Liberia will raise the quality and standard of trade with lower tariff.
Speaking earlier at the news conference, Ambassador Reiter said their trip to Liberia is in recognition of the work that Liberia has done and to present the country's accession agreement to the public and the private sector.
Ambassador Reiters and Dr. Osakwe lauded Liberia's efforts to join the international trade body and especially lauded President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf for steps taken to have Liberia as a member of the WTO.
Dr. Osakwe said the steps taken by the President are designed to ensure international best practice in conducting international trade noting that Liberia as the first democratic country in Africa cannot afford to be backward on issues of international concerns.
He said the WTO is about improving economic governance, improving private sector development and creating jobs. "Our visit is a vote of confidence for Liberia's accession to the WTO".
Also speaking at the conference, Liberia's Commerce and Industry Minister, Mr. Axel Addy said Liberia's accession to the WTO will in no way change laws such as the Liberalization Law, the Small Business Law and other local instruments that are aimed to proper facilitate trade locally.
Liberia will hold its final working party in early October where the final Draft Accession Package will be presented to WTO for approval and referendum. The final formal decision shall be taken at the tenth WTO Ministerial Conference in Nairobi, Kenya in December of this year.
Liberia's accession has been supported by the Swedish National Board of Trade (SIDA/NBT), the International Trade Center (ITC), the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) the Advisory Center on WTO Law (ACWL) the World Bank, Enhanced Integrated Framework (EIF) and the Geneva-based Law Firm of King and Salding; reports Timothy T. Seaklon 
All Africa Global Media
WTO chief negotiators meeting next month to finalise agenda
25 August 2015
Press Trust of India
New Delhi, Aug 25 (PTI) WTO chief negotiators including from India will meet in Geneva next month to finalise the agenda for the forthcoming ministerial conference in Nairobi scheduled for December.
"WTO members have not been able to finalise the post-Bali work programme so the chief negotiators will meet in Geneva in mid-September to work and try to finalise the agenda for the ministerial meeting," a senior government official said.
The next Ministerial Conference, which is the highest decision making body of the World Trade Organisation, is scheduled to be held from December 15-18 in Nairobi, Kenya. The last meeting was held in Bali, Indonesia, where members finalised the trade facilitation agreement.
Developing countries including India are expected to ask about bringing back issues related to the long-stalled Doha Round including agriculture (export subsidies), market access and services in the next meeting, a source said.
The Doha Round of negotiations launched in 2001 have remained stalled since July 2008 due to differences between the rich and the developing nations mainly over the subsidies given to farmers.
WTO members are unable to finalise the agenda because of differences in the priority order of the issues. Press Trust Of India Limited
Dumping duties of 54%-77% to be applied on Chinese blankets: EGypt
Daily News Egypt 
25 August 2015
Minister of Foreign Trade and Industry Mounir Fakhry Abdel Nour issued a final decision to impose dumping duties of between 54%-77% on imports of synthetic fibre Chinese blankets, according to a Tuesday statement.
Complaints by local manufacturers had recently increased due to Chinese blankets being dumped on the local market, Abdel Nour said. He added that the Anti-Dumping Authority has received many complaints against these types of blankets, which are being exported to Egypt and sold at dumping prices, causing damage to the domestic industry.
The Anti-Dumping Authority has examined the complaints received on this matter, supported by documents from the Industries Union, Ibrahim Al-Seginy, Head of the Anti-Dumping Authority, said.
Meanwhile, the Chinese government has been informed that these complaints were accepted and that a market dumping phenomenon was confirmed, Al-Seginy added.
Furthermore, the Anti-Dumping Authority has conducted field visits to each of the local industry and cooperating Chinese companies, Al-Seginy said, to inspect and review the accuracy of data submitted by all parties through financial records and documents.
The results of the visits were presented to the Advisory Committee and the concerned parties, stressing that there is sufficient evidence that the availability of these imported blankets caused damage to the local industry.
The decision was published in the official gazette, with the Egyptian Customs Authority and the World Trade Organisation (WTO) notified to begin the implementation of a resolution, Al-Seginy added.
In April, the ministry banned the imports of products featuring Egyptian folklore and antiquities, such as engraved products, sculptures and ceramics.
Business news co. 
Asian nations focus on regional trade after TPP delay
Greg Earl Asia-Pacific editor 
26 August 2015
The Australian Financial Review
Asian countries have agreed to speed-up the conclusion of a more localised trade agreement after the delays finishing a competing US-led pact, in a bid to maintain regional economic integration just as a growth slowdown is hitting financial markets.
Economic ministers, including Trade Minister Andrew Robb, agreed that the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) should be substantively finished by the end of the year potentially shifting the focus of how Asian countries will try to harmonise the existing noodle bowl of trade deals. Trade negotiators from the 16 RCEP countries are now due to meet again in South Korea in October to wrap up the trade barrier cutting aspects of the agreement in time for potential endorsement by regional leaders at the East Asian Summit in November.
Speaking after the meeting in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysian Trade Minister Mustapa Mohamed said: "The biggest issue we resolved today was agreement on modality in goods, meaning the level of tariff reduction. I consider this to be a major achievement."
Mr Robb said the RCEP would set the region up for some enormous opportunities in the years ahead on account of an exploding middle class. "Together with the TPP this would lay the groundwork for helping to realise the ambition of a free trade area across the Asia Pacific," he said.
Some analysts see the RCEP, of which China is a key member, as a competitor with the US-led 12 member Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), which excludes China. A participant at the Malaysian RCEP meeting said there appeared to be productive cooperation between Asian rivals including China and Japan which underlined the drive to get one regional agreement finished.
The recent growth slowdown and associated share market slump amid fears of a regional round of competitive currency devaluation may encourage Asian officials to use the RCEP to reassure markets that the region is trying to step up its integration.
Australia has focused more on the TPP in recent months on the basis that it would set important new principles for 21st century commerce in areas including services and regulation but the government now appears less confident of any swift conclusion to TPP.
The RCEP is more focused on trying to harmonise the many existing bi-lateral and multi-country trade agreements in east Asia than establishing new commerce rules such as those of the TPP which makes it more attractive to some Asian countries.
Fairfax Media Management Pty Limited
No Trans-Pacific trade deal if auto parts sector threatened: Canada's trade minister
25 August 2015
Waterloo Region Record
KITCHENER - Canada will not sign a Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal that would allow Japanese vehicles into North America with fewer parts manufactured here, says Ed Fast, the federal minister of international trade.
"We have made it very clear as a Canadian government that we will only sign a TPP agreement if it is in Canada's national interest," Fast said in an interview Monday during a visit to Waterloo Region.
The United States is leading negotiations among 12 countries, from Chile to Japan, for a free-trade agreement that circles the Pacific Ocean. Collectively, the countries involved represent 40 per cent of the world's economic output.
Without consulting Canada and Mexico, the Americans provisionally agreed to reduce the amount of North American parts in Japanese vehicles coming into Canada, the U.S. and Mexico.
Currently, Japanese vehicles imported into North America duty free must have 62.5 per cent of their parts made in North America. Washington and Tokyo had agreed to lower that to 30 per cent for parts and 45 per cent for light duty vehicles.
Auto parts manufacturing is a cornerstone of the southern Ontario economy, and the sector protested loudly when the developments came to light recently.
Waterloo Region's manufacturing sector employs some 65,000 workers. Many of the jobs are directly and indirectly tied to production of auto parts.
"We are absolutely committed to ensuring our Canadian auto parts sector remains strong," Fast said.
Federal government negotiators have had ongoing consultations with the auto parts manufacturers since Canada entered talks in 2012 for a Trans-Pacific Partnership agreement, Fast said.
"I am as minister confident that we will get an outcome that serves that sector well," he said.
"Unless the rules of origin continue to support a strong Canadian auto-parts sector, we cannot support that agreement," he said.
After visits to the University of Waterloo, the Accelerator Centre and some local companies, and a round-table with business representatives in downtown Kitchener, Fast sat down for a brief interview with The Record.
His visit came as stock markets around the world reeled in the wake of a sharp plunge in China's main market. The Toronto Stock Exchange closed down 420.93, while the Dow Jones industrial average fell 588.4 points.
Meanwhile, the Canadian economy has been sputtering.
Fast defended the Conservative government's economic track record.
"We have made it very clear that a low tax and low debt plan for our economy positions Canada to withstand these global economic shocks," Fast said.
International Trade Minister Ed Fast met with local business representatives during a visit to Waterloo Region on Monday. 
Toronto Star Newspapers Limited
Argentina: Trade surplus falls 75% to USD 204mn in July 2015
25 August 2015
Esmerk Latin American News
La Gaceta, 25 Aug 2015, Online:- Argentina's trade surplus dropped 75% year-on-year to USD 204mn (EUR 179.12mn) in July 2015, the national institute of statistics INDEC has informed. It stood at USD 1.43bn in the first seven months of 2015, 65% lower than a year earlier. July's exports were 12% lower compared to July 2014 at USD 5.89bn. Imports were 4% lower, year-on-year, at USD 5.69bn. Exports fell 17% in price but rose 6% in volumes in July this year. Imports fell 11% in prices but rose 9% in volumes in the same period. Asia and the Mercosur bloc accounted for 25% of Argentina's exports in the first seven months of 2015, respectively. 27% of Argentina's imports came from Asia and 24% from the Mercosur bloc in the same period.
M-Brain Insight Oy

New trade measures top Apec agenda in Cebu meetings
25 August 2015
Philippine Daily Inquirer
New and aggressive measures to improve trade and economic growth across the region will be high on the agenda of some 2,000 officials from the 21 member states of the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (Apec) as they convene in Cebu over the next two weeks. Specifically, Apec officials are expected to move forward with the drafting of a collective strategic study on issues related to the realization of the Free Trade Area of the Asia-Pacific (FTAAP), led by China and the United States. The said agreement is expected to build on the liberalization gains in the region, possibly on the ongoing negotiations for the Trans Pacific Partnership (TPP) and Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP). “Regional economic integration is high on the agenda as the potential stepping stones for an FTAAP to come into clearer view and Apec members will work out the hard details on how to get there.
Fleshing out emerging issues that the FTAAP should contain to ensure next generation growth is a priority right now and will lay the foundation for what lies ahead,” Alan Bollard, executive director of the Apec secretariat, said in a statement issued Monday. “Increasing services sector demand and breakthroughs in technology and mobility in the region are creating significant market opportunities among groups that have benefited less from globalization in the past. Apec members are intent on breaking down barriers to wider participation in cross-border trade and business development to reduce inequality and solidify growth within the region's economies,” Bollard said. According to the Apec secretariat, the formulation of a new Apec Services Cooperation Framework, the identification of viable market opening reforms in related sectors and facilitation of small business participation in cross-border production and supply chains will be a parallel focus.
Inquirer Interactive, Inc. 
End of the world not at hand (yet) as the equity bubble bursts
Anthony Rowley , 
26 August 2015
Business Times Singapore
ARE we facing Armageddon - again - just seven years after the global financial crisis struck? It feels a bit like it judging from the quality (or lack thereof) in much of the share market commentary over the past week. But there are grounds for optimism that Doomsday is not at hand, yet at least.
Having witnessed more financial crises than I care to remember, I am very wary of the phrase "this time is different", but the stock market rout or shakeout we are seeing now is different qualitatively from more recent crises. Whether it proves different quantitatively remains to be seen.
It is essentially the bursting of an equity market bubble, unlike the 2008 global financial crisis which struck deep (and in some cases mortal) blows into the heart of leading financial institutions that had gorged themselves on property-related and securitised assets.
Nor is the "Crash of 2015" - if that is what it comes to be called - a banking crisis of the kind that erupted frequently in the 1990s, although the 2008 debacle admittedly embroiled banks, investment banks, insurers and all. It is, as I say, essentially an equity market affair.
There is no reason to think that financial markets in general will seize up, as they came close to doing in 2008 when authorities had to step in to ensure that everything from short-term money markets to longer term lending institutions could avert freezing over and breaking up.
Yes, you may say, but what about the "wealth effect" - or rather, reverse wealth effect - that goes into action once the paper wealth that comes along with stock market bubbles evaporates? Will that not cause consumption and investment to collapse, as it has on previous occasions?
Yet the world has been far from experiencing anything like a universal consumption boom over the past seven years. Personal consumption in fact has been the missing link in global recovery. Likewise, private capital investment has been largely conspicuous by its absence.
So, where has recovery come from since the crash of 2008? Well, the fact is that recovery has been very slow to materialise, as the likes of IMF, OECD and a host of private economists have pointed out repeatedly. A consumption and investment-driven recovery it decidedly is not.
What has been driving the modest growth that the global economy has experienced has been massive quantitative easing (QE) exercises on the part of the world's leading central banks: the US Federal Reserve, Bank of England, Bank of Japan and European Central Bank, in that order.
They pumped trillions of dollars (or equivalent) into their own economies and, of course, a great deal of that spilled over into emerging economies given the inevitable fact that QE forced down interest rates in the US and other major markets, making them unattractive to investors.
To the surprise of many, inflation did not appear to take off as a result. In fact, deflation has continued (supposedly) to dog the world's leading economies throughout the tidal wave of monetary easing. I say "supposedly" because inflation was not absent, just not perceived.
I have often been grimly amused by the fact the economists scan the pavement for evidence that the relative ants represented by "current price" inflation (the cost of goods and services) are not growing into man-eating monsters while ignoring the Godzilla of asset inflation towering above them.
In this case, asset inflation has taken the form of stock market bubbles, from the US to China and throughout the emerging market universe. Fortunately, it does not appear to have inflated property prices in general by a similar quantum to that seen in prior real estate crashes.
The bubble in this case has been killed off not by rising interest rates but rather by the long drawn-out expectation of such an event in the US, which in turn has siphoned off money in huge amounts from emerging markets. This is no "tapering tantrum" but rather a pre-emptive panic.
It is nonsense to blame China for all this. The Chinese equity market remains largely sealed off still from the rest of the investment world. Rather, it is a case of huge waves of money from Western markets retreating once trouble looms. How many times have we seen that in recent decades?
What can be done to avert Armageddon this time? Little, probably, if anything by way of monetary easing of the kind former US Fed chairman Alan Greenspan pioneered around the year 2000 in order to avert a threatened disaster in the shape of the US dot-com bubble.
Does this mean that fiscal purse strings are going to have to be loosened to the point of risking government bankruptcies?
Probably not, because while the current stock market rout is more than a "little local difficulty" it should not portend the end of the world, for yet a while at least.
Singapore Press Holdings Limited
END
 
Josep Bosch, Information Officer
Information and External Relations Division
+41227395681
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.