Headlines:
Kiwi gov't welcomes WTO procurement pact accession
Liberia Close to Becoming WTO Member - Commerce Minister
China to build highway for Liberia as part of Ebola recovery aid
India to tread cautiously on Kunming-Kolkata rail link
Analysts divided on yuan decline’s impact on exports
A bumpy landing now for China would be better than years of stagnation
U.S. steelmakers, politicians denounce China steel price cuts
U.S./Vietnam Poultry Case To Be Hard-Fought
Why south-south co-operation is a myth when it comes to BRICS and Africa
Closing loopholes: G-20, OECD economies to adopt anti-tax-haven regulations
 
Details:
Kiwi gov't welcomes WTO procurement pact accession
John Macdonald 
13 August 2015
Xinhua News Agency
WELLINGTON, Aug. 13 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xinhua) -- The New Zealand government on Thursday welcomed the country's accession to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization's (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) Agreement on Government Procurement (GPA).
"Kiwi companies now have more opportunities to do business with governments internationally than ever before," Economic Development Minister Steven Joyce said in a statement.
"From today they have guaranteed access to bid for approximately 1.7 trillion U.S. dollars in annual overseas government contracts across 43 HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO member countries, including the U.S., Canada, Japan and 28 countries of the EU," said Joyce.
"This figure is expected to grow significantly as further countries join the GPA over time, creating new opportunities for Kiwi businesses to export more products and services to more destinations."
Accession would be a big boost for New Zealand manufacturers and information and communication technology exporters, and would assist with the continuing diversification of the New Zealand economy.
The GPA covered the purchase of a broad range of goods and services that government agencies bought from the private sector, including construction.
New Zealand's accession followed two years of negotiations, Trade Minister Tim Groser said in the statement.
The government's Trade and Enterprise agency was supporting companies to identify and take advantage of international trade opportunities.
"Our accession to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO GPA, along with our other free trade agreements, is a welcome and significant step in opening up large overseas markets to our Kiwi suppliers," said Groser.
Xinhua News Agency
Liberia Close to Becoming WTO Member - Commerce Minister
By Wilfred Gortor (LINA-All Africa)
Commerce Minister Axel Addy has disclosed that Liberia's quest to become a full member of the World Trade Organization (WTO) will soon be realized.
Addy disclosed that due to significant efforts made over the years by the country, it will be unveiled as a member of the WTO in December This year at the WTO ministerial conference to be held in Kenya.
Speaking Thursday at the Ministry of Information regular press conference in Monrovia, the Commerce Minister indicated that this will provide Liberia further leverage as a suitable destination for trade and commercial activities.
According to Addy, a WTO membership for Liberia will also enhance the country's economy; attract business opportunities which will lead to the subsequent generation of revenue and the creation of more jobs for young Liberians.
Liberia is the only country in the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) region that is yet to become a member of the WTO, although the country applied for membership since 2007.
The nation could not also be a founding member of the organization in 2005 as it was holding the first democratic elections following a protracted period of civil conflict.
The hosting of the Tenth WTO ministerial conference this year in Nairobi, Kenya also means that Africa will be playing host to the body's sitting for the first time since the organization was founded.
WTO is an organization that supervises and liberalizes international trade.
It regulates trade between participating countries by providing a framework for negotiating and formalizing trade agreements and a disputes resolution process aimed at enforcing participants' adherence to WTO agreements.
Related: HYPERLINK "http://www.reuters.com/news/world" World, HYPERLINK "http://www.reuters.com/places/china" China
China to build highway for Liberia as part of Ebola recovery aid
MONROVIA, Reuters. -
China will build a new coastal highway for Liberia as part of its aid to the country recovering from an Ebola epidemic, Liberia's foreign minister said on Sunday.
He was speaking at a news conference with China's Foreign Minister Wang Yi who is visiting Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone, the countries hardest hit by the epidemic.
Liberia's existing coastal route is vital for commerce as the country rebuilds after a civil war that ended in 2003. It connects the capital to the border with Ivory Coast via the port city of Buchanan, where exports of exports of iron and timber pass through, but much of the road is unpaved.
"China has agreed to help Liberia with the construction of a ministerial complex which will host about 10 ministries. Also, China will construct a coastal highway," Liberia's Augustine Kpehe Ngafuan said.
China would use its global fund for Africa to finance the project and seek partners, he said. The construction of the ministries had already been announced.
Wang did not directly refer to the highway but said Ngafuan had explained the specific components of China's aid.
"China is open to cooperation in all areas and we know that Liberia is attracting investments from all countries around the world. We know about the historic ties between Liberia and USA but China has its own strength," Wang said.
"Our relations with Liberia have enjoyed fast growth," he said. Liberia was founded by freed American slaves and has retained close ties with the United States.
Ebola has killed more than 4,800 people in Liberia and almost 11,300 people in the three countries since the outbreak began in December 2013 but the number of new cases has fallen to close to zero in recent weeks. 
China, Africa's biggest trading partner, has sent hundreds of medical workers to Africa and contributed aid of more than $120 million to the anti-Ebola effort, after initially facing criticism for not doing enough.
Many big companies in China have invested in Africa, tapping the continent's rich vein of resources to fuel the Asian giant's economic growth over the past couple of decades.
(Reporting by Alphonso Toweh and James Giahyue; Writing by Matthew Mpoke Bigg; Editing by HYPERLINK "http://blogs.reuters.com/search/journalist.php?edition=us&n=alison.williams&" Alison Williams) 
India to tread cautiously on Kunming-Kolkata rail link
Sumanta Ray Chaudhuri 
13 August 2015
Hindustan Times
Kolkata, Aug. 13 -- Despite the West Bengal government's avid interest in China's proposal for establishing a direct railway link connecting Kunming, the capital of the Yunnan province in China with Kolkata, the central government wants to tread cautiously in giving the final go-ahead to this project.
The apprehension of the Centre on this project is that China may utilise this rail link to serve its own motive for expanding its products share in the Indian market while denying a level-playing field to Indian products in the Chinese market.
This move would widen the trade deficit gap between India and China that goes blatantly in favour of China.
Officials of the five-country group Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa (BRICS), which also has an interest in the coveted rail link that connects Kunming with Kolkata via Myanmar and Bangladesh, interacted with the Union external affairs ministry officials to gauge the Centre's views on this project.
"The answer we got from the then Union external affairs ministry official is that the success of the project would depend much on how the Chinese government amends its bilateral trade policies allowing level-playing field for Indian products to trade in the Chinese market," a BRICS associate told HT.
The products that India is insisting on for pushing into the Chinese markets are those where it has a competitive advantage like pharmaceuticals, agro, information technology-enabled service (ITES) and computer hardware and software, among others.
In June 2015, state finance minister Amit Mitra took a delegation to Kunming to showcase West Bengal as an investment destination. There, he called for quick implementation of the Kunming-Kolkata rail link.
The ambitious Kunming-Kolkata rail link, which is supposed to be funded by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Asian Development Bank and is an important component for Bangladesh-China-India-Myanmar (BCIM) Economic Corridor, will start from Kunming, pass through Mandalay in Myanmar and Chittagong and Dhaka in Bangladesh and will finally end in Kolkata.
The trade deficit gap between India as on April-May of the current financial year stands in favour of China at $8 billion.
In fact, Union commerce minister Nirmala Sitharaman recently informed Parliament that the increasing trade deficit with China is essentially due to the fact that Chinese exports to India is strongly dependent on manufactured items while India's exports to China is limited to raw material and intermediaries. HT Media Limited
Analysts divided on yuan decline’s impact on exports
Greg Knowler 
12 August 2015
Journal of Commerce Online
HONG KONG — China’s currency has now fallen 3.5 percent in two days after the central bank on Tuesday triggered the yuan’s greatest one-day decline in 20 years, and it is expected to fall further as the country struggles to reverse a sharp drop in trade recorded in July.
The 1.9 percent devaluation was followed by a 1.6 percent drop today in what the central bank said was a result of changes aimed at making the tightly controlled currency more market-oriented. Further declines will help Chinese exporters in a sector that in July was hit by an unexpected 8.3 percent drop.
Exports to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union fell 12.3 percent in July while those to the U.S. dropped 1.3 percent. Demand from Japan, another leading trading partner, fell 13 percent.
Beijing has set a 6 percent trade growth target this year, but that will be a challenging goal, analysts believe, pointing out that regional and global demand drives China’s export business.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Credit Suisse said in a report that the depreciation would not change the gloomy picture of global demand, and Tuesday’s 1.9 percent devaluation would not provide any meaningful help.
In a note to investors, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Citigroup Research said soft demand from Europe and within HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" intra-Asia has weighed on freight volume trends this year, offset partially by decent demand from the U.S. after the West Coast Port Strike, with China exports down 8.3 percent and Korean exports down 3.3 percent year-over-year in July.
“While the recent decline in currencies across Asia may aid exporters targeting the U.S. and to a lesser extent Europe, we also envision an adverse impact on regional domestic consumption and import trends and intra-Asia trade, particularly if macro growth decelerates further,” the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Citigroup note said.
Qu Hongbin, China economist at global bank HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" HSBC, said additional measures to stimulate the economy should be expected. "A recovery in external demand remains far off and economic growth will continue to rely on domestic demand, which implies policies should continue to be relaxed in the second half," he said.
However, Hong Kong-based independent analyst Charles de Trenck said the yuan devaluation would need to be 10-15 percent to help generate exports, and even that would only help medium-term. He said the move by the central bank to devalue the currency was not unexpected.
“I don’t think this was a surprise at all. I believe most long-term investors and even some economists would have expected this,” he said.
China has been trying to wean itself off exports that have dominated its economy since being accepted into the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization, which is why the markets reacted with such surprise to the central bank’s sudden move to adjust the currency.
There will be no sudden rise in exports, however. Data from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF and Drewry shows that global HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" container trade is slowing. Between 2002, just after China entered the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO, and the global financial crisis in 2008, the average container growth was 10.8 percent. From 2010 to a forecast 2017, container growth is predicted to fall to 6.4 percent.
Contact Greg Knowler at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" greg.knowler@ihs.com and follow him on HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Twitter: HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" @greg_knowler.
United Business Media Global Trade
A bumpy landing now for China would be better than years of stagnation
Hamish McRae 
13 August 2015
The Independent
The best way to get one's mind around the double devaluation of the Chinese yuan is to see it as part of a gradual progression from being a controlled currency, with the exchange rate set by the authorities in Beijing, to becoming a more normal one, with the rate set by the financial markets. We are still a long way from that, and China may never get there. There are advantages to pegging a currency rather than letting it freely float. But to see this as the start of a trade war, or a desperate measure to crank up growth, or a response to the impending rise in US interest rates, is to over-emphasise the short-term.
That said, the trigger is probably the prospect of higher US rates, because these are pushing up the dollar, particularly against the euro. The objective of the authorities is to maintain the yuan against a basket of currencies rather than pegging to the dollar as such - although that is how it is usually quoted. It follows that if the dollar rises, as it has been doing, the yuan is pulled up too far against the basket, so it has to devalue against the dollar to maintain the same overall level.
You can see this in the top graph. Over the years, far from weakening, the yuan has tended to strengthen against the dollar, as it indeed it has against other currencies. Its costs have risen, with wage rates in Shanghai now higher than in parts of the US. Other costs remain lower but the basic point is that its products are no longer cheap compared with those of other East Asian exporters, such as Indonesia. As Lombard Street Research noted in a commentary yesterday, whereas until 2008 it had an undervalued currency, it now has one that is overvalued by - depending on which measure you take - between 15 and 30 per cent. So you could see these devaluations, and I think there will be more, as trying to offset unwanted revaluation, rather than an aggressive attempt to gain market share by artificially depressing its currency.
Still, growth has slowed - and quite dramatically. You can see that in the bottom graph. That 4.6 per cent figure for the first half of this year is an estimate by Lombard Street Research; others have put it lower, with Fathom Consulting estimating current growth at just 3.1 per cent. Some sort of slowing was inevitable and welcome, but as we all know it is hard to transform a fast-growing economy into a moderately-growing one without triggering some sort of crash. In theory it should be possible, because everyone knows what must happen and accordingly should be able to adjust. In practice, people make mistakes. The most dramatic such failure was that of Japan. When its stock market and property bubble burst at the end of the 1980s, it avoided severe recession, but at the cost of two decades of stagnation.
The Japanese experience hangs over Chinese policy-makers. From a Western perspective the big current issue is whether China will avoid a so-called "hard landing" as it makes this transition to slower, but more sustainable, growth. That affects commodity and energy prices, and although they are relatively small still, it affects Western exports. Thus in the past days we heard that Jaguar Land Rover is being hit by lower vehicle exports to China. Actually a hard landing would not be all bad for the developed world as a whole, for it would remove pressure on commodities. (It would naturally be bad for developed countries that were commodity and energy exporters, such as Canada.)
The Chinese authorities are naturally concerned about a hard landing too. But I think their concern goes beyond that, for what they really are determined to avoid is two decades of stagnation. Whisper it low, but it may be better to have a sharp slowdown now and then kick-start growth thereafter, than to prop up the economy artificially right now.
If this argument is right, then the timing of this move has probably been determined by the desire to soften the transition to slower growth as well as offsetting the unwanted rise of the yuan in weighted average terms. But it will have been planned for many months and is consistent with the long term objective of making the yuan match the dollar as a reserve currency.
What does it mean for us? If this is just the modest exchange rate adjustment suggested here, not a lot. Any company that trades internationally is grown-up about exchange rate risk. What we are seeing is, as yet, an adjustment to counter the rise of the dollar. It will affect east Asian countries trading with China, and whenever you get a movement that is not expected there is always the possibility of it having unforeseen consequences. On the evidence so far I can't see another east Asian financial crisis akin to that which happened in the 1990s, but it would be silly to rule it out.
If, however, China were to head into some sort of recession (and define at as you will), then the consequences would of course be massive, but unpredictably so. The great recession of 2008-09 was actually a recession only of the developed world. The emerging world, taken as a whole, continued to grow throughout, with the two biggest BRICs, China and India, losing only a couple of percentage points of growth. But that did not give much help to the developed world; indeed by maintaining high demand, and prices, for commodities and energy, it may have made it harder for developed countries to escape recession. They did not get the boost from lower commodity prices they might have expected to get at that stage of the cycle.
Now we are in the reverse position. Growth is picking up in most of the developed world but it is easing or has eased in three of the BRICs - India being the exception. The challenge for the West will be to engineer a smooth path back to sustainable rates of growth, with sustainable fiscal deficits and an end to ultra-low interest rates. The US will, as always, be the leader and will determine the outcome. The challenge for China is to become more normal too, growing at a sustainable rate, and loosening the remaining elements of a command economy. Allowing the currency to decline a little is a sensible bit of the programme. It may be China has a hard landing, but we should not yet assume that this is inevitable.
Independent Print Ltd.
U.S. steelmakers, politicians denounce China steel price cuts
By Bernie Woodall 
12 August 2015
Reuters News
DETROIT, Aug 12 (Reuters) - Moves by Chinese steel exporters Wednesday to cut prices provoked cries of foul from the U.S. steel industry, and gave politicians skeptical of the pending Trans Pacific Partnership trade agreement new ammunition.
Reuters reported Wednesday that Chinese steel producers were cutting export prices, riding the fall of the yuan currency after the central bank devaluation on Tuesday.
"This devaluation is just the latest attempt to support Chinese industry at the expense of producers in the rest of the world who have to earn their cost of capital to survive," said Alan Price, a lawyer who represents U.S. steelmaker HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Nucor Corp .
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" United Steelworkers union president HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Leo Gerard said: "Washington has been asleep at the switch in dealing with China" and called for action against "China's predatory practices" before more U.S. jobs were lost.
The union represents 850,000 members in North America.
Trade policy and steel industry jobs are important to several states that will be pivotal in the 2016 presidential election, including Ohio. That state's Republican and Democratic senators both criticized China's devaluation and linked it to the Trans Pacific Partnership trade talks, even though China was not a party to those negotiations.
"The U.S. needs to ensure American businesses and workers have a backstop to fight back against currency manipulation," Ohio's Democratic Senator Sherrod Brown said.
Ohio Republican Senator Rob Portman struck a similar note.
"We cannot afford to sit idly by as China refuses to play by the rules," Portman said. "Any negotiations on the Trans-Pacific Partnership must prioritize combating currency manipulation by our foreign competitors."
Democrats and labor unions say the TPP deal could unleash a flood of cheap imports, forcing U.S. plant closures and killing good jobs in steel and other industries.
Steel has been a source of tension in the U.S.-China trade relationship for years.
U.S. steelmakers have filed a series of actions accusing rivals in China and other countries of dumping products below cost in the U.S. market. The Obama administration has backed the industry on some of those petitions, slapping duties on imported steel products.
Since July, U.S. steelmakers including HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" AK Steel, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" U.S. Steel Corp and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Nucor have filed trade petitions over imports of hot-rolled steel and cold-rolled steel. China was named in the cold-rolled steel complaint.
In June, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" U.S. Department of Commerce said it would look into a third complaint about imports of corrosion-resistant steel, which also named China.
U.S. steelmakers scored a victory in June when Congress approved stronger anti-dumping and countervailing duty laws.
"China has consistently intervened directly in foreign exchange markets to ... make their exports more competitive and impose new barriers to imports," said HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Thomas J. Gibson, head of industry group HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" American Iron and Steel Institute.
Price, representing HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Nucor, said China had built "massive excess capacity in steel, aluminium, and many other industries that is unrelated to market demand or legitimate development needs."
The solution, he said, should be for Chinese steelmakers to shut some of those plants. (Reporting by Bernie Woodall and Joe White in Detroit; Kevin Drawbaugh and John Whitesides in Washington; Sweta Singh in Bangalore; Editing by Grant McCool) 
Thomson Reuters (Markets) 
U.S./Vietnam Poultry Case To Be Hard-Fought
By Thu Nguyet 
15 August 2015
Saigon Times Weekly
The South-eastern Region Livestock Association late last month requested agencies to conduct anti-dumping investigation against imported U.S. chicken legs. However, experts say for formal proceedings, companies in the industry have to make specific preparations, which requires a lot of effort and resources, as the target involves U.S. enterprises which have extensive experience in trade defence lawsuits.
Usually, an anti-dumping case is quite complicated and often lasts 12-18 months, requiring careful studies to provide well-founded arguments for the petitioner’s arguments throughout the investigation process, said lawyer HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Nguyen Hai from HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Mayer Brown JSM. Basically, to proceed with the lawsuit, Vietnam’s livestock industry should concentrate on proving four following points.
First, it is to prove the capacity of the petitioner. A prerequisite to filing a lawsuit is the petitioner must be qualified as a representative of the domestic industry. In other words, those companies wishing to initiate the case must produce or represent a volume or value of goods that accounts for at least 25% of the total production volume or value of the whole industry.
If the petitioner is an association, such association must represent businesses of the same production. In addition, in case there were any livestock enterprises objecting to the lawsuit, the total volume or value of goods produced or represented by those supporting the case should be greater than that of those who protest.
“As far as I know, in this case, Vietnamese businesses have achieved unanimous consensus on filing a lawsuit,” Hai said.
Second, it is to prove dumping is a reality. It means the animal husbandry industry should prove U.S. products are being dumped into Vietnam, Hai said. Normally, if the U.S. producers sell their goods in Vietnam at lower prices than stateside, it is indeed an act of dumping, and thus it is possible to conduct an anti-dumping lawsuit.
Third, it is to prove damages can be seen. It is to say the petitioner must show the domestic livestock industry is in trouble, as reflected by the economic indicators such as decline (or at least no increase) in revenue, profit, market share, production capacity and price. The economic indicators that need to be proven are defined in the Anti-Dumping Agreement of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) and its relevant case law.
Fourth, it is to indicate a causal relationship between the dumping and damages. In other words, the petitioner must prove the cause of “economic losses” is no other than “dumping prices.” For example, if production in Vietnam recorded an absolute or relative reduction in the past three years while imports kept rising, it would consolidate the livestock association’s argument that the animal husbandry of Vietnam is suffering “economic losses” due to the U.S. imports.
Businesses should be active
“I’ve learned that businesses have sent a request to the authorities for investigation into this case of dumping. In this regard, although in theory, the Vietnam Competition Authority has the right to conduct investigations, it is an uncommon practice in the world that investigation agencies do this job themselves. Therefore, enterprises should determine this is their job, which is closely associated with their core interests, to be active in the proceedings,” Hai said.
Moreover, to pursue the lawsuit, businesses should prepare sufficient resources, including the money to hire a lawyer and to have a team to work with the lawyer during the case. It is crucial to select an appropriate legal counsel and representative.
In a trade defence case, the first thing businesses should pay attention to is to prepare the dossier, which is not simple, said the Trade Remedies Investigation Division of the Vietnam Competition Authority (under the Ministry of Industry and Trade) at a workshop on trade remedies held in HCMC last year.
For instance, in the case of Posco VST and Hoa Binh Inox bringing a lawsuit against cold-rolled stainless steel imports from China, Malaysia, Indonesia and Taiwan in May 2013, though Posco VST has considerable experience in this issue since it has been sued for anti-dumping abroad, it took the company a year to complete the dossier for submission to the Vietnam Competition Authority.
As of end-2014, the Vietnam Competition Authority had conducted pre-trial investigations for 11 cases, but so far only three cases have been initiated and two cases faced anti-dumping tax imposition. This suggests that many businesses wish to use trade defence measures, but they are discouraged by the complexity and difficulty.
A source from the Vietnam Competition Authority with extensive knowledge about the trade defence cases of domestic firms said livestock enterprises once looked to file a lawsuit against chicken imports, but the information back then was only preliminary so the case did not proceed. This time, the information from the South-eastern Region Livestock Association is more specific and complete.
If the livestock association actually wants to go ahead with the lawsuit, it should note that the defendant, U.S. companies, have been too accustomed to anti-dumping cases, said Hai. This will be a great challenge for the local animal husbandry industry and require the participation of experts with experience in this field, especially experience in cases involving Americans. However, the U.S. chicken (feet and legs) has been sued and are now subject to relatively high anti-dumping duties in many markets including China, South Africa and Mexico. This helps strengthen the confidence of Vietnamese companies on the chance of winning.
Saigon Times Group
Why south-south co-operation is a myth when it comes to BRICS and Africa
Mohammad Amir Anwar, Post-doctoral fellow at University of Johannesburg 
13 August 2015
The Conversation
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" What the increased ties between Russia, India, China and Brazil mean for Africa remains unclear. Reuters/Sergei Karpukhin
Brazil, Russia, India and China have shown tremendous determination and co-operation on global issues in recent years. Their alliance epitomises south-south co-operation in the contemporary era. This is the notion of solidarity among developing countries through the exchange of goods, resources, technology and knowledge to meet their HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" development goals.
But what does this all mean for Africa? Is this bloc of countries committed to Africa or simply driven by self-interest? For the purposes of this article I refer to the bloc known as HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" BRICS but I am excluding South Africa. The reason for this is that HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" South Africa was a late addition to the group and was brought in to complete the regional representativity of the group.
New formidable bloc in global affairs
Recent developments in south-south co-operation include increased trade volumes and foreign direct investments among HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" BRICS countries. They also include HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" movements towards regional integration, technology transfers, the sharing of expertise, and other forms of exchanges between developing and less developed economies.
This is particularly true for the economies of Brazil, Russia, India and China, which have increased their HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" co-operation on global economic issues, global governance, geopolitics, development, aid, climate change, terrorism and a host of other issues.
Some observers remain cautious about the grouping and point to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" limits of its role in global affairs. Nevertheless, its member countries have become a force to reckon with. For example, the bloc has formalised the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" New Development Bank and signed a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" Contingency Reserve Arrangement at this year’s BRICS HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" summit in Russia.
Discussions are also underway to establish their own credit ratings agency, bilateral swaps and settling trade in local currencies. At the summit, the bloc also discussed discarding the US dollar and the euro for their roughly US$500 billion trade with HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" one another.
The bloc constantly raises its voice on the issues of global governance, particularly HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" reforms of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN Security Council. BRICS’s declaration at this year’s summit emphasised principles of openness, solidarity, equality, mutually beneficial co-operation and inclusiveness. These are thought to address emerging global economic, political and social HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" challenges.
The impact on Africa
While this all sounds very good, what is surprising is how little the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" summit and the declaration had to offer African development. This is despite Africa, with a combined economy of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" US$2 trillion, having become central to the growth and development of Brazil, Russia, India and China in the 21st century. This is particularly so after the 2008 global financial crisis.
The strategy of these countries towards African development seems to be muddled with selfish national interests. The focus of all of them is on areas critical to the growth of their economies. These include fuel, minerals, biofuels, food and information and communication technology.
It is true that their engagement in Africa is HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" reshaping the nature of globalisation on the continent. It is also affecting the prospects for African development. Trade between China and Africa, for example, has grown dramatically. China is Africa’s biggest trading partner at about HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" US$200 billion in 2013. It is followed by India. Its trade with Africa stood at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" US$70 billion in 2012 and is HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" projected to rise to US$90 billion by the end of 2015.
Africa’s rapid economic growth in the past decade has led observers to chant HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" “Africa Rising”. But Africa’s over-hyped growth is driven by investments in the extraction of natural resources such as fossil fuels, minerals, biofuels and lately HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" land acquisition. Brazil, Russia, China and India have become important sources of foreign direct investments in these sectors.
There is little evidence that this engagement is helping address issues critical to the continent. Chief among these would be HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" poverty reduction, food security, climate change and medicine.
Developmental or self-interest?
Brazil, Russia, India and China’s engagements in Africa are largely driven by their domestic political economies. These in turn HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" influence the nature of their investments in Africa and development assistance on the continent.
Their leaders are wont to claim that much of their trade and investment projects are “developmental”. Several Indian government officials I spoke to emphasised their engagements with Africa are not about imperialism and colonialism but “market-based” and “developmental”. But most of its HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" investment and trade in Africa resemble the relations Britain had with India during colonial times, which is extractive in nature and is true for other BRIC countries trading with Africa.
Given this, it is hard to see how the emergence of a rhetorically new development model based on south-south co-operation between Brazil, Russia and India and China is going to contribute to Africa’s development.
Shifting the balance of power
There are some aspects of the various engagements, such as India’s lines of credit to some African countries, that have developmental characteristics. These are considered less exploitative in comparison to aid from Western donors.
As “emerging donors”, the countries bring HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" virtues of solidarity, shared experience of colonial exploitation and empathy with developing countries. These are all key components of south-south co-operation.
The most important outcome of the emergence of Brazil, Russia, India and China is the shift they have brought to the balance of power in global affairs. The establishment of the new bank and the contingency reserve arrangement show that the old established US-dominated order is being challenged, and that formidable rivals have emerged.
Yet, the bloc wants to work within the framework of same Western institutions that are largely responsible for under-development in many parts of the world.
In this context, the potential of south-south co-operation for African development remains less clear. There is no coherent strategy from the group for helping develop Africa. A new way has to be found to ground the engagement on mutual benefit. As it stands, the bloc is pushing for a fair deal in global geopolitics for itself to the exclusion of Africa and other developing nations.
The bloc can become a launch pad for a longer-term development strategy that breaks away from the old styled US-led hegemonic system. As emerging powers leading the call for greater democratisation of the global order, Brazil, Russia, India and China need to show greater responsibility on global development issues. But this needs to be more than mere rhetoric that uses the same clichés as HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN’s declarations. And it must want to work on the principles of equality.
Mohammad Amir Anwar does not work for, consult, own shares in or receive funding from any company or organization that would benefit from this article, and has disclosed no relevant affiliations beyond the academic appointment above.
The Conversation Media Group Limited
Closing loopholes: G-20, OECD economies to adopt anti-tax-haven regulations
13 August 2015
Nikkei Report
TOKYO -- The members of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Group of 20 leading economies and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development plan to adopt regulations against international tax evasion by companies, following the example of countries such as Japan, the U.S. and the U.K.
The 40-plus members agreed on a blanket adoption of the so-called anti-tax-haven rules at working-level discussions, and the decision is to be formalized at a G-20 summit in November.
These regulations aim to prevent tax evasion by companies with international operations. For instance, a company with headquarters in Japan but an empty shell subsidiary in another country where the corporate tax rate is less than 20% would be levied Japanese tax on the subsidiary's profit, if deemed appropriate by Japanese authorities.
Germany, China and South Korea also have similar regulations. More than 10 countries including India and the Netherlands will newly adopt such rules by updating domestic laws. The G-20 and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD members will urge others to follow suit. But it is unclear whether non-member states like Singapore and Malaysia would do so, as they tout low tax rates as a strategy to attract foreign companies. However, the business environment will be fairer with over 40 countries adopting rules against such tax havens, an observer said.
"Japanese companies that are already subject to the rules will be at an advantage in international competition," said Kimihito Takano, a partner of auditing company HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" PricewaterhouseCoopers.
The blanket adoption of the rules might increase double taxation. A Japanese company with an intermediary holding company in India that has a shell subsidiary in a low-tax country, for instance, could be taxed on the unit's profit in both Japan and India. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD is considering a mechanism to avoid such double taxation.
"If [the mechanism] does not function properly, that could prompt global companies to take a second look at group operations," Takano said.
Nikkei Digital Media Inc.
END
 
Josep Bosch, Information Officer
Information and External Relations Division
+41227395681
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.