Japan, U.S. agree to conclude Pacific free trade pact early
Apec  Senior Officials' Meeting kicks off in Cebu
A Silver Lining to Brazil’ Troubles
Trade liberalisation: Commerce min prefers multilateral pacts
No conclusion in sight for TPP talks, says Malaysian Trade Minister 
India hopeful of a permanent solution to WTO  food security issue
US's Lew Tells Japan FinMin TPP Improves Econ Integration-Text
BRICS pool of currency reserves starts off with meetings of governing agencies
G20 defies gloom to forecast rise in growth
 
Japan, U.S. agree to conclude Pacific free trade pact early
5 septembre 2015
Kyodo News
 
ANKARA, Sept. 5 -- Japanese Finance Minister Taro Aso and U.S. Treasury Secretary Jack Lew agreed Friday the two governments should work on concluding a sweeping Pacific free trade pact at an early date, according to the governments.
 
Aso told reporters he discussed with Lew the need to quickly strike a deal on the U.S.-led Trans-Pacific Partnership pact with 10 other countries when the two met on the fringes of a meeting of finance chiefs from the Group of 20 economies in Ankara.
 
The U.S. Treasury Department said Lew told Aso that he is "hopeful that TPP negotiations would conclude as soon as possible."
 
The United States, Japan and 10 other Pacific Rim countries held ministerial talks in Hawaii in July but failed to reach a deal following the marathon negotiations on the TPP, which would cover some 40 percent of global output.
 
The 12 countries have yet to even decide when to reconvene, fueling concern that the TPP talks have been shelved at least for the time being, as U.S. political attention shifts to the run-up to next year's presidential election.
 
It has been more than five and a half years since the United States, Australia, Brunei, Chile, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore and Vietnam launched TPP negotiations in March 2010. Malaysia, Mexico, Canada and Japan joined the dialogue later.
 
Apec Senior Officials' Meeting kicks off in Cebu
5 septembre 2015
Inquirer.net
 
CEBU CITY -- The 21-member economies of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (Apec) must be "resolute to improve the lives of our people" amid global challenges of globalization.  hus said Foreign Affairs Undersecretary Laura Del Rosario in her opening remarks during the Third Apec Senior Offficials' Meeting (SOM3) at the Radisson Blu Hotel here.  We must be resolute that our efforts to improve lives of our people cannot be stifled," Del Rosario said.  he said member economies of the Apec must provide creative solutions to "create clear vision for the people of Apec.  enior officials of the 21-member economies attend a series of meetings to discuss new initiatives on inclusive growth, issues on health and the economy, the public-private dialogue on water and the symposium on urbanization, among others.  We will tackle problems such as how we can move the direction of services, which grew steadily in recent years," said Del Rosario, who is also the chair of the SOM.
 
  he said that trade between economies had been in existence even before globalization has taken place, citing that the Philippines is commemorating the 450th anniversary of start of the Manila-Acapulco galleon trade this 2015.  Today, we also find new routes toward achieving sustainable growth—ust as Magellan chartered new route to PH," she said.  We hope that the vision of inclusive growth will become our "north star" as we go forward with our meetings," she said.  Apec has 21 member economies, namely Australia, Brunei Darussalam, Canada, Chile, People's Republic of China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Japan, Republic of South Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Republic of the Philippines, Russia, Singapore, Chinese Taipei (Taiwan), Thailand, the United States and Vietnam. Nestor Corrales, INQUIRER.net/CDG    
 
A Silver Lining to Brazil’ Troubles
 
Op-Ed Columnist By JOE NOCERA   
5 septembre 2015
NYTimes.com 
 
Of all the BRICS, Brazil would seem, on the face of it, to be in the worst shape.
 
BRICS, of course, stands for Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa, a catchphrase that was meant to connect their rapidly growing economies. But that was then. Today, their economies are sluggish at best, and their prospects no longer seem so bright.
 
Everybody knows about China’ troubles: its falling stock market, its slowing economy and the amateurish attempts by the government to revive them, as if they should somehow snap to when the Communist Party gives an order.
 
Russia’ problems are also well known: In addition to the annexation of Crimea, and the ensuing Western sanctions, the Russian economy has slowed with the decline of the price of fossil fuels, its primary export. The South African economy is in such trouble that even its president, Jacob Zuma, described it as “ick.”lthough India grew by 7 percent in the second quarter, that number was below expectations, and in any case, probably overstates the health of the economy, Shilan Shah of Capital Economics told BBC News.
 
And then, sigh, there’ Brazil. Inflation? It is closing in on 10 percent. Its currency? The real’ value has dropped nearly in half against the American dollar. Recession? It’ arrived. The consensus view is that the Brazilian economy will shrink by some 2 percent in 2015. Meanwhile, “etween 100,000 and 120,000 people are losing their jobs every month,”ays Lúia Guimãaes, a well-known Brazilian journalist.
 
Compounding the economic problems, many a result simply of poor economic stewardship, a huge corruption scandal has swept up both Brazilian politicians and a number of prominent businesspeople. The scandal centers on the country’ biggest company, Petrobras, whose success had been an object of real pride during the go-go years.
 
Although the details are complicated, as its core the scandal is “n old-fashioned kickback scheme,”s The Times’ David Segal put it in a fine story last month — kickback scheme that has been estimated at a staggering $2 billion.
 
Politicians and members of the business elite alike have been arrested. The country’ president, Dilma Rousseff, who was the chairwoman of Petrobras while much of the scheme was taking place, hasn’ been accused of anything, but her approval rating is in the single digits. People have taken to the streets to call for her impeachment, though there are really no grounds yet to impeach her.
 
Political corruption has long been a fact of life in Brazil, but rarely has it been on such vivid, and nauseating, display.
 
The double whammy of scandal and recession has created a mood that combines outrage, anguish and resignation. But there is something else, too. “eople feel betrayed,”ays Guimãaes. Rousseff’ party, the Partido dos Trabalhadores (PT) —r Workers’arty —ame to office in 2003 promising, idealistically, to create social programs that would help the poor join the middle class. Between 2003 and 2011, according to one estimate, some 40 million people have climbed from abject poverty to the lowest rung on the middle class.
 
“he worst thing,” Brazilian friend of mine wrote in an email recently, “s this feeling of disappointment with the …T, which brought so much hope to the middle class. I’ call this feeling a kind of political depression.”
 
And yet, as I look over the BRICS, I think there is more hope for Brazil than some of its fellow members. Admittedly, I am a lover of Brazil, and want to see it succeed, and so was pleased when, as I made phone calls and emails for this column, a surprising silver lining emerged.
 
It is this: For all the pain Brazilians are going through right now, its democracy and its judicial institutions are working.
 
“hat I see, more than I’e ever seen before, is that the country is weathering this storm,”ays Cliff Korman, an American musician who has lived and taught in Brazil for decades. It has a free press, which has stayed relentlessly focused on the Petrobras scandal. It has prosecutors who are actually putting politicians and businessmen in prison, and bringing cases against companies. The judiciary is not backing down.
 
“orruption is such a part of public life,”ays Riordan Roett, the director of Latin American Studies at Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies. “ut now people are being held accountable. There is a sense that things could actually change.”
 
And unlike a half-century ago, when a military dictatorship overthrew a president whose left-wing programs it didn’ like —nd held power for the next 21 years —here is no hint that such a thing could happen today. No matter how the economy goes, Brazilians are going to be able to choose their own leaders, and in so doing chart their own course.
 
“t is the beginning of a new Brazil,”oett says optimistically. It couldn’ happen to a nicer country.
 
Trade liberalisation: Commerce min prefers multilateral pacts
5 septembre 2015
Financial Express
 
Even as it is negotiating several new bilateral trade and investment agreements, including the much-touted India-EU pact, the Union commerce ministry said it would give preference to trade liberalisation via multilateral arrangements.
 
Speaking to reporters after addressing Federation of Indian Export Organisation (FIEO) members in Chennai on Friday, Rita Teaotia, Union commerce secretary said while FTAs/CEPAs (comprehensive economic partnership agreements) and multilateral accords will run in parallel, she was of the view that multilateral arrangements were better suited to help the exporters to get the much-needed level playing field, while competing with their counterparts globally.
 
"While we would pursue the ongoing FTA moves, we would like to give preference to multilateral sort of arrangements, some thing like the World Trade Organisation (WTO) forum," she said. India already has eleven bilateral trade pacts - including those with Japan, Korea, ASEAN, Singapore and Sri Lanka and is in talks for such pacts with Australia, New Zealand, Canada, Gulf Cooperation Council among others. The commerce secretary's statement assumes significance as many of the extant FTAs have been skewed in favour of the partner-countries. The services component of ASEAN and Singapore agreements, for instance, have taken much time to materialise after the tariffs have been cut on goods, much to the benefit of the respective countries than India.
 
"And once there is a market of our choice, then we will do one-on- one. See, we don' t have many FTAs, we have only 11. Even though the FTAs with Japan and Korea were well negotiated, when faced with trouble many exporters accuse that these FTAs were not good enough to protect their interests," she said.
 
Besides bilateral accords, India is also exploring the option of regional trade agreements including an Asia-Pacific agreement that comprises China.
 
The commerce secretary said that at a time when India's exports were down, the Centre is taking various measures to help the exporters. The ministry is holding talks with various stakeholders, including exporters, state administration and others to boost the exports. Some of the major issues raised by the stakeholders includes infrastructure bottlenecks including high transaction cost, port and airport access, traffic management, integration of software with various agencies and specific concern like interest subvention.
 
On the Chinese Yuan's effect and what her ministry has been doing to help exporters, the commerce secretary said there was no universal blanket measure to arrest the impact any currency fall.
 
No conclusion in sight for TPP talks, says Malaysian Trade Minister 
5 septembre 2015
TODAY (Singapore)
 
KUALA LUMPUR/TOKYO —Malaysian Trade and Industry Minister Mustapha Mohamed yesterday cautioned that negotiations on the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) would not be concluded anytime soon, as Tokyo expressed confidence that support was building for a second ministerial-level meeting on the Pacific Rim trade agreement.
 
“there has been progress, but we still have some issues to address. However, when the TPP will be concluded is an open question,”r Mustapa was quoted as saying by local media.
 
Speaking to reporters, Mr Mustapa revealed that fellow TPP member nations such as the United States, Japan, Australia and New Zealand still had their own set of concerns over the effects that the TPP would have on their automotive, agricultural and dairy industries.
 
Yet, while there were still a host of issues that remain to be addressed, Mr Mustapa was optimistic that a deal could still be reached.
 
“t the moment, most countries involved in the talks are looking forward to a conclusion,”e said.
 
The TPP would stretch from Chile and Canada to Japan and Singapore, encompassing about 40 per cent of global output.
 
Malaysian critics of the TPP have argued that the ambitious free-trade pact would undermine the country’ right to manage state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and the policies of preferential treatment for ethnic Malays and other indigenous people, known as bumiputra.
 
In addition, activists say the TPP would drive up medical costs, as its provisions would curb access to affordable generic medicines. Critics also claim that the pact would affect rice businesses in Malaysia.
 
In late July, Mr Mustapa sought to allay critics’ears by vowing to seek flexibility for the country’ SOEs within the TPP and promising to safeguard bumiputra preferences by ensuring that the current bumiputra and small and medium-sized enterprise preferences will be maintained.
 
He also warned that failing to join the TPP would come at a cost of potentially losing foreign investment to other countries, and that late entry would not give Malaysia the ability to shape the rules.
 
Reiterating his stand yesterday, Mr Mustapa said: “t the end of the day, we have the opportunity to be among the movers in shaping world economy and trade. We will be left out if we don’ join the agreement. Then, it would be too late for us to compete and catch up.”
 
Meanwhile, at a news conference in Tokyo yesterday, Japan’ Economic and Fiscal Policy Minister Akira Amari expressed confidence that support was building for the next ministerial meeting on the TPP to be held.
 
Last week, Mr Amari warned that the negotiations might be halted if member nations were unable to strike a broad deal before the Canadian general elections next month.
 
Trade ministers of the 12 TPP nations last met in Hawaii for four days in July, but failed to secure an agreement due to differences over thorny issues such as intellectual property and liberalised trade of dairy products. AGENCIES
 
India hopeful of a permanent solution to WTO food security issue
 
NAYANIMA BASU New Delhi   
5 septembre 2015
Business Standard
 
A year ago, India was viewed as a spoiler at the Geneva-based World Trade Organization (WTO). Now, the tables seem to have turned at the multilateral trading platform and India is hopeful that a permanent solution to the food stockpiling programme will be achieved by 2017. While the talks are still at an early stage, regular dedicated sessions on the issue of public stockholding of grains for food security are taking place in Geneva with full attendance by the developed countries, including the US. Sessions to discuss the matter are also happening among the countries that run such food stocks programme, a senior commerce ministry official told Business Standard. According to the decision taken during the ninth ministerial meeting in Bali, Indonesia, in December 2013, a permanent solution to the food stocks was to be achieved by December 2015. The deadline was revised to December 2017 during the General Council meeting in November 2014.
 
“he ministerial decision to achieve the per-manent solution remains December 2017, when the 11th ministerial takes place. However, we are trying to achieve it by the Nairobi ministerial but that looks unlikely although regular talks on this issue is taking place,”aid the official, who is involved in the talks.
 
India, China and other developing countries that run food stockpiling schemes basically want the subsidies given to their poor and marginal farmers should become part of the ‘reen box’f WTO subsidies —eaning these subsidies are not considered to be distorting trade.
 
Meanwhile, a handful of developed countries have raised concerns over the methodology used by India to calculate the quantum of subsidies it gives to its poor and marginal farmers by way of minimum support price on rice and wheat. Last year, India notified WTO that it had given subsidies worth $56 billion during 2004-05 to 2010-11. Earlier this year, the US accused India and China of exceeding the WTO limits on farm subsidies, saying these caused trade distortion.
 
“ncreasing support levels gave Indian farmers an artificial incentive to produce more wheat. In fact, India’ wheat production increased 35 per cent over those seven years (2005-06 to 2013-14) to record levels. That buoyed world wheat supplies and increased pressure on prices that hurt wheat farmers in other countries,”aid the US Wheat Associates in a media release.
 
India, as well as other members of the G-33 grouping, has also turned down a US proposal on a permanent solution. According to India, this could result in a scenario where countries would be dictated what sort of food security models they should adopt.
 
US's Lew Tells Japan FinMin TPP Improves Econ Integration-Text
4 septembre 2015
20:15
Market News International
 
WASHINGTON (MNI) - The following is a "readout" Friday from the U.S.
Treasury of a meeting on the sidelines of the Ankara G-20 between top economic
policymakers of the U.S. and Japan:
 
     U.S. Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew today met with Japanese Deputy Prime
Minister and Finance Minister Taro Aso on the sidelines of the G-20 Finance
Ministers and Central Bank Governors Meeting.
 
     Secretary Lew discussed key issues before the G-20 including the importance
of global growth and financial stability.
 
     Secretary Lew also discussed the importance of the Trans-Pacific
Partnership Agreement, which will contribute to stronger and more balanced
economic growth and encourage closer economic integration with Japan and
throughout the TPP region. Secretary Lew stated that he was hopeful that TPP
negotiations would conclude as soon as possible.
 
     Secretary Lew discussed the need for exchange rate authorities to abide by
their G-7 and G-20 commitments and remain in close contact.
 
     Secretary Lew also spoke about the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action and
emphasized that no new sanctions relief would be provided until the
International Atomic Energy Agency has verified that Iran has implemented key
nuclear-related measures and that sanctions related to terrorism and regional
destabilization would remain in place after that.
 
BRICS pool of currency reserves starts off with meetings of governing agencies
4 septembre 2015
21:12
ITAR-TASS World Service
 
MOSCOW, September 4. /TASS/. Meetings of the Council of Governors and the Standing Committee that were held in Ankara on Friday marked the beginning of operations of the BRICS pool of currency reserves, the press service of the Central Bank of Russia said.
 
"The first sessions of the pool’ governing agencies mark the start of a full-scale functioning of the pool of BRICS currency reserves as an international institute aiming its activity at consolidation and strengthening of cooperation (among the member-states - TASS)," the CBR said.
 
The agreement on the pool of equivalent currency reserves took effect on July 30, 2015. The total reserves committed by Brazil, Russia, India, China, and the South African Republic stand at $100 billion.
 
Each Central Bank reserves a definite sum of money as a lifeline for emergency situations that may be caused, in part, by a strong outflow of monies. Thus the setting up of this mechanism is pursues of the goal of maintaining financial stability in the member-states.
 
The breakdown of the reserves committed by the five countries looks as follows:
 
China, the owner of the world’ biggest gold/forex reserves -- $ 41 billion,
 
Brazil, India and Russia -- $ 18 billion each,
 
South Africa -- $ 5 billion.
 
G20 defies gloom to forecast rise in growth 
Chris Giles in Ankara   
4 septembre 2015
19:49
Financial Times (FT.Com)
 
Policymakers from the world’ largest economies will seek to break the mood of pessimism hanging over the global economy and financial markets with a reassuring statement on Saturday predicting an increase in growth.
 
The sanguine statement, to be released at the end of a two-day meeting in Ankara of the Group of 20 finance ministers and central bank governors, contrasts with widespread anxiety elsewhere that too many economies are performing worse than expected.
 
The G20 nations will accept the International Monetary Fund’ assessment that global economic performance this year is disappointing. However, they do not think it is time yet to take decisive co-ordinated action.
 
Officials who have seen the draft G20 communiqué say it will forecast an increase in global growth, while acknowledging recent financial market volatility. It avoids specifically mentioning slowing Chinese growth or the possibility of destabilising effects of an interest rate rise in the US.
 
Those omissions did not stop these two countries being at the centre of discussions on Friday. Catherine Mann, chief economist of the OECD group of mostly wealthy nations, which attends the G20, said there was “qual [time] on the hot-seat for the big guys”
 
Although representatives from some emerging economies wanted the G20 to warn against the higher US interest rates that might lead to destabilising capital flight from their countries, the idea was quashed by the US and other advanced economies.
 
Haruhiko Kuroda, governor of the Bank of Japan, said a rise in US rates would be a sign of normalisation “nd this would be a plus for the global economy” He was supported by Wolfgang Schäble, the German finance minister, who told journalists that the problem in the world was not one of too little liquidity.
 
If the possibility of a normalisation of economic policy in the US is creating tensions, slowing growth and emergency measures to quell financial market volatility in China have generated fears that the authorities have lost control of the country’ transition to a more consumer-orientated society.
 
China’ delegation in Turkey said that its economy was fundamentally still strong, that the authorities understood the situation and that the country was not seeking a competitive devaluation to boost exports.
 
Yi Gang, deputy governor of the People’ Bank of China, said: “he Chinese economy’ fundamentals are fine.”
 
Although an improving outlook in the US and Europe has reassured many officials that global growth has yet to be comprehensively derailed, there is a nervousness among many that low oil prices are not yet boosting consumption sufficiently to allow growth to accelerate as forecast in 2016.
 
These concerns were detailed in the IMF briefing paper given to G20 countries before the meeting.
 
Jens Weidmann, head of Germany’ Bundesbank, said that although he did not see China’ slowdown as a lasting danger for the global economy, “he long-term growth outlook is rather subdued —nd not just in the eurozone”
 
Ms Mann said the forecasts for faster growth were still in place, “ut we need to see the fruits of this to unlock investment” She added that countries had yet to implement many of the reforms they had agreed to at last year’ G20 summit.
 
Guy Ryder, head of the International Labour Organisation, said: “ weak economic recovery continues to weigh heavily on G20 labour markets, while the persistent lack of decent jobs is, in turn, hurting the recovery.”
 
Although this more pessimistic outlook is pervasive, it will not be reflected in the communiqué as it is not the consensus view among the G20 nations. They believe that negative sentiment in financial markets over the summer exaggerated the weakness in the global economy.


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.