India to finalise Doha round work plan shortly
German economy minister plays down boost from EU-U.S. trade deal: magazine
Trade deal has health consequences
ÉTATS-UNIS: accord sur l'ossature du TTIP espéré pour la fin 2015 (Commission)
Global Day of Action against TTIP; AP Planner; Future News Item; Stop TTIP
Andy Warhol as a Guide to Trade
WTO review of Pakistan's trade regime
Multilateral Trade Negotiations Doha to Bali and Beyond
 
India to finalise Doha round work plan shortly
Daily The Pak Banker
New Delhi: A Commerce Ministry official said India will soon finalise its work programme which will be discussed as part of the long-pending agenda of Doha round of talks at the next WTO meet in Nairobi in December.
Additional Secretary in the Department of Commerce, J S Deepak said, "We are working to finalise the work programme for the Doha round by the end of July. My most of the attention is on market access issues. I hope we will have some reform of rules as well on the agenda for the next WTO ministerial meeting." Two-day International Conference on Trade Remedy Measures was organised by the Indian Institute of Foreign Trade (IIFT). After notching up a major victory on food security last year at the World Trade Organisation (WTO), India wants to push for the long-pending Doha agenda.
The rich nations are asking for a significant reduction in industrial good tariffs and further strengthening of patent laws. India also wants to resolve issues of the least developed countries (LDCs). There are a number of pending issues under the Doha round, which India would like to bring to the table in Nairobi. It includes issues related to agriculture (export subsidies, cotton and fishery subsidies), intellectual property rights, market access and services.
 
German economy minister plays down boost from EU-U.S. trade deal: magazine
Reuters News
Germany's economy minister warned on Saturday against overblowing expectations for an economic boost from a trade deal between the United States and European Union but said the pact was needed to set high common standards for consumers.
The European Commission is trying to finalize a deal on the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP), which some experts say could generate $100 billion a year in additional economic output on both sides of the Atlantic.
It would eliminate all tariff barriers between the United States and EU members, which together account for almost half the global economy.
"I don't believe in the wondrous calculations for economic growth from (the trade deal) TTIP," said Sigmar Gabriel, also chairman of Germany's Social Democrats (SPD) which shares power with Chancellor Angela Merkel's conservatives.
"All the estimates about its impact ... give an impression of voodoo economics," Gabriel told Focus weekly.
However, Gabriel, who has long expressed reservations about some aspects of TTIP, said Europe urgently needed a deal.
"Our companies would profit because, with equal standards, they wouldn't have to go through approval procedures twice."
"Overall, Europe would profit because we could influence the standards for world trade for the coming 20 or 30 years," he said, adding without a deal, other countries, including China, would end up setting environmental and consumer standards.
Gabriel repeated the SPD's concerns about allowing U.S. mulitnationals to use so-called investor-to-state dispute settlement mechanisms to challenge Europe's food, labor and environment laws on the grounds that they restrict free trade.
The United States will not accept a deal without that.
Asked by Focus when TTIP could be finalised, Gabriel said the view in Brussels was that hopes a deal could be concluded this year were very ambitious.
 
Trade deal has health consequences
The Quad-City Times
Speaking recently at an economic forum, Richard Trumka, the outspoken president of the AFL-CIO, asked this about free trade: "Is our trade policy working for America's workers and for our nation as a whole? And the simple answer to that question right now is no, it isn't."
Trumka was addressing the controversial Trans-Pacific Partnership that the Obama administration is attempting to fast-track through Congress. But our trade policy isn't working for other nations, either.
Writing last week in The Guardian, Ramon Vera Herrera blamed free trade for the obesity and Type 2 diabetes epidemic ravaging Mexico, Central and South America.
"Today, many countries in the global South are seeing an explosion of these afflictions -all because their governments welcomed in transnational food companies looking for new 'growth markets' for poor quality, heavily processed or just plain junk food," wrote Vera Herrera.
"For big conglomerates to increase their profits, they need to develop and sell products aimed at hundreds of millions of the world's poor. ... To reach these potential consumers, large food corporations are infiltrating, inundating and taking over traditional food distribution channels around the world, and replacing local foods with junk, often with the direct support of local governments."
Vera Herrera said that the North American Free Trade Agreement, signed by President Clinton in 1993, destabilized Mexico's food system -in terms of loss of economic stability, the undercutting of local food producers' profits and, in many cases, the gobbling up of land by huge agricultural companies. These are major reasons for Latin Americans' skyrocketing incidences of malnutrition, obesity and associated diseases, he says.
Recall this irony: In 2013, Mexico became the fattest nation on earth, taking the title from the United States, which had reigned supreme for years. Today, both countries are neck and neck for the dubious title.
Mexico's obesity epidemic should be no surprise to anyone who has traveled south of the border in the past few years. Where once sidewalks were packed with vendors selling freshly cut fruit and vegetables, freshly squeezed juices and handmade comestibles, vendors are now likelier to be hawking bottled soft drinks, American candy bars and colorful packets of salty, fried chips.
When I visited family in Mexico in the 1980s, it was rare to see American stores, restaurants or products. My mom used to pack Snickers bars and Oreos to treat the family kids since those items were generally unavailable there.
But on my last trip to Mexico City, in 2007, I was shocked to see that my aunt's formerly sleepy neighborhood had been transformed into a mini-American suburbia with a Burger King, two Kentucky Fried Chicken franchises, several Wal-Marts teeming with Nabisco and Frito-Lay packaged goods and even a Hooters chicken wing restaurant.
So many Mexican citizens drink sugary sodas that the country's status as the world's top consumer of soft drinks led to a tax on the beverages in order to help curb the rapid expansion of obesity-related disease. Less publicized, however, are communities who rely on bottled soft drinks as their No. 1 alternative to water because their governments have not prioritized providing clean, running water for their citizens' use.
This is not to say that malnutrition in Mexico and other Latin American nations can be blamed solely on free trade agreements. But many experts point to such deals as force multipliers in poor countries where an influx of cheap calories can quickly become a very expensive national health crisis.
Vera Herrera writes: "After visiting the country in 2012, the U.N. Special Rapporteur on the Right to Food got it right when he said: 'The overweight and obesity emergency that Mexico is facing could have been avoided, or largely mitigated, if the health concerns linked to shifting diets had been integrated into the design of the country's trade policies.'"
It begs the question about how such dietary concerns are being addressed, if at all, in regard to the 12 countries involved in the proposed Trans-Pacific Partnership. Vietnam, for instance, is currently juggling both hunger and rising obesity, while Singapore is struggling to stem obesity and Malaysia is already Asia's most obese country.
But with the text of the proposed trade agreement shrouded in secrecy, we may not find out whether nutrition was even a consideration until it's much too late.
 
 ÉTATS-UNIS: accord sur l'ossature du TTIP espéré pour la fin 2015 (Commission)
Bulletin Quotidien Europe
Le négociateur en chef européen pour les négociations de libre-échange entre l'UE et les États-Unis (TTIP), Ignacio Garcia Bercero, espère parvenir avant la fin 2015 à une position commune avec la partie américaine sur les paramètres clés d'un accord, mais il se montre sceptique quant à la possibilité de conclure un accord sous l'administration du président américain, Barack Obama. C'est ce que M. Bercero concède dans un entretien au quotidien français Les Échos, vendredi 10 avril, à la veille du 10ème round de négociations au plan technique, du 20 au 24 avril à New York.
« La substance de l'accord prime sur la vitesse des négociations », explique M. Bercero, précisant que l'UE et les États-Unis souhaitent « parvenir, en 2015, à une position commune sur les paramètres clés de l'accord accès au marché (tarifs, services, marchés publics), réglementation, protection de l'environnement et énergie. « Mais il est illusoire de croire que nous conclurons l'accord sous l'administration Obama. Ce serait un record de vitesse », estime le négociateur en chef européen.
Les dirigeants européens ont, lors de leur sommet du 20 mars, réaffirmé leur souhait de conclure un accord d'ici la fin 2015. Mais le 25 mars, le chef de la diplomatie lettone, Edgars Rinkevics, s'est montré plus prudent quant à la possibilité d'y parvenir. « Nous visons à conclure sous l'administration Obama », soit en janvier 2017, avait renchéri la commissaire au Commerce, Cecilia Malmström.
Jusqu'à présent, 20 chapitres de négociations ont été ouverts et « nous entrons enfin dans le coeur des négociations, chaque partie ayant déposé ses propositions sur la majorité des chapitres », précise M. Bercero, dans les colonnes des Échos. « À partir de là, les négociateurs recherchent le bon équilibre entre les souhaits des uns et des autres. Le processus est lent, car toutes nos propositions sont préparées en amont et vérifiées en aval avec le Conseil », ajoute le négociateur en chef européen.
Sur la question controversée de l'inclusion dans le TTIP d'une clause de règlement des différends investisseur/État (ISDS), M. Bercero confirme que l'UE soumettra aux États-Unis, « à la fin du printemps », une proposition de mécanisme ISDS réformé « pour introduire plus de transparence et de légitimité dans ces procédures d'arbitrage ». La Commission travaille autour de plusieurs pistes, comme celle de proposer que les arbitres soient nommés par les deux parties et qu'ils aient des qualifications au moins équivalentes à celles des juges nationaux, ou celle d'introduire une procédure d'appel, précise-t-il. Concernant l'idée de la création d'un tribunal international permanent sur l'investissement, M. Bercero estime que l'adoption par l'UE et les États-Unis, les deux plus grands investisseurs mondiaux, de règles communes sur ce mécanisme d'arbitrage « serait un progrès très important qui pourrait préfigurer un tel système ». 
 
Global Day of Action against TTIP; AP Planner; Future News Item; Stop TTIP
AP Planner
Description: Global Day of Action against TTIP, with various pressure groups protesting against the proposed Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership which they clain is 'an assault on democracy' * U.S. and EU officials have been negotiating for the last year over a deal on TTIP, which they say will boost economic growth and jobs in the U.S. and the EU through the liberalisation of trade and investment between the two largest economic regions in the world * The 9th Round of TTIP Negotiations between the U.S. and EU takes place in New York 20-24 Apr
Start Date: 2015-04-18
End Date: 2015-04-18
Web Site: stop-ttip.org
 
Andy Warhol as a Guide to Trade
New York Times
I OFTEN ask people in my business — public policy — where they get their inspiration. Liberals often point to John F. Kennedy. Conservatives usually cite Ronald Reagan. Personally, I prefer the artist Andy Warhol, who famously declared, "I like boring things." He was referring to art, of course. But the sentiment provides solid public policy guidance as well.
Warhol's work exalted the everyday "boring" items that display the transcendental beauty of life itself. The canonical example is his famous paintings of Campbell Soup cans. Some people sneered, but those willing to look closely could see what he was doing. It is the same idea expressed in an old Zen saying, often attributed to the eighth-century Chinese Buddhist philosopher Layman Pang: "How wondrously supernatural and miraculous! I draw water and I carry wood!"
Warhol's critical insight is usually lost on most of the world. This is not because people are stupid, but because our brains are wired to filter out the mundane and focus on the novel. This turns out to be an important survival adaptation. To discern a predator, you must filter out the constant rustling of leaves and notice the strange snap of a twig.
Warhol believed that defeating this cognitive bias led to greater appreciation of beauty. It also leads to better public policy, especially in relieving poverty. For example, while our attention is naturally drawn to the latest fascinating and expensive innovations in tropical public health, many experts insist it is cheap, boring mosquito bed nets that best protect against malaria. Despite their lifesaving utility, these boring nets tend to be chronically underprovided.
We can look closer to home, too. People love to find ways to get fancy technology into poor schoolchildren's hands, but arguably the best way to help children falling behind in school is simply to devise ways to get them to show up.
But the very best example of the Warhol principle in policy is international trade. If it is progress against poverty that we're pursuing, trade beats the pants off every fancy development program ever devised. The simple mundane beauty of making things and exchanging them freely is the best anti-poverty achievement in history. 
For more than two decades, the global poverty rate has been decreasing by roughly 1 percent a year. To put this in perspective, that comes to about 70 million people — equivalent to the whole population of Turkey or Thailand — climbing out of poverty annually. Add it up, and around a billion people have escaped destitution since 1990.
Why? It isn't the United Nations or foreign aid. It is, in the words of the publication YaleGlobal Online, "High growth spillovers originating from large open emerging economies that utilize cross-border supply chains." For readers who don't have tenure, that means free trade in poor countries.
That mug in your hand that says "Made in China" is part of the reason that 680 million Chinese have been pulled out of absolute poverty since the 1980s. No giant collaboration among transnational technocrats or lending initiatives did that. It was because of economic reforms in China, of people making stuff, putting it on boats, and sending it to be sold in America — to you. Critics of free trade often argue that open economies lead to exploitation or environmental degradation. These are serious issues, but protectionism is never the answer. Curbing trade benefits entrenched domestic interests and works against the world's poor. 
And what of claims that trade increases global income inequality? They are false. Economists at the World Bank and at LIS (formerly known as the Luxembourg Income Study Center) have shown that, for the world as a whole, income inequality has fallen [http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/20/upshot/income-inequality-is-not-rising-globally-its-falling-.html?_r=1&abt=0002&abg=0] for most of the past 20 years. This is chiefly because of rising incomes from globalization in the developing world.
Interestingly, Warhol himself once remarked on the democratizing effect of global commerce with his characteristic ironic edge. "The President drinks Coke, Liz Taylor drinks Coke, and just think, you can drink Coke, too," Warhol said. Fortunately, President Obama appreciates the benefits of trade and is currently fighting for the latest international trade pact, the Trans-Pacific Partnership [https://ustr.gov/tpp] (T.P.P.). It would knock down barriers between North American, South American and East Asian nations, benefiting rich and poor people and countries alike. Admirably, the president is standing up to critics in his own party (as well as some in the opposition) who oppose the deal. With luck, T.P.P. will make its way through the House and Senate this spring or summer, and receive the president's signature.
Trade doesn't solve every problem, of course. The world needs democracy, security and many other expressions of American values and leadership as well. But in a policy world crowded with outlandish, wasteful boondoggles, free trade is just the kind of beautifully boring Warholian strategy we need. Americans dedicated to helping others ought to support it without compromise or apology.
 
WTO review of Pakistan's trade regime
Daily The Pak Banker
Karachi: Pakistan's major trading partners — who reviewed the trade policies and practices pursued by the country since 2008 — concluded in a WTO meeting in Geneva last week that Pakistan's expanding economy needs more fiscal consolidation, infrastructure expansion and trade liberalisation.
The country's regulatory framework and development initiatives also came under strong scrutiny.
The participants put over 200 questions over what they considered hurdles in the way of freer and larger trade volumes. Most active in the discourse were representatives from the US, China, EU, Malaysia, Canada, Singapore, Australia, Argentina and Japan.
Some members raised the issue of the presumptive income tax of 1pc on export proceeds. They believed that exporters pay lesser income tax as compared to non-export companies, and a member termed this difference a subsidy Ahead of the review, the WTO secretariat had prepared a comprehensive research document on Pakistan's trade regime. Pakistan had responded through a position paper to the WTO secretariat, highlighting the government's efforts to improve the economy and foreign trade. These two documents became the basis for the five-year review.
Trade policymaking in Pakistan has been a 'ritualistic' process. It is focused on demands for cash subsidy on exports or a ban on imports or tariff increases to ward off international competition.
There is no overall strategy, and, at best, the trade policy tends to adjust competing interests and often ends up promoting interests of certain groups at the cost of others. This approach was brought into the spotlight by the queries at the review meeting.
The frequent use of ad-hoc trade policy instruments, mostly SROs — tax and trade-related special regulatory orders — came under discussion. These ad-hoc trade policy instruments, it was stated, have undermined the predictability of the trade regime.
For example, the government has imposed 10pc regulatory duty on the import of non-essential and luxury goods. Regulatory duties on the export of raw hides and skins and molasses etc are being levied to cater to the local value-added domestic industries' demand for raw materials. Recently, the government imposed regulatory duty on the import of sugar and wheat as well. The EU wants these duties to be withdrawn.
Most of the countries wanted Pakistan to lift its ban on the import of poultry and poultry and livestock products from negligible-risk countries. The WTO members appreciated Pakistan's commitment to phase out the remaining tax concessions and exemptions by the end of June 2017.
Some members also raised concerns over the high degree of protection afforded to the domestic automobile industry. While encouraging the rationalisation of tariffs, they appreciated the move to end the SRO culture.
While welcoming a small reduction in the applied MFN tariff since 2008, several members voiced concerns with respect to the big difference between applied and bound rates. Similar reservations were also expressed about the abolition of duty-free tariff lines.
A number of members raised the issue of what they considered to be a high degree of overall tariff protection, which favours import-substitution. Subsidies in various forms were also questioned. These included subsidies for promoting exports and applying mark-up rates for export finance schemes to promote certain products. Certain members reiterated the need to reduce subsidies and export prohibitions.
Other issues that were raised included the support price for wheat, pricing in the pharmaceutical industry, importlicensing procedures, safeguard mechanisms and the high number of anti-dumping investigations.
The lack of notifications, particularly those pertaining to agriculture and domestic support, was also mentioned.
Contrary to these observations, a senior Pakistani official who was a part of the review said everyone had appreciated and encouraged the elimination of SROs.
"We generally got a good response; the members appreciated our trade and economic performance." He added that, by and large, the response was very positive. "They told us to improve our cost of doing business ranking, and encouraged Pakistan to sign government procurement agreements and information technology agreements," the official said.
The proposed establishment of the Exim Bank was also highlighted during the review. The bank is likely become operational by the end of this calendar year. The imports and exports of all sectors, including agriculture, will be eligible for financing by the Exim Bank.
The issue of the presumptive income tax of 1pc on export proceeds was also raised by some members. They believed that exporters pay lesser income tax as compared to non-export companies. A member termed this huge difference in income tax a subsidy.
Other issues raised during the review included transparency in procurement rules, effective enforcement of standards, complete capital account liberalisation, effective supervising authorities for ensuring coordination and compliance and progressive liberalisation in trade and services.
WTO Director-General Roberto Azevêdo, in his concluding remarks on Pakistan's trade regime, said he would like to underline that despite the many challenges faced by the country, its economy had proved to be resilient and several of its policies since the last review demonstrated its commitment to moving towards more transparency and predictability.
"I am encouraged by the progress Pakistan continues to make in its pursuit of a more prosperous future. Pakistan has a vast array of natural resources, a strategic geographical position and a large, willing and young labour force," he said.
"The challenge for Pakistan is to harness this potential through appropriate policies and reforms, including improving the business climate; further liberalising the trade regime and ensuring its predictability; reducing state intervention in the economy; providing adequate infrastructure facilities, especially those related to the power sector; and improving the fiscal situation by broadening the tax base," he concluded.
 
Multilateral Trade Negotiations Doha to Bali and Beyond
Policy Perspectives
Fasih Uddin
Institute of Policy Studies
 [abstractThe latest round of multilateral trade negotiation under the World Trade Organization (WTO) known as the Doha Development Agenda has remained inconclusive for well over 13 years. There have been serious differences between the developed and developing countries on issues such as market access and agricultural subsidies. While a compromise deal was reached in the Bali ministerial conference of the WTO making the round a success remains an uphill task as divergences are there and apparently reaching a consensus is hard. However it will be in the interest of all the member nations and the global economy to take the round towards a successful conclusion. ]
 
Introduction
Notwithstanding short-term and cyclical ups and downs' in the last sixty years the world output and trade expanded steadily. During 1950 and 2013 global output in real terms rose by annual average of over three per cent while merchandise trade in US dollars surged three hundred-times. This growth was facilitated by the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) that was concluded in September 1947 and succeeded by the World Trade Organization (WTO) in December 1994. In addition to setting basic principles and framework for the conduct and expansion of global trade these agreements envisaged periodic multilateral negotiations for further liberalization of trade and removal of barriers. So far eight rounds of negotiations have been successfully conducted.
The ongoing ninth round named Doha Development Agenda" was launched by the fourth WTO Ministerial Conference in Doha (Qatar) in November 2001; encompassing wide range of areas and to be concluded by December 2004. The Talks encountered serious obstacles from the beginning; 13 years have passed differences on critical issues among member persist and final conclusion is not yet in sight. Realizing the obstacles in making all round progress the last Ministerial Conference in Bali (Indonesia) in December 2013 picked up some areas (called Bali Package) on which consensus could be reached earlier than completion of Talks. This paper reviews the progress of negotiations in the past 13 years analyses the Bali Package in the context of the Doha Agenda and discusses the prospects and challenges lying ahead. It also looks at the issues from Pakistan's perspective.
European Union project independent of global socio-economic and political factors will stand no less an incomplete analysis.Doha Development Agenda
The 21st Century began in difficult conditions. The world economy was under recessionary pressure; attempts to launch the next multilateral trade negotiations at the third WTO Ministerial Conference in Seattle in September 1999 had failed; and 9/11 incidence had shattered the world confidence. The fourth Ministerial Conference (November 2001) was thus held under gloomy atmosphere; yet it surprisingly took a bold decision to launch the next round of negotiations named as the Doha Development Agenda' to be concluded by December 2004. It covered wide range of areas (21) including trade in agricultural and nonagricultural products services intellectual property rights trade and environment trade facilitation dispute settlement special and differential treatment to developing countries and aid for trade. The negotiations were to be conducted by a newly created Trade Negotiations Committee (TNC) supported by sector committees and groups.
The negotiations failed to conclude by the deadline of December 2004 and still remain inconclusive. These post-Doha 13 years passed through phases of conflict divergence confrontation and stalemate; occasionally interspersed with a ray of hope. The spirit in which the Doha Agenda was launched did not last long; the negotiations repeatedly collapsed leaving the original deadline of December 2004 far behind. Though final conclusion is not yet in sight some positive developments in the shape of Bali Package took place at ninth Ministerial Conference in Bali in November 2013. The journey from Doha to Bali passed through following stages.
Hitting the rough road early (November 2001 September 2003): The post-Doha work began with establishing the negotiating set-up; identifying and clarifying issues; and outlining modalities of negotiations. Initial discussions in the Trade Negotiations Committee and special sessions of Agriculture and Services Committees brought to the fore divergence of views among members on some crucial matters. The most sensitive issues were:
(a) Agriculture: Divergence of views mainly between developed (in particular European Union and United States) and developingcountries on (i) Market Access (ii) Export Subsidies and (iii) Domestic Support Measures.
(b) Non-agriculture Products: Failure to agree on modalities and formula for further reduction in trade barriers.
(c) Services: Lack of progress on further liberalization and commitments.
(d) Other Areas: Progress in other areas was also slow and was affected by stalemate in negotiations in above areas.
The unresolved issues at committee-level in Geneva were supposed to be resolved at the fifth Ministerial Conference in Cancun (Mexico) in September 2003. Instead of finding solutions the Cancun Conference exacerbated the confrontation and derailed the negotiation process. The advanced countries (in particular the USA and European Union) maintained their position of opposing the elimination of export subsidies and reduction in domestic support measures on agriculture while the developing countries pressed for their reduction and elimination in return for greater access in non-agricultural products to their markets. The conflict heightened; the meeting ended in confusion with the Director General WTO and the Chairperson of the Conference making short statements indicating failure of the Conference. It was a great set-back with no such precedence in GATT/WTO history.
Efforts to bring back the Talks on track (July 2004 -December 2005): The failure at Cancun was followed by intensive informal contacts among members in particular the main actors in the conflict. These discussions facilitated the General Council in July 2004 to adopt some important measures for bringing negotiations back on track. These included:
Preparation of framework agreements for negotiation on agriculture non-agriculture products and services;
Reiteration of the needs of developing and least developed countries with respect to special and differential treatment technical assistance capacity building food security and rural development; and
Special safeguard mechanism for developing countries.
These decisions were placed before the fifth Ministerial Conference in Hong Kong in December 2005. Initially the situation remained tense as conflicts re-emerged. However at the last moment the Conference was able to approve these measures and agreed on the timeframe ofApril/July 2006 for finalization of negotiation modalities. It also resolved to eliminate export subsidies on agricultural products by 2013 and arrived at understanding to complete Doha negotiations by end of 2006.
Suspension of Talks (July 2006 December 2011): The target of April/July agreed for finalization of negotiation modalities remained elusive; conflicts re-emerged and the situation became so tense that negotiations had to be suspended to save it from complete collapse. Once again the members relied on informal consultations in which the main players were more active. These consultations continued without any break through; the parties did not budge from their earlier positions. Owing to sensitivity of the issues the eighth Ministerial Conference held in December 2011 in Geneva confined its deliberations to regular work of WTO; only holding general discussion on the Round and issuing Political Guidelines' reaffirming members' commitment to the Talks. While acknowledging that the Doha Talks were at an impasse the Conference decided to advancing negotiations in areas where progress could be achieved.
This meant focusing on elements of Doha Agenda that would allow members to reach agreement based on consensus earlier than full conclusion of Talks; thus enabling the Trade Negotiation Committee to prepare groundwork for identifying and fostering negotiations on such elements. Intensive negotiations enabled the General Council in July 2013 to approve a package of elements focusing on development.
Partial Retrieval of Talks (December 2011 November 2013): The ninth Ministerial Conference held in Bali (Indonesia) in December 2013 welcomed the advances in the Doha Agenda at the last General Council meeting and adopted a Package (known as Bali Package) consisting of some elements of Doha Agenda on which consensus was reached. These included:
Trade Facilitation
Conclusion of negotiations on Agreement on Trade Facilitation and setting up the Preparatory Committee to ensure expeditious entry into force of this Agreement.
Agriculture
a) General Services: With a view to promoting rural development and poverty alleviation the Conference agreed that the General Services programs related to land reforms and rural livelihood security could be considered as falling within the scope of nonexhaustive list of General Services of Agreement on Agriculture.
b) Public Stockholding for Food Security: The Conference agreed on an interim mechanism on public stockholding for food security purposes till a final mechanism was agreed.
c) Tariff Rate Quota: The Conference adopted an understanding on tariff rate quota administration of agricultural products.
d) Export Competition: While regretting that it had not been possible to achieve the objective of reducing export subsidies on agricultural products by 2013 as envisaged by Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration the members agreed to exercise utmost restraint with regard to any recourse to all forms of export subsidies and all export measures of equivalent effect.
Cotton:
While regretting that trade related component on cotton of Hong Kong Conference Declaration (2005) was yet to be delivered the Conference reiterated the importance of pursuing progress in this area.
Development and LDC Issues:
The Conference adopted certain improvement measures in following matters:
a) Preferential Rules of Origin for Least-Developed Countries;
b) Preferential Treatment to Services of Least-Developed Countries;
c) Duty-free and Quota-free Market Access for Least-Developed Countries; and d) Monitoring Mechanism on Special and Differential Treatment.
Post-Bali Work:
While reaffirming commitment to the development objectives of Doha Declaration the Conference instructed the Trade Negotiations Committee to prepare within next 12 months a clearly well-defined work program on the remaining Doha Development Agenda issues.
Steps for Revival of Talks (November 2013-December 2014): The decisions of the Bali Conference were pursued at informal as well as General Council and committee levels during 2014.
Progress was stalled in July as India suggested that deadline for Trade Facilitation Agreement be postponed to December 2014 and that the decision relating to public stockholding for food security purposes be amended to address its concerns relating to support to traditional food crops.
The US objected to Indian suggestion which led to deadlock in Talks; which was ultimately resolved through bilateral India-US agreement in November2014 and the US agreed to the Indian position on public stockholding.
The November 2014 meeting of the General Council amended the Conference decision accordingly paving the way to advance the work further; in particular in respect of: Trade Facilitation Agreement: Setting up of the Preparatory Committee on Trade Facilitation and adoption of the Protocol amending WTO Agreement 1994 annexing the said Agreement. The Agreement will come in force on ratification by two-third members.Public Stockholding for Food Security: The Bali decision was modified to the effect that until a permanent solution is agreed Members shall not challenge compliance of a developing Member with its obligation to support provided for traditional staple food.Post-Bali Work: Extending the deadline for preparation of work program on Doha Agenda to July 31 2015.
Doha Development Agenda Pakistan's Perspective
Being one of the 23 founder members of GATT Pakistan has been an active participant in GATT/WTO work. It has been an ardent supporter of the principles of multilateral trade system and special and preferential treatment to developing countries. The role of Pakistan in the negotiation of the Textile and Clothing Agreement under Uruguay Round (1986-94) was widely appreciated. The Agreement led to abolition of quota restrictions by developed countries on import of textile and clothing and brought back their trade under WTO regular fold.
Pakistan is continuing with its positive stance in the Doha Round individually as well as in association with other groups (e.g. Cairn's Group G-33 G-20) keeping its national interest in view. The objective is to improve market access for its agricultural and manufactured products and services; ensure special and preferential treatment to developing countries; and support rule-based trading system. Specific areas of its interest are:
Agriculture: Elimination of export subsidies and reduction of domestic support measures in particular in the US European Union and other highly protected markets to ensure greater market access for its products; as also Special Safeguard Mechanism for products of developing countries.
Non-Agriculture Market Access: Elimination of tariff peaks tariff escalation and non-tariff barriers on products of its export interest (like textiles clothing and leather goods) in other markets.
Services Trade: Liberalized commitment in mode 4 (Movement of Natural Persons) as it has export potential in manpower.
Special and Differential Treatment to Developing Countries: Improvement in rules and more effective application of concessions relating to such treatment to developing countries.
It may be pointed out here that as a participant in the Talks Pakistan is required to open up its market and assume additional obligations.
In order to fully exploit the trade potential envisaged in the Doha Agenda Pakistan needs to resist domestic protectionist pressure realign its economic and commercial policies to principles of multilateralism and take measures to improve its global competitiveness. The effective implementation of the Trade Facilitation Agreement will improve competitiveness by reducing cost and time involved in processing cross border trade transactions.
Evaluation
This section addresses three issues; namely the impact of impasse on trade development and trading system; factors contributing to impasse; and prospects of successful conclusion of the Talks.
Effect of Impasse on Growth and Trading System
The impasse in negotiations on Doha Agenda has adversely affected trade and development and has led to rise in trade restraining measures by members.
a) During 1948 and 2013 the world trade had expanded by over 300 times in terms of US dollars and world GDP (in real terms) grew by 3.4 percent per annum (for details see Annex). This growth was partly attributable to the successive Rounds of Multilateral Trade Negotiations conducted under GATT/WTO since 1948 which had reduced barriers to trade and provided a congenial trading environment. The Doha Agenda was expected to improve this growth process further. According to a World Bank Study the liberalization of merchandise trade and elimination of subsidies under Doha Agenda could add 1.5 trillion dollars to developing country incomes. Reshaping the world's trading system and reducing barriers to trade in goods could reduce the number of poor by 300 million by 2015 and boost global income by as much as US $2.8 trillion over the next decade (i.e. by 2011). Thus trade and economic development have suffered due to impasse in Talks; the main beneficiaries namely the developing countries suffered the most.
b) The deadlock in Talks has encouraged actions that are detrimental to the promotion of multilateral trading system. According to the recently published WTO report on International Trading Environment (December 2014) :
Regional and bilateral arrangements have flourished. By mid2014 over 250 arrangements were reported to WTO Secretariat while another 63 also exist.
Trade restrictive and distortive measures taken by members have increased. During 2008 and mid-2014 about 2150 such measures were taken as against 510 removed.
The compliance of WTO obligations and requirements by members has slowed down.
Factors Responsible for Lack of Progress
Many factors including the following are responsible for the impasse in Talks.
Unlike earlier Talks the Doha Round included some sensitive issues like agriculture which are deeply imbedded in domestic policies and politics of member states. For instance export subsidy on agricultural products by the European Union and domestic support measures to agriculture by the United States are key elements of domestic politics and policy and their elimination is being resisted. They are main stumbling blocks in the Talk. The statesmanship required on their part to take bold decisions by resisting the political pressure for the good of global trade and development is missing.
The newly emerging economies (including China India Brazil South Africa etc.) are required to open up their market and provide greater market access in return for concessions to be extended by others. These countries are not very forthcoming in opening their markets.
Decisions in WTO are generally taken on the basis of consensus. Building consensus among 160 big and small countries with varied interests is a difficult and time consuming task.
The adoption of the results of the Talk is to be a single undertaking' which implies that the balancing of concessions and commitments will be based on conclusion of negotiations in all areas. This means that even if agreement is reached in some areas these will remain open till negotiations on other areas are concluded. This slowed down the overall progress also.
In many areas negotiations were to be preceded by time consuming process of exchanging information and agreeing on definition and identification of issues and negotiating modalities.
Post-Doha was a volatile period for the world economy (the financial turmoil Euro crisis and slowing down of growth) which distracted the attention of leading members from undertaking meaningful negotiations on Doha Agenda.
Prospects of Successful Conclusion of Talks
The thirteen-year-stuck Talks saw a ray of hope in Bali (December 2013) and the Bali Package was hailed as an important stepping stone towards the completion of the Doha Round. In this context two questions need to be addressed: (a) Does the Bali Package contain such elements as would help in resolving the key issues of Doha Agenda and (b) Taking into account the track-record is it realistic to believe that the deadline set for preparing work program will be adhered to
a) The Bali Package covers a few areas; and they are not of high significance in the context of overall Doha Agenda. The only important development is the conclusion of the Trade Facilitation Agreement. In agriculture the decisions relating to general services food security and tariff rate quota are of marginal value. The LDC matters basically relate to clarifications and laying down procedures. On cotton there is reaffirmation of commitment made in Hong Kong Ministerial Conference (December 2005) with no concrete measures now being suggested. The decision on export competition is in fact going back on the commitment made by developed countries at Hong Kong to eliminate export subsidies by 2013; that too without setting a new deadline.
b) The Bali Ministerial Conference had instructed the Trade Negotiations Committee to prepare within the next 12 months (i.e. December 2014) a clearly well-defined work program on the remaining Doha Agenda. This deadline has since been extended to July 2015 by the General Council in November 2014. Thus the possibility of further extension of the deadline cannot be ruled out.
Conclusion
The past efforts to salvage the Doha Talks failed with adverse consequences for global trade development and multilateral trading system. Will the Bali Package help in reviving the Talks is an open question with serious caveats. The controversial issues (mainly; market access export subsidy and domestic support measures in agriculture; greater non-agriculture market access; and new commitments onservices trade) are critical and the positions taken on them by key actors are inflexible. In particular their position in respect of agriculture is dictated by domestic policies and lobby groups. There are no indications that these actors are ready to soften their stance. The European Union seems to prefer taking the Hong Kong Conference/July 2004 General Council decisions as the starting point for developing future work program and seek balancing of gains of Talks on overall basis as well as in each area.
The USA is reported to suggest fresh approaches reluctance to offer concessions on their domestic support measures and seeking greater services and non-agriculture market access in newly emerging economies (China India Brazil etc.).
The emerging economiesare for protecting their agriculture support programs (such as food subsidy) and hesitant to open their market of non-agriculture products .
The interest of developing countries continues to be on getting effective differential and more favorable treatment in obtaining as well as offering market access.
Thus despite Bali decisions to bring back the negotiations on track the task is difficult. So far the progress is slow.
Beside serious efforts to iron out the differences at the negotiation table basic changes on domestic front are required for agreeing on the work program by the new deadline of July 2015 and concluding the Talks as early as possible.
The first half of 2015 is crucial and all formal and informal avenues should be explored to arrive at consensual decisions. The stakes are high and any further delay could damage the multilateral trading system with serious consequences for world trade and development.