HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "Commerce mondial: des parlementaires plaident pour des progrès à l'OMC
·         HYPERLINK \l "Kazakh Foreign Minister hopes country to join WTO in 2015
·         HYPERLINK \l "Obama attacks Europe over technology protectionism
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S. ag groups seek faster EU approval for biotech imports
·         HYPERLINK \l "Ecuador impondría nueva salvaguardia más elevada que sería perjudicial para exportaciones peruanas
·         HYPERLINK \l "Ignoring US demand, India to continue sops for textile exporters
·         HYPERLINK \l "Antidumping duty imposed on imports of graphite electrodes
·         HYPERLINK \l "Vietnam: Anti-dumping protectionism - A double edged sword
·         HYPERLINK \l "Ukraine's goods trade deficit narrows sharply in 2014 as imports plunge
·         HYPERLINK \l "Greece bailout talks collapse in acrimony
 
 
Commerce mondial: des parlementaires plaident pour des progrès à l'OMC 
16 February 2015
AWP Swiss News
 
Genève (awp/ats) - Réunis lundi à Genève, des parlementaires ont plaidé pour une conclusion rapide des négociations du cycle de Doha à l'Organisation mondiale du commerce (OMC). Ils ont appelé les gouvernements à redoubler d'efforts.

La conférence, organisée conjointement par l'Union interparlementaire (UIP) et le parlement européen, coïncide avec le 20e anniversaire de la création de l'OMC en 1995.

Selon le projet de document final soumis aux 250 participants, dont l'adoption est prévue mardi, les parlementaires "regrettent que les négociations aient progressé si lentement ces deux dernières décennies". Ils enjoignent les pays membres de l'OMC à "redoubler d'efforts pour mener à bien le cycle de Doha, qui a débuté il y a plus de 13 ans".

Les parlementaires se félicitent de l'approbation par l'OMC de l'accord de Bali sur la facilitation des échanges, visant à réduire les formalités et à rationaliser les procédures douanières. Ils appellent les membres de l'OMC à le ratifier au plus vite et à avancer rapidement dans la mise en oeuvre de tous les éléments du paquet de Bali.

Pas une minute à perdre

Ils préviennent que "les membres de l'OMC n'ont pas une minute à perdre s'ils veulent respecter l'échéance fixée à la fin juillet 2015".

Les parlementaires insistent aussi sur la nécessité d'étudier les modifications à apporter au fonctionnement de l'OMC pour en faire une institution plus efficace, tout en maintenant la règle du consensus. Ils demandent à l'OMC d'intensifier l'assistance technique à destination des pays les moins avancés (PMA), en particulier dans le cadre de l'Aide pour le commerce.

La déclaration finale rappelle en outre que la multiplication des accords commerciaux plurilatéraux, régionaux et bilatéraux ne peut remplacer les accords multilatéraux.

La conférence, organisée autour du thème "Le commerce, un catalyseur pour la paix et l'amélioration des conditions de vie" a été ouverte par le vice-président du parlement européen Olli Rehn, le président de l'organe de règlement des différends (ORD) l'ambassadeur du Mexique Fernando De Mateo et la coprésidente de la conférence la parlementaire suédoise Krister Örnfjäder.

Un dialogue est prévu avec le directeur général de l'OMC Roberto Azevedo et des représentants des principaux groupes de négociation: notamment l'ambassadeur de l'UE Angelos Pangratis, l'ambassadeur de Suisse Remigi Winzap, président du groupe sur l'accès aux marchés pour les produits non agricoles, l'ambassadeur de Colombie Gabriel Duque, président de la session du Conseil du commerce des services.

 
Kazakh Foreign Minister hopes country to join WTO in 2015   
17 February 2015
Central Asia News
 
Kazakh Foreign Minister Erlan Idrissov said yesterday at the parliament meeting that Astana hopes to join the World Trade Organization (WTO) this year.

He reminded that Kazakhstan has completed talks with EU on the new enhanced partnership deal and the negotiations of the country's accession to the WTO. "We hope that the remaining processes will end this year,” Idrissov said.

The Minister pointed out the great importance of the WTO for Kazakhstan. He said that it was significant not only economically but also politically.

"This is a balancer of our global economic relations. Through the WTO, we will get access to an extensive global trading system, to its standards, rules and regulations. These same rules and regulations will apply to Kazakhstan in trade with other countries. So for us the WTO is a signifier of growth, which we are consistently working towards," Tengrinews cited the minister as saying.

 
Obama attacks Europe over technology protectionism
Murad Ahmed in London, Duncan Robinson in Brussels and Richard Waters in San Francisco
Financial Times 
February 16, 2015 12:09 pm
 
European officials have hit back at Barack Obama for suggesting that efforts to restrain Silicon Valley companies on the continent were a form of protectionism.

The US president said over the weekend that European scrutiny of companies such as Google and Facebook was driven by the “commercial interests” of the region’s tech companies who struggle to compete with better American rivals.
FirstFT is our new essential daily email briefing of the best stories from across the web

“We have owned the internet. Our companies have created it, expanded it, perfected it in ways that they can’t compete. And oftentimes what is portrayed as high-minded positions on issues sometimes is just designed to carve out some of their commercial interests,” Mr Obama said in an interview with technology news site Re/Code. 
 
European’s politicians and institutions reacted forcefully to the president’s remarks. 
 
“This point — that regulations are only there to shelter our companies — is out of line,” said a European Commission spokesperson. 
 
“Regulation should make it easier for non-EU companies to access the single market,” she went on. “It is in [US companies’] interest that things are enforced in a uniform manner.” 
 
In the past year, Europe’s authorities have made a concerted effort to rein in the power and reach of leading US tech companies, often in response to concerns over US internet surveillance, tax avoidance and commercial dominance.

Google, in particular, has been a target in the region, with an EU competition probe into the search company entering its fifth year. Earlier this month, privacy watchdogs threatened legal action against Google over its implementation of the continent’s new “right to be forgotten” law.

Last year, the European parliament overwhelmingly backed a motion that called on regulators to consider the break-up of Google. Though the vote was merely symbolic, it was designed to put pressure on the European Commission to take a tougher line on the company. 
 
The vote led US Republican and Democratic politicians to send open letters expressing alarm over “proposals that seem to target US technology companies”.

In defence of Google and Facebook, sometimes the European response here is more commercially driven than anything else
- Barack Obama

“In defence of Google and Facebook, sometimes the European response here is more commercially driven than anything else,” Mr Obama said.

“As I’ve said, there are some countries like Germany, given its history with the Stasi, that are very sensitive to these issues. But sometimes their vendors — their service providers who, you know, can’t compete with ours — are essentially trying to set up some roadblocks for our companies to operate effectively there.”

Google and Facebook declined to comment.

Ramon Tremosa, a Catalan MEP who sponsored the parliament’s motion on Google, said: “President Obama forgets or maybe isn’t aware that among the dozens of complainants in the Google antitrust case, there are several US companies. 
 
“Some companies, like Yelp, have no problem going public. Others don’t want to attack Google openly because they fear retaliation measures, such as demotion/exclusion and penalties supposedly applied by Google to some rival companies.” 
 
Other big US companies are struggling to navigate difficult terrain in Europe. Uber, the taxi app company, faces opposition from incumbent groups across the continent. Some countries and cities, particularly in France and Germany, are considering or enforcing bans on the San Francisco-based company operating in their locales.

US tech groups are also under fire for their tax strategies, leading to investigations into their tax avoidance regimes. Last October, the Irish government said it would close a controversial tax loophole — known as “double Irish” — that had been exploited by the likes of Google, Facebook and Apple. 
 
Mr Obama’s defence of US tech companies came during a visit to Silicon Valley last week to show off joint government and corporate efforts to boost cyber security. However, relations between Silicon Valley and Washington have deteriorated in the wake of the Snowden revelations about US surveillance of the internet, with tech executives grumbling privately that the White House has not done enough to reinforce the privacy of their users.

The top executives at Google, Facebook and Yahoo, which had been at the centre of the most damaging surveillance revelations, sent security officials to the event rather than attend in person, a decision that was seen as a snub for the president’s attempt to show a strong united front.
 
 
U.S. ag groups seek faster EU approval for biotech imports 
Chris Gillis 
16 February 2015
American Shipper
 
A dozen large U.S. agricultural trade groups have asked the European Health and Food Safety Commission to speed up its process for consideration of draft import authorizations for 13 new biotechnology products.

The import authorizations, some of which have been awaiting the commission’s approval for more than a year, include products such as soybeans, corn, canola and cotton.

“All of these products have received positive European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) scientific assessments and have been considered by the Standing Committee on the Food Chain and Animal Health and the Appeals Committee,” the groups wrote. “Timely action by the European Commission will avoid the risk of disruption to the essential supply of feedstocks needed by the EU’s livestock, poultry and feed industries, which are more than 70 percent dependent on imported protein.”

The last import authorizations for new biotech crops were issued by the European Commission in November 2013.

In the letter, the groups also urged the health and food safety commission to respect the European Union’s obligations under the World Trade Organization with regard to timelier biotech deregulation decisions, which were reaffirmed by the WTO in a 2006 dispute settlement decision that found that the European Union was not complying with its international obligations to consider import authorizations on a timely basis.

The groups that signed the letter include the Agricultural Retailers Association, National Corn Growers Association, American Farm Bureau Federation, National Cotton Council, American Seed Trade Association, National Oilseed Processors Association, American Soybean Association, U.S. Canola Association, Biotechnology Industry Organization, U.S. Grains Council, Corn Refiners Association, U.S. Soybean Export Council, and National Association of Wheat Growers.
 
 
Ecuador impondría nueva salvaguardia más elevada que sería perjudicial para exportaciones peruanas
16 February 2015
Gestión Online
 
Esta acción procedería ante la resolución de la Secretaria General de la Comunidad Andina (SGCAN), que decidió dejar sin efecto la aplicación de salvaguardias [http://gestion.pe/noticias-de-salvaguardias-36116?href=nota_tag] cambiaria a productos de Colombia y Perú.

El Gobierno de Ecuador estaría imponiendo en la última semana de febrero una salvaguardia global, que sería de aplicación a todos los países incluyendo al Perú, y que podría hasta alcanzar un porcentaje mayor a la medida cambiaria que quiso implementar recientemente sin éxito, informó la Cámara de Comercio de Lima [http://gestion.pe/noticias-de-camara-comercio-lima-298?href=nota_tag] (CCL [http://gestion.pe/noticias-de-ccl-335?href=nota_tag]) .

El director ejecutivo del Instituto de Investigación y Desarrollo de Comercio Exterior de la CCL (Idexcam), Carlos Posada [http://gestion.pe/noticias-de-carlos-posada-214?href=nota_tag] , afirmó que posible decisión puede generar graves pérdidas para la industria nacional.

“Este tipo de medidas representan un grave problema para nuestros exportadores, pues un constante aumento de los aranceles, además de una serie de restricciones que se han impuesto para ingresar al territorio ecuatoriano, están desalentando nuestras exportaciones al país del norte", manifestó.

Posada explicó que la posible medida se ampararía en las disposiciones de la Organización Mundial de Comercio (OMC), que sí autoriza la aplicación de salvaguardias [http://gestion.pe/noticias-de-salvaguardias-36116?href=nota_tag] siempre que ésta sea para todos los productos que ingresen a un determinado territorio.

En tanto, trascendió que la salvaguardia global se aplicaría inclusive a la Unión Europea, a pesar de que Ecuador tiene un acuerdo comercial vigente con este bloque desde julio del 2014.

“Esperamos con atención las reacciones que el Gobierno peruano tendrá para detener esta nueva amenaza al libre comercio. También reiteramos nuestro constante apoyo a la búsqueda de nuevos mercados, y destacamos que es más importante que nunca aprovechar al máximo los diversos acuerdos comerciales que nuestro país ha suscrito", indicó Posada.

Como se recuerda el pasado 7 de febrero, mediante la resolución N° 1762- 2015, la Secretaría General de la Comunidad Andina no autorizó al Ecuador la aplicación de salvaguardias cambiarias de 21% para los productos originarios de Colombia, y de 7% para los de Perú, pues la medida ecuatoriana carecía de sustento técnico y jurídico.
 
 
Ignoring US demand, India to continue sops for textile exporters 
Amiti Sen 
17 February 2015
Business Line (The Hindu)
 
Says it has until2018 to withdraw the incentives 
In a major relief for textile exporters struggling to maintain their share in an uncertain global market, India has decided to continue with export sops for the sector in the new fiscal and, probably, the following two years as well. This is despite the US demanding that such incentives be done away with immediately.

Washington argues that New Delhi no longer qualifies to give such concessions under the World Trade Organisation (WTO) rules as it attained export competitiveness in the textile sector eight years back.

With India sticking to its stand, the Centre will not feel compelled to withdraw export incentives for the textile sector while announcing the Budget (for 2015-16) or the Foreign Trade Policy.

While not willing to withdraw the sops right away, the Commerce and Textile Ministries have, however, started working on alternative schemes that are WTO compliant, so that export sops for the sector can be replaced over the next three years.

Phase-out period

“The US has been claiming that we need to stop our export sops for the textiles sector from 2015, but we believe that our phase-out period ends in 2018. We will stick to our deadline,” a Commerce Ministry official told BusinessLine .

The sops that will have to be phased out include the popular Focus Product and Focus Market schemes under which exports to targeted markets are incentivised, the EPCG scheme and the interest subvention scheme for export credit.

As per WTO’s Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures, export subsidies can be given only by countries that have not attained export competitiveness, which is defined as attaining a 3.25 per cent share in world trade for a product for two consecutive years. Members get eight years to phase out their export subsidies once they reach export competitiveness.

New Delhi’s argument is that since the WTO undertook a computation of India’s world trade share following a member’s request only in 2011, and determined that it had retained competitiveness on the basis of data of 2009-10, it can be inferred that the phase-out period would end in 2018.

As per statistics compiled by the WTO, India’s share in world trade for textile and clothing was 4.66 per cent in 2013 with exports worth $37 billion. Textile and clothing exports contribute more than 10 per cent to India’s export basket.
 
 
Antidumping duty imposed on imports of graphite electrodes 
 
New Delhi, Feb 16 (PTI) The government has imposed an anti-dumping duty of up to USD 922.03 per tonne on imports of a product used in steel plants, a step to protect the domestic industry from below-cost shipments.

The Finance Ministry imposed the import duty on a type of graphite electrodes based on recommendations of the Directorate General of Anti-Dumping Duty (DGAD) for five years. The duty ranges between USD 278.19 and USD 922.03.

The main use of graphite electrodes is in melting of steel.

The DGAD had initiated and conducted investigation into dumping, injury and causal links between dumping and injury to the domestic industry.

In its final findings, the DGAD said it "is of the opinion that definitive measure is required to be imposed to offset dumping and injury being caused to the domestic industry" and recommended the imposition of the anti-dumping duty.

It said the production, sales and capacity utilisation of the domestic industry has declined in the period of investigation (January 2012-December 2012) after a healthy growth during the previous years, while imports increased substantially over the injury period (April 2009-December 2012).

The DGAD had carried out the probe into the dumping on complaints of domestic manufacturers -- HEG and Graphite India.

Countries initiate anti-dumping probes to check if domestic industry has been hurt because of a surge in below-cost imports. As a counter-measure, they impose duties under the multilateral WTO regime. PTI NKD NS
 
 
Vietnam: Anti-dumping protectionism - A double edged sword 
17 February 2015
Thai News Service
 
Section: General News - Despite World Trade Organization (WTO) commitments made by countries around the globe to liberalize trade and fight against protectionism, the tendency to impose trade-restricting measures and harm exports of other countries has been on the upswing.

Against the backdrop of a world economy in recovery, protectionism is particularly important because it runs contradictory to international integration and fuels continuing economic uncertainty. It also damages value chains.

During the past 20 years there have been a total of 80 trade-unfriendly measures, principally anti-dumping lawsuits, lodged against Vietnam according to the Competitiveness Management Department under the Ministry of Industry and Trade.

The number of measures filed affecting Vietnamese exports has been trending upwards, with the US accounting for the highest number, 20%. The European Union (EU) made up 15% of the total cases and India and Turkey, 11%.

The number of incidences for which countries have imposed new export restrictions has also been on the uptick, a trend seen as worrisome for the detrimental consequences such practices can have for both the global commodity markets and value chains.

Typical methods of protectionism are import tariffs, quotas, subsidies or tax cuts to local businesses, new import licensing procedures, reference values, minimum transaction prices or banning trade altogether.

These measures have most seriously impacted the Vietnamese seafood, garment and textile and footwear exporters, causing them to lose markets.

Notably, however, protectionism measures have not been that well understood nor utilized by Vietnam. As of September, Vietnam had conducted merely three anti-dumping investigations on imported goods.

The only measure that was successful resulted in Vietnam imposing an anti-dumping duty on cold-rolled stainless steel from China, Malaysia, Indonesia and Taiwan (China) from October 5, 2014 forward.

Vietnamese exporters should increase links amongst themselves and seek information on international legal regulations to reduce losses to the manufacturing sector by unfair trade practices, said Nguyen Huu Truong Hung at the Competitiveness Management Department.

Trade protection measures are a valid tool the WTO allows its member countries to use legally if member countries fail to strictly comply with agreements of the WTO on anti-dumping, anti-subsidy and self-defence capital.

Deputy Minister of Industry and Trade Do Thang Hai in turn noted many countries have used anti-dumping lawsuits quite effectively as tools to fight against unfair competitiveness of foreign importers.

If found guilty of unfair trade practices a foreign company would be prohibited from exporting to the Vietnam market for a period of five years, which could be extended if investigations show the practices were continuing.

Anti-dumping lawsuits and other measures should not be viewed as protectionism measures, but rather as trade policy tools to protect fair and balance trade, Hai underscored. - VOV

 
Ukraine's goods trade deficit narrows sharply in 2014 as imports plunge
 
KIEV, Feb 16 (Reuters) - Ukraine's trade deficit for goods narrowed sharply last year to $468.3 million, official data showed on Monday, but that was due to a drop in imports following a gas pricing row with Russia and a sharp depreciation of the hryvnia currency.

Ukraine's economy has been hammered by a year of political upheaval and war, putting the former Soviet republic on the brink of bankruptcy.

The conflict with pro-Russian rebels in Ukraine's industrial eastern regions has hit the country's main exports such as steel.

Ukraine's total exports fell 13.5 percent last year, to $53.9 billion, while imports plunged 28.3 percent to $54.381 billion, the state statistics service said.

The trade deficit narrowed from $13.5 billion in 2013.

Ukraine secured a new $40 billion, four-year IMF-led international financing deal last week to prop up its finances. Its hryvnia currency plunged 30 against the dollar after the central bank was forced this month to scrap the currency's peg to the dollar and move towards a free float.

Metals, agriculture products and grain were Ukraine's main exports last year. The country imported mostly fuel, machinery, equipment and chemical products, the statistics service said in a statement.

Ukraine is trying to reduce its reliance on Russia for gas supplies, saying it is buying Russian gas at above market prices. (Reporting by Pavel Polityuk; Writing by Alessandra Prentice; Editing by Susan Fenton) 
 
 
Greece bailout talks collapse in acrimony
Peter Spiegel in Brussels 
Financial Times
Last updated: February 17, 2015 8:16 am
 
A crucial meeting of eurozone finance ministers over the future of Greece’s bailout broke down in acrimony after Athens angrily rejected the bloc’s insistence that it agree to complete its current €172bn rescue as “absurd” and “unacceptable”.

It is the second time in five days that negotiations between the new anti-austerity Greek government and its eurozone creditors have collapsed and it means Athens, whose public finances are deteriorating fast, could soon be left with no European financial backstop.
 
The eurozone gave Athens until Wednesday night to reverse course and seek an extension of the current programme, which is due to expire at the end of next week.

Market reaction to the breakdown of the meeting was cautious in early trading on Tuesday. After initial see-saws, the euro was largely flat against tthe dollar at $1.136. The Greek 10-year yield jumped 15 basis points to 9.46 per cent, while the three-year yield has climbed 65 bp to 17.91 per cent.

Jeroen Dijsselbloem, chairman of the eurogroup of finance ministers, said on Monday the time available for a Greek request was almost up: “We can use this week, but that’s about it,” he said. “There was a very strong opinion across the whole eurogroup that the next step has to come from the Greek authorities.”

Monday’s talks collapsed when Yanis Varoufakis, the Greek finance minister, strongly objected to a draft statement requiring Athens to prolong the bailout and implement the economic reform requirements that are included in the programme.

Speaking after the meeting, Mr Varoufakis for the first time said publicly he had been prepared to agree an extension of the existing programme, but under different conditions than the eurogroup ultimately demanded.

He said an earlier plan presented to him by Pierre Moscovici, the European Commission’s economic chief, for a four-month prolongation was in line with Greek thinking and he had been ready to sign it before it was changed. “I have no doubt there is going to be an agreement in the end,” he added.

Eurozone officials had viewed Monday’s meeting as a make-or-break session, with time running out for any bailout extension to be approved in national parliaments.

Although officials said they could still get an extension approved if a request comes before the end of the week, Monday’s impasse suggests further talks may be futile.

Without an EU backstop in place, eurozone officials are concerned market turmoil could begin anew and are particularly worried that it could spark a bank run in Greece.

Athens has insisted that it has enough funding to keep the government running for several months but some eurozone officials believe it could run short of cash next month.

The draft statement that precipitated the collapse of the talks, obtained by the Financial Times, said that Greece would agree to a six-month “technical extension” giving time for “work on a follow-up arrangement”.
 
“The Greek authorities gave their firm commitment to refrain from unilateral action and will work in close agreement with its European and international partners, especially in the field of tax policy, privatisation, labour market reforms, financial sector and pensions,” it added.
 
EU officials said Mr Moscovici’s plan was presented after a midday phone call between his boss, European Commission president Jean-Claude Juncker, and Alexis Tsipras, the Greek prime minister.

According to an official briefed on the talks, the two men agreed to an outline that included several commitments from Athens during the extension period: Greece would pay all its creditors, not to roll back any of the economic reforms, maintain a budget surplus, and abide by a debt relief agreement reached in November 2012.

In exchange, the eurozone would refrain from forcing Athens to adopt measures it believed would damage the economy and the Greece’s three international creditors — the commission, the International Monetary Fund and the European Central Bank — would begin work on a “new deal for Greece”, essentially a third bailout.

Eurozone officials said they did not believe Mr Juncker’s proposal was substantively different to the communiqué rejected by Mr Varoufakis, but EU officials acknowledged that the later statement did not contain many of the elements Mr Tsipras had negotiated with Mr Juncker.

Mr Dijsselbloem said the eurogroup was prepared to meet again on Friday but only if Athens specifically requested an extension and committed to completing the terms of the current bailout.

“There should also be a commitment from the Greek authorities to successfully conclude the programme,” Mr Dijsselbloem said. “We should have assurance that is the intention.”

That insistence appeared to be where the talks broke down, and could be a rift that is impossible to bridge. Mr Varoufakis said Athens would continue to refuse to implement the existing bailout: “We do not believe it is a programme that can be successfully completed.”

Both he and Mr Dijsselbloem said they remain hopeful that an agreement could be reached before the end of the week. But, the recriminations appeared to further fray already well-worn nerves on both sides.

Mr Varoufakis vowed not to give in to the eurogroup’s “ultimatum”, and earlier in the day, Wolfgang Schäuble, German finance minister accused Athens of “behaving rather irresponsibly”.
END


  ________________________________  
Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.