Rada ratifies protocol on amending agreement establishing WTO 
Nairobi ministerial: In search of convergence
WTO: 500 diferencias planteadas en la OMC
Nairobi annonce un tournant pour l'avenir de l'OMC 
Russia and China will support continuation of Doha Round at WTO meeting in Nairobi - Russian Minister of Economic Development 
APEC business group wants resumption of WTO talks 
Trade Ministers Must Aim for Pragmatic Deal in Nairobi 'Homecoming' Talks [guest column] 
Brazil to ask G20 members not to raise agricultural subsidies 
'No tough rules' for foreign bank cards 
Pourquoi le Toblerone ou le Rivella pourraient être menacés par l'OMC
Algeria: Minister says discriminatory dual price for fuel no longer used 
 
Rada ratifies protocol on amending agreement establishing WTO 
Interfax: Ukrainian General Newswire, KYIV. Nov 10 -- The Verkhovna Rada, Ukraine's parliament, has ratified a protocol on amending the Marrakesh agreement which established the World Trade Organization (WTO). 
A total of 255 lawmakers supported the draft law on the ratification of the protocol (No. 0069) on November 4. According to an explanatory note to the draft law, it is aimed at fulfilling internal state procedures by Ukraine that are required to enforce the protocol. The ratification of the protocol and the application of the agreement will allow for cutting the cost of customs clearance, increasing the transparency and efficiency of transactions of public agencies, boosting trade flow, public revenue and foreign direct investment, as well as cutting corruption, expanding cooperation between private and public sector participants, and improving the development of small and medium sized businesses. The ratification of the protocol by Ukraine and its application will improve the country's position in the global business community and would give a positive signal to international trade participants and investors that an effective and transparent chain has been created in the state. In December 2013, WTO members concluded negotiations on a Trade Facilitation Agreement at the Bali Ministerial Conference. On 27 November, the WTO adopted the 2014 Protocol of Amendments to the agreement establishing the WTO. 
 
Nairobi ministerial: In search of convergence
The Financial Express, Wasi Ahmed, 11 Nov, 2015 -- Notwithstanding his expression of unrelenting hope ever since he took over, WTO Director General Roberto Azevêdo hardly ever tends to skirt around the controversies likely to block the way of getting things through. In the run up to the WTO Nairobi Ministerial conference, Mr.  Azevêdo is not all smiles as he was after the Bali Ministerial where it looked like a major convergence to pursue the stalled Doha Development Agenda (DDA) issues. Addressing a meeting of the trade ministers from the African, Caribbean and Pacific countries in Brussels last week, the Director-General, while outlining the significance of the forthcoming WTO ministerial in Nairobi in December, dwelt on the state of play in negotiations as well as the difficulties in advancing the core DDA issues, and some of the potential negotiated outcomes which might be achieved in Nairobi. There is a clear note of discomfort, if not dismay, when he told the trade ministers, "Whatever we deliver in Nairobi, clearly it would not be viable or credible to announce it as a satisfactory conclusion of the DDA. So how do we take forward the outstanding issues after Nairobi? There is a clear divergence among the membership on this point." No one expected the Nairobi conference to be conclusive because of the many long standing irritants, but the fact that the Director General (DG) himself does not consider the outcomes viable well ahead of the event, suggests that the conference, like many in the past, is but a formality set to be observed with all solemnity and seriousness. Yes, the DG is looking forward to taking the issues after the Nairobi conference assuming there might be a few more on the already overburdened shoulder of the world body to put up with.  As for the likely outcomes of the forthcoming ministerial conference, a forward movement on export competition in agriculture is one. Azevêdo said this would be the WTO's most significant negotiated outcome on agriculture to date, which has long been the top priority for developing countries. In addition, he underlined the importance of development and issues related to least developed countries (LDCs), which should be at the heart of any agreement in Nairobi. But there is a general sense of scepticism whether all the core issues of the DDA would remain on the negotiating agenda, such as agriculture, market access, and services. There is an added problem too. Even if these are on the agenda, there is no agreement on how negotiations on these should take place -- under the present Doha framework, or under some new negotiating modality. Given that divergent views are almost inevitable, the most obvious difficulty fraught with future negotiations would be to find a way to deal with the divergences. Although negotiations on a range of issues are taking place, both within and outside the WTO, the question of addressing them in a meaningful way amid the divergences is indeed vital to how they are going to affect global trade in the days ahead. As the DG mentioned to the trade ministers, "A huge amount is at stake in the coming weeks -- in terms of the potential Nairobi deliverables, and in terms of what success, or failure would mean for the future of the WTO. I urge you all to recognise what is at stake." Needless to clarify, it is convergence that is at stake. There are many irritants that are likely to crop up with increasing divisions among the members. The issue of public stock-holding for food security, for example, is one on which there has not been any progress in terms of consensus as yet. The LDC issues -- quite a number of them besides the most talked-about duty-free, quota-free (DFQF) market access -- need to be agreed upon, not only among the facilitators but also among the beneficiaries. Issues pertaining to the coverage of S&D (special and differential) treatment in a host of areas, fulfilling commitments for LDCs' capacity building including that in the field of infrastructure, the rolling forward of the Enhanced Integrated Framework (EIF), reinforcing the Aid for Trade package are all critical issues that need to be firmed up with a clear road map. The global trade scenario, envisioned at the time of the formation of the WTO under the ambit of its rule-based system twenty years ago, has clearly moved away to a different domain in recent times.  This is mainly due to the overwhelming growth of the regional trade agreements (RTAs), often found more beneficial for countries as they are in a position to decide on what is good or bad for them in groupings of their own choice. It is sometimes alleged that the failure of the WTO to deal with the long-stalled and emerging trade issues on an equitable plane is largely instrumental in prompting many countries to seek recourse to RTAs, for their own survival. The latest to happen in this arena -- and with a bang -- is the Trans Pacific Partnership (TPP). With the big powers increasingly busy with themselves rather than meddling in affairs that are not overtly gainful such as the WTO multilateralism, it is really a big challenge for the world trade body to speak out its key agenda of level-playing field in an increasingly divided world. Amid the uncertainties, there was some relief of late for the LDCs with the consensus on extension of pharmaceutical patents waiver. Following a decision taken by the WTO's Council for Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) on November 06, the WTO members agreed that the LDCs would be allowed to maintain maximum flexibility in their approach to patenting pharmaceutical products until, at least, 2033. The decision has been hailed by the Bangladesh ambassador to Geneva and coordinator of the LDC group in the WTO, as "historic," adding that it "will assure the LDCs the necessary legal certainty to procure or to produce generic medicines for those who need it most but do not have any access." This, no doubt, is reassuring for the LDCs, particularly Bangladesh.
One only hopes that at the Nairobi conference, things do not turn too inflexible to bring some semblance of convergence - despite the apparent divergences.
 
WTO: 500 diferencias planteadas en la OMC
4-traders.com, 11/10/2015 | 12:30pm US/Eastern
Since the WTO was established on 1 January 1995, its members have initiated disputes covering a variety of trade concerns, and developing and developed members have brought complaints in about equal numbers. While the majority of complaints have focused on WTO rules regarding subsidies and anti-dumping, members have also challenged various tariff regimes, food safety measures, commitments in services schedules, labelling and packaging rules, animal welfare measures, and environmental schemes. Of the 500 cases filed, just over half have reached the litigation stage, suggesting that the system's requirement for the members concerned to try to find a solution by consulting with each other helps to avoid many cases entering the litigation phase. The 500th dispute was submitted on 10 November, when Pakistan filed a request for consultations with South Africa regarding South Africa's provisional anti-dumping duty on cement from Pakistan. The two sides will now consult with the aim of arriving at a mutually agreed solution. A total of 300 disputes were brought under the dispute settlement system of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) - the predecessor to the WTO - over a period of 47 years. Although the GATT system worked reasonably well, the dispute settlement system introduced with the establishment of the WTO in 1995 was designed to ensure a more effective and reliable dispute settlement mechanism, including by requiring the automatic establishment of dispute panels following the second request by a WTO member and the adoption of dispute settlement reports unless all members decide otherwise. The WTO mechanism also introduced the possibility to appeal panel reports, a rare feature in international dispute settlement at the time. 'There is no doubt that the WTO dispute settlement system has served the membership extremely well,' said DG Azevêdo. 'It is a system recognized the world over for providing fair, high quality results that respond to both developing and developed members.' DG Azevêdo acknowledged however that 'the success has brought challenges and while the system is still faster than most if not all international dispute settlement systems operating today, we are clearly in a situation where the high demand is testing our capacity'.  Disputes are generally much more complex and voluminous now than they were in the first decade of the WTO. As the jurisprudence has grown, so have the size and nature of parties' submissions and the length of panel and Appellate Body reports. The disputes of today are very different from those in the minds of the drafters of the dispute settlement rules, and appeals are not the rare occurrences members thought they would be. As a result, members and the WTO Secretariat will have to adjust to the new world of WTO dispute settlement. 'We are allocating more resources to dispute settlement and are working with members to find solutions. I am confident that we can work together to ensure that the dispute settlement system continues to provide members with the highest possible level of service,' said the Director-General. In the latest dispute, Pakistan filed a request for consultations with South Africa regarding South Africa's imposition of a provisional anti-dumping duty on Portland cement from Pakistan. The request was submitted to the WTO Secretariat on 10 November; further information will be available within the next few days in document HYPERLINK "https://www.wto.org/" WT/DS500/1 
The request for consultations formally initiates a dispute in the WTO. Consultations give the parties an opportunity to discuss the matter and to find a satisfactory solution without proceeding further with litigation. After 60 days, if consultations have failed to resolve the dispute, the complainant may request adjudication by a panel. 
Some figures about the how often WTO members have used the dispute settlement system: 
Summary of disputes (as of 10 November 2015) 
To date, 500 disputes have been brought to the WTO, of which: 
110 disputes have been resolved bilaterally or withdrawn 
282 disputes have proceeded to the litigation phase 
For the remainder, no outcome has been notified to the WTO.  A total of 102 members have participated in a dispute either as a complainant or a respondent or as a third party. That means 63% of the membership has used the system.  The authorization for a member to retaliate once another member has been found to be in violation of its WTO obligations has been given 18 times, which means only 10% of the disputes have reached this outcome of last resort.  The compliance rate with dispute settlement rulings is very high, at around 90% 
 
Nairobi annonce un tournant pour l'avenir de l'OMC 
L'institution basée à Genève envisage d'enterrer Doha, cycle de négociations jugé trop ambitieux et moribond depuis son lancement en 2001
Le Temps, HYPERLINK "http://www.letemps.ch/auteur/206" Dejan Nikolic, 10 novembre 2015 à 12:45 --  Doha devait à l’origine durer trois ans. Mais ce cycle de négociations est au point mort depuis son lancement en 2001. La tentation est forte, parmi les membres de l’Organisation mondiale du commerce (OMC), qui fête cette année ses 20 ans d’existence, de «passer à autre chose». La prochaine Ministérielle doit se tenir début décembre à Nairobi. Elle est censée s’inscrire dans le succès (relatif) obtenu lors du dernier sommet de Bali en 2013. Toutefois, deux camps s’opposent. Ceux qui prônent le statu quo, mettant en exergue leurs besoins en termes de développement. Contre les membres envisageant de faire table rase pour proposer de nouveaux sujets, davantage d’actualité pour eux, comme les investissements, les marchés publics, les technologies de l’information, le droit à la concurrence, les services, les chaînes de valeurs mondiales, etc. Les observateurs, eux, s’accordent à dire que cette étape africaine – première du nom – devrait se solder par la mise au rebut de Doha et le lancement d’un nouveau round de pourparlers baptisé «cycle de Nairobi».
Réforme poussée en vue 
Vers quelle dynamique se dirige-t-on? Les objectifs de Doha ne seront très vraisemblablement pas atteints à Nairobi. L’OMC a donc déjà entrepris un exercice d’introspection approfondi, pour tenter de ramener l’épicentre du commerce international dans son giron. Ce d’autant plus que les initiatives d’accords bilatéraux et régionaux, lancées dans ce contexte de frustration induite par l’absence de résultats à Genève, pullulent. «Nous nous dirigeons vers deux résultats au Kenya: un mini-paquet, comprenant notamment à des aspects chers aux pays les moins avancés, de même que des orientations pour les futures négociations au sein de l’OMC, y compris sur les thèmes de Doha», estime pour sa part Didier Chambovey, ambassadeur helvétique chargé des accords commerciaux. Et le représentant de la Confédération au sein de l’OMC de commenter: «Jusqu’ici, nos travaux n’ont pas fonctionné. En l’état, il est peu probable qu’ils fonctionnent dans un avenir proche. Force est de constater que nous avons été trop ambitieux, pensant que nous pourrions reproduire l’exploit de l’Uruguay round. Mais les Big Bang commerciaux, à l’échelle multilatérale, n’arrivent qu’une à deux fois par siècles.»
Un certain nombre de pays – Suisse incluse – planchent ainsi depuis plusieurs mois sur des méthodes de travail alternatives pour sortir l’OMC de l’ornière. «Une des pistes consiste à adopter une approche plus sectorielle, sous forme de négociations plurilatérales, avec une masse critique suffisante et selon une architecture ouverte, permettant à tous les membres de se joindre au consensus, mais par étapes. L’enjeu, pour la Suisse, reste de maintenir une OMC forte, quitte à adopter un mécanisme plus raisonnable», conclut Didier Chambovey.
 
Russia and China will support continuation of Doha Round at WTO meeting in Nairobi - Russian Minister of Economic Development 
ITAR-TASS World Service, 10 November 2015 13:46 --Russia and China will support continuation of Doha Round at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO meeting in Nairobi - Russian Minister of Economic Development 
BEIJING, November 10. /TASS/. Russia and China will support continuation of the Doha Round at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO ministerial meeting in Nairobi in December 2015, Russian Minister of Economic Development Alexey Ulyukayev said on Tuesday after the Sino-Russian trade and economic cooperation sub-commission meeting. 
"My Chinese counterpart and I said very firmly we will take this position. We should continue developing the agenda for the next cycle," the minister said. Discussion is currently underway whether to end the Doha Round at the forthcoming conference in December or continue preparing agenda of this round later on, Ulyukayev added. 
The Doha Round launched in 2001 is the latest round of trade negotiations among the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members. Its aim is to achieve major reform of the international trading system through the introduction of lower trade barriers and revised trade rules. However, negotiations are stalled until now, particularly because developed economies refuse to abolish subsidies for their agricultural producers. 
 
APEC business group wants resumption of WTO talks 
Manila Bulletin, 11 November 2015 -- The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) Business Advisory Council (ABAC) seeks the resumption of the stalled HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) talks. 
Doris Magsaysay-Ho, who chairs the ABAC 2015, said this is part of the 23 recommendations the council will present to the leaders of the 21 HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" APEC member economies when they meet next week. “The ABAC supports the multilateral trading system,” Magsaysay-Ho said. As a rules-based, transparent, and non-discriminatory global trading system, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO remains to be the best option to counter protectionism, the ABAC said in its recommendations. “The ABAC urges the early implementation of the Trade Facilitation Agreement by the 10th WTO Ministerial Conference in December this year. The ABAC calls on HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" APEC economies to lead in seeking to reinvigorate and conclude the Doha Round of multilateral trade negotiations,” it said. The Trade Facilitation Agreement seeks to expedite the movement, release, and clearance of goods, seeking cooperation, mostly with customs authorities. Negotiations in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's Doha Round, which seeks to lower trade barriers around the world and thus facilitate increased global trade, were stalled after a breakdown in talks in 2008 over agriculture, industrial tariffs and non-tariff barriers, services, and trade remedies between developed and developing nations. Since the breakdown of talks, there have been repeated attempts to revive them. At the same time, the ABAC wants HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" APEC leaders to support the Trade in Services Agreement negotiations, for the further liberalization of trade in services. “Identifying and addressing non-tariff barriers that inhibit access to markets, including finding practical ways to engage and empower business to take the lead in these efforts” are important, said the business leaders of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" APEC economies. Magsaysay-Ho conceded that the Trade in Services Agreement is particularly problematic because it involves the movement of people across borders. She however said services are the next big thing in world trade. The ABAC also supports the consensus reached by 54 HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members on the expansion of the product coverage of the Information Technology Agreement, which seeks to completely eliminate duties on IT products covered by the Agreement. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" APEC business groups “strongly urge HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" APEC economies which are participating in the negotiations to lead the final conclusion of the said negotiations without delay”, the council said in its recommendations. (PCOO-APEC Communications Group) 
 
Trade Ministers Must Aim for Pragmatic Deal in Nairobi 'Homecoming' Talks [guest column] 
All Africa, By Stephen Karau, Nov 10, 2015 (All Africa Global Media via COMTEX) -- Nairobi has been on the radar globally as the world discusses the upcoming Tenth World Trade Organization Ministerial Conference, known as MC10, to be held in the city in December. In October dozens of trade ministers gathered in Brussels to grapple with a crucial question: how can the Nairobi meeting on international trade - the first of its kind on African soil - deliver for the world's most vulnerable countries? In the Belgian capital, many of the countries most affected by inequalities in world trade met first in an HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" African Union (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" AU) meeting and later in a gathering of the Africa Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) group of states. These two groups of countries see the conference in Kenya, as the first in one of their member states, as a homecoming - and hope that it will deliver results worthy of a homecoming. The trade ministers in Brussels discussed the urgent business of developing a common position on what they want to advocate and achieve in Nairobi. The countries of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" AU and ACP share a common understanding on numerous trade issues fundamental to the growth of their economies and the development of their people. The Doha Development Agenda (DDA) was a big talking point. In the Qatar capital, in 2001, countries designed a rich agenda aimed at lifting the economies of the poorest nations by placing development concerns front and centre. The most pivotal issues in the agenda are yet to bear fruit, and members attending the October meetings pondered how countries could build a consensus that would allow Nairobi to offer new impetus to the DDA. Among the most fundamental of these Doha issues is a raft of measures that will provide substantive commercial gains to the Least Developed Countries group in agriculture negotiations - allowing a level playing ground and better global market share for farmers in developing countries. Other issues involve goals on delivering flexibilities for Small and Vulnerable Economies (SVE's), enabling them to integrate and perform better in the multilateral trading system. While these issues are crucial to the success of the Nairobi meeting and the future of trade with developing countries, some are also heavily contested. This is why the director-general of the World Trade Organization, Roberto Azevedo, speaking at both the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" AU and the ACP meetings in Brussels, urged participants to map pragmatically what is achievable in Nairobi and aim for that rather than bite off too much and endanger the adoption of a Nairobi declaration. Having the outcome of MC10 captured in a ministerial declaration is important if it is to carry legal weight and enable issues to be implemented or followed up. That is why African, Caribbean and Pacific countries - and all other parties - must map out their targets and ask what is achievable in Nairobi. In the weeks leading up to the Nairobi conference, we must be both idealistic and pragmatic. Idealism calls us to imagine what is possible and go for it. It is good to have a map of where we want to go and what we want to achieve as we pursue fairer trade practices for all countries. Fired by idealism, we must dream of a time when trade policies will benefit as many people as possible, and be guided by a strong determination to boost those in need. Nevertheless idealism alone is not enough. As we go to Nairobi, we must also be pragmatic. We must be strategic in seeking to build quick and solid consensus around goals that can be achieved in the time we have and the set of conditions in play. While seeking to get the best from Nairobi, we must also plan long term. By asking what the best achievement from Nairobi can be, we can also blend some of our immediate ambitions with a strong post-Nairobi framework for crucial issues that may not be accomplished in December. There may be no sure way to know exactly how such a Nairobi outcome and a post-Nairobi work programme would look like at this juncture. However, it seems to me that product must be guided by the old principle of give and take. Both rich and poor nations, developed and developing countries, must give up some ambitions and take up others for a successful Nairobi meeting. They must seek to build bridges with a key focus on better trade for all. In a city which hosts the only world headquarters of United Nations agencies in the global south, countries can also unite to give the world outcomes that can take trade among nations to the next level. The world is hopeful of a good outcome from Africa this December. Will the delegates rise to the occasion? Dr. Stephen Karau is Kenya's Permanent Representative to the UN, WTO and other international organizations in Geneva. 
 
Brazil to ask G20 members not to raise agricultural subsidies 
2015-11-11 13:08 | Xinhua  -- Brazil's ambassador to the Group of 20 (G20) said here Tuesday that his country will ask developed countries not to raise agricultural subsidies due to the fall of prices for raw materials.
Carlos Bicalho Cozendey announced Brazil's stance on the matter at a press conference, saying that at the upcoming G20 summit, to be held in Antalya, Turkey on Nov. 15-16, his country would seek a commitment from the G20 not to raise agricultural subsidies. While most matters related to agricultural subsidies are discussed within the World Trade Organization (WTO) framework, a commitment by the G20 would have a strong moral and political strength, even if it is not legally binding, he said. Cozendey said Brazil tabled the proposal at a meeting of G20 sherpas in September, where Argentina and Russia expressed their support for the idea while the EU said there could be "difficulties" in getting such a commitment. Preventing a rise in agricultural subsidies is "especially crucial for products that play a role in food security," he said, adding Brazil would seek to diversify its exports.
"We are no longer in the scenario of high commodity prices but there is still a sustained demand for products, including from Brazil. The fall in the demand of certain products will be compensated by others," he added.
Explaining his plea, Cozendey said that subsidies for farmers in developed countries would allow them to be better equipped to deal with this low-price scenario, which means that producers in poorer countries would face more pressure and see their food output drop. Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff has confirmed her participation in the G20 meeting in Antalya, where she will also attend a meeting of heads of state from the BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa).
 
'No tough rules' for foreign bank cards 
2015-11-10 21:28 | Reuters-Global Times -- China will not impose tough licensing restrictions on overseas bank card providers seeking to enter the country's $7 trillion card payment market, a senior central bank official said on Tuesday. Significantly, overseas bank card providers such as Visa Inc and MasterCard Inc won't have to establish joint ventures before entering the country's card payment market, Fan Yifei, a vice governor at the People's Bank of China (PBC), told a conference. The remarks came after industry sources told Reuters in October that they were concerned the Chinese government would limit the number of licenses issued to foreign card providers and force them to operate through joint ventures with local partners. "We will actively and cautiously open up China's card payment market according to laws and regulations, and encourage fair competition," Fan said. Foreign card firms, including Visa Inc and MasterCard Inc, have been lobbying for over a decade for direct access to China's cards market, which is projected to become the world's biggest by 2020. The State Council, China's cabinet, announced in April that China would allow foreign firms to apply to the central bank for licenses to operate bank card clearing businesses from June 1, a move aimed at addressing a 2012 ruling by the WTO that found China was discriminating against US credit card firms. Currently China UnionPay Co, a State-controlled consortium, has dominant control on all yuan payment cards issued and used in the country. "As China opens up its market, more institutions will enter the interbank clearing market. UnionPay will compete and collaborate with new joiners," Ge Huayong, chairman of China UnionPay, said following Fan's remarks at the same event. Bank card consumer transactions stood at 42.38 trillion yuan ($6.84 trillion) last year, central bank data showed, representing an annual growth of 33 percent. The PBC released draft implementation regulations in July and the detailed measures will be finalized "as soon as possible," Fan said. A spokeswoman for Visa declined to comment. Reuters could not immediately reach MasterCard for comment.
 
Pourquoi le Toblerone ou le Rivella pourraient être menacés par l'OMC 
La Confédération veut s’engager à supprimer ses subsides à l’exportation de produits agricoles, entrant notamment dans la composition d’aliments typiquement helvétiques. Des marques seraient tentées de délocaliser, le label «Swissness» est en danger
Le Temps, HYPERLINK "http://www.letemps.ch/auteur/206" Dejan Nikolic,  10 novembre 2015 à 15:45 -- L’Organisation mondiale du commerce (OMC) se profile comme le fossoyeur du chocolat «qualité suisse»? Berne entend abandonner, en décembre lors de la Conférence ministérielle de Nairobi (Kenya), ses soutiens à l’exportation de produits agricoles. Fin octobre, le Conseil d'Etat genevois validait le mandat de négociation de la Confédération qui, depuis septembre dernier, «examine avec les organisations professionnelles concernées, la mise sur pied de mesures d’accompagnement alternatives, dorénavant compatibles avec les règles de l’OMC», résument les autorités du bout du lac. Le nouveau dispositif ou concept doit être assorti d’un délai de transition, pour un atterrissage en douceur. Mais à terme, des marques fabriquées en Suisse, comme les chocolats Ragusa ou Toblerone, les biscuits Kambly et autres Rivella – parmi les plus forts symboles de la qualité helvétique reconnue dans le monde entier – pourraient perdre de leur caractère suisse. Explications.
La «loi chocolatière»
Aujourd’hui, seuls la Suisse, le Canada et la Norvège subventionnent encore la vente à l’international de certains articles agroalimentaires (produits transformés, comme le chocolat, les boissons, les biscuits, les pâtes alimentaires, etc.). Berne est d’ailleurs la capitale la plus active au monde dans ce registre. Le mécanisme helvétique de compensation, baptisé «loi chocolatière», a été introduit en 1974. Il vise à corriger les écarts de prix des matières premières entre la Suisse et l’étranger. Ainsi, les fabricants helvétiques qui utilisent dans leurs recettes des denrées locales et donc plus chères, obtiennent une aide financière pour être mis sur pied d’égalité avec leurs concurrents internationaux. Le budget fédéral prévoit à cet effet 115 millions de francs par an, même si une telle somme n’a jamais été intégralement dépensée (67,9 millions théoriquement alloués pour 2016). Cette béquille commerciale, jugée indispensable selon l’industrie alimentaire exportatrice du pays, est ainsi vouée à disparaître. «Nos produits seront moins compétitifs car leurs prix vont prendre l’ascenseur [ndlr: même si les Indiens sont prêts à payer 65% de plus pour du chocolat suisse, contre le double du prix pour les Japonais, d'après Nicolas Bideau, directeur de Présence suisse]. La tentation est forte de transférer une partie de notre production à l’étranger. Mais dans l’immédiat, il s’agira de s’approvisionner en matières premières étrangères, meilleur marché», a lancé le mois passé Rolf Schweiger, président sortant de la Fédération des industries alimentaires suisses.
Un «cocktail empoisonné» 
Le risque, avec ce palliatif (au cas où une dérogation appelée «trafic de perfectionnement» ne serait pas octroyée par la Confédération), tout avec comme la solution de délocalisation? Des mets typiquement helvétiques risquent de devoir abandonner leur suissitude, faute de pouvoir revendiquer le label à la croix blanche sur fond rouge. Car pour prétendre à cette distinction marketing justifiant un prix de vente plus élevé, les fabricants devront, dès 2017, utiliser - a priori, sans aide dorénavant - des ingrédients à 80% d'origine helvétique (farine de blé, sucre, etc.) et transformer leurs articles localement, à savoir sur le territoire suisse. 
Contacté la semaine dernière, l’Institut fédéral de la propriété intellectuelle nous renvoie à l’Office fédéral de l’agriculture, lequel nous oriente auprès du Secrétariat d’État à l’économie. Ce dernier reconnaît le dilemme, suggérant qu'il pourrait être à l'avenir plus difficile de revendiquer l'étiquette «Swissness», poumon de l'économie helvétique. Idem pour Chocosuisse, la faîtière de fabricants de chocolat du pays. «Le franc fort, ajouté aux prix des matières premières suisses sans compensation par loi chocolatière, constitue un «cocktail empoisonné» pour l’exportation», relevait pour sa part, en septembre dernier, Daniel Meyer, directeur de Mondelez Suisse, propriétaire de la marque Toblerone, dont à 97% des volumes issus des usines helvétiques sont destinés à être écoulés sur les marchés étrangers.
 
Algeria: Minister says discriminatory dual price for fuel no longer used 
Bulletin Quotidien Europe, 10 November 2015, Brussels, 09/11/2015 (Agence Europe) - Algeria cannot apply a different price for its gas according to whether it is sold to Algerian companies or foreign companies set up there. At the end of last week, Algeria's Minister for Energy and Mines Salah Khebri stated that there is “a single fuel rate for all”. We cannot ask foreigners to pay more than Algerians, he said, since Algeria's laws do not provide for this. The issue of the “dual price” was raised at the start of the trade negotiations with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU, as the practice is considered discriminatory at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO.  According to Algeria's official news agency APS, Khebri was questioned by a member of parliament who asked if it could be justified that “in a time of crisis, foreign companies could gain” from the “policy of subsidies” that is practised and “which moreover costs the (Algerian) treasury dear”. This favourable treatment is only due when their production is for the Algerian market. “When a company also produces for the external market, it is the international market price that is applied”. (Original version in French by Fathi B'Chir) 
 
END
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.