Headlines:

India, China to highlight food security issues at WTO Ministerial
Russia plans consultations with Latvia on fish supplies from Aug 3
China's growth to slow to 4.1% by 2025: Tokyo think tank
TPP talks should bolster WTO's core role in global trade liberalization
Pacific trade talks in final stretch as ministers meet in Hawaii 
Drug patents issue continues to hamper Pacific trade deal
U.S. May Remove Tariffs on Certain Japanese Beef
Restoring vibrant world trade is vital to driving global development
Brazil sees progress on EU-Mercosur deal

 

 

Details:

India, China to highlight food security issues at WTO Ministerial

29 July 2015

Press Trust of India

New Delhi, Jul 29 (PTI) India and China have joined hands to present a paper highlighting issues faced by developing countries, including matters related to food security, at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO ministerial meeting in Nairobi, a senior official said.

The move is aimed at strongly presenting the views of developing countries at the forthcoming ministerial meeting in Nairobi, scheduled in December.

During Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Narendra Modi's visit to China in May, the two countries had decided to have a special mechanism to discuss issues at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO) talks as they have similar views on many issues.

"India and China are jointly coordinating on HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO issues. It will help in putting forward the views of developing countries in the Nairobi meeting," the official said, adding the group would meet shortly to discuss all the issues which are of interest to developing countries.

"India and China will submit a joint paper in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO on issues of interest to developing countries," the official added.

Besides food security, the other issues of common interest to India and China include a cut in agri-subsidies by the developed nations.

The next Ministerial Conference, which is the highest decision making body of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO, is slated to be held from December 15-18 in Nairobi, Kenya.

Both the countries are pitching for a permanent solution on the issue of public stockholding for food security purposes.

Ending months-long deadlock, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO in November last year acceded to India's demand to remove constraints on the food stockpiling issue.

The WTO's General Council, the highest decision making body of the organisation, accepted India's demand for extending the peace clause till a permanent solution is found on the food stockpiling issue.

This has enabled India to continue procurement and stocking of foodgrain for distribution to poor under its food security programme without attracting any kind of action from HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO members even if it breaches the 10 per cent subsidy cap as prescribed by the multilateral trade body.

India, the official said, wants that all issues including Doha Round matters, should be taken up in the Nairobi meeting as "cherry picking of issues" would not help the multi-lateral body.

The Doha Round of negotiations launched in 2001 have remained stalled since July 2008 due to differences between the rich and the developing nations mainly over the subsidies given to farmers.

India wants to bring back issues related to the long-stalled Doha round including agriculture such as export subsidies, cotton and fishery subsidies and market access. PTI RR RSN MKJ

Press Trust Of India Limited

Russia plans consultations with Latvia on fish supplies from Aug 3

30 July 2015

Prime News

MOSCOW, Jul 30 (PRIME) -- HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Russia’s Federal Service for Veterinary and Phytosanitary Oversight plans to hold technical consultations with Latvian authorities over fish products starting from August 3, the watchdog said late Wednesday.

On June 4, the watchdog temporarily banned supplies of all fish products from Latvia and Estonia due to violations uncovered during inspections and due to presence of prohibited or harmful substances.

Later, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Federal Service for Consumer Rights Protection and Human Welfare Oversight banned imports of canned fish from four Latvian producers, with the ban to come into force on Saturday.

Latvian relevant authorities started eliminating the uncovered violations and provided their comments to the veterinary and phytosanitary oversight watchdog on July 23, and the watchdog’s specialists are now analyzing them.

The watchdog also believes that the E.U. blinks at uncovering of prohibited or harmful substances in products that are being supplied to Russia.

Latvia and Estonia recently submitted claims over the Russian ban on fish imports to the Council of the E.U.

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Commission said then that the Russian ban contradicted rules of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO).

China's growth to slow to 4.1% by 2025: Tokyo think tank

29 July 2015

Nikkei Report

TOKYO -- China's growth rate could fall to 4.1% by 2025, according to new projections by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Japan Center for Economic Research. The downtrend will put a drag on four major Southeast Asian economies.

This is the first time the Tokyo-based think tank has released a report detailing the medium-term prospects of not only Japan but also China, Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines.

JCER reckons the Chinese economy will decelerate significantly over the next 10 years because of structural problems, such as ballooning local government debts, and the waning impact of monetary easing. In its report, the center outlines three potential trajectories: a baseline scenario, along with optimistic and pessimistic forecasts that depend on how Beijing's reforms play out.

It is under the baseline scenario that Chinese gross domestic product growth would slow to 4.1% a year by 2025. If reforms successfully improve the business environment, the world's No. 2 economy would likely maintain a 5.5% annual growth rate. If the reforms fizzle, the think tank projects a decline in growth to about 3% a year.

The four key HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Association of Southeast Asian Nations members are likely to see their GDP growth taper off at a moderate pace after 2016, partly due to China's slowdown.

JCER plans to release this report, titled "Medium-term Forecast of Asian Economies," once a year.

The following is a compilation of the report's major points.

The challenges ahead

China faces a host of problems. The working-age population has begun to shrink, as the birthrate declines and the median age rises. Local governments' debt load is also growing heavier as property values fall. These issues could weigh on growth and, partly due to the insufficient social insurance system, exacerbate inequality. The Chinese Communist Party leadership could face intensifying social instability.

If these challenges are left unresolved, it will be difficult for China to escape the middle-income trap.

Thailand, meanwhile, must contend with the effects of political instability and military control of the government, as well as a declining working-age population.

Malaysia's gross national income is in the ballpark with high-income nations. Yet the government in Kuala Lumpur needs to address various issues, such as the brain drain driven by its Bumiputra affirmative action policy for ethnic Malays and reform of state-owned enterprises.

Thailand and Malaysia should enhance their education standards to produce high-skilled workforces. They also need to boost productivity and encourage innovation, following the examples of Singapore and Taiwan.

In terms of per capita GNI, Indonesia and the Philippines rank below China, Malaysia and Thailand. Indonesia and the Philippines thus need to improve their business environments, including by strengthening legal and regulatory frameworks. Attracting more foreign investment in infrastructure is crucial. They also need to develop industrial clusters and promote urbanization -- prerequisites for adding value to products and services.

If these four countries take full advantage of the planned HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"ASEAN Economic Community to boost trade, and foster a cycle of rising domestic demand and wage growth, they will have a shot at realizing these reforms.

China (baseline scenario)

Under JCER's baseline scenario for China, real GDP would grow at an average rate of 5.9% from 2016 to 2020, then by 4.5% from 2021 to 2025. The annual rate would drop to 4.1% by 2025.

While President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Xi Jinping has called for adjusting to a "new normal," progress on structural reforms may be slow.

Personal spending is expected to gradually overtake capital spending in terms of contributions to GDP growth. Yet consumption growth is also likely to slow at a moderate pace. China's potential growth rate -- how much the economy can produce over the medium to long term without sparking higher inflation -- is on the decline.

In 2015 and 2016, relatively high asset prices and monetary easing should help to maintain growth momentum. This will be temporary: As the impact of these factors wanes in 2017 and beyond, the potential growth rate will drop to 5%-5.5% on average from 2016 to 2020, with real GDP growth also losing steam.

Improvements in China's business environment will be harder to come by. Total factor productivity is forecast to drop from around 6% between 2006 and 2010 to around 4% between 2011 and 2015, and later to around 2% between 2021 and 2025.

Over the years, China's capital stock has increased sharply due to the indiscriminate pursuit of development projects. Some of these projects will be scrapped due to lower land prices, and the number of abandoned facilities will increase. Consequently, China's fixed assets will likely continue deteriorating. Capital's contribution to the potential growth rate is seen falling to a little over 3% in the 2016 to 2020 period, from around 4% in 2011 to 2015. From 2021 to 2025, the figure is projected to sink below 2%.

Aside from sluggish property prices and a drop in income from land sales, China faces other structural problems. Efforts to address them will determine whether the economy follows the baseline scenario, or veers onto more optimistic or pessimistic paths.

In rural areas, cash income per capita grew around 8%, on average, from 2001 to 2005. In urban districts, wages (at state-owned companies) increased 14% during the same period.

The working-age population has begun to decrease, after peaking at 1.06 billion in 2013, according to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"U.N. Surplus labor in rural areas has hit bottom due to industrialization -- a situation known as the Lewis Turning Point. But if local governments fail to settle their mounting debts, it could hinder rural wage growth along with development and urbanization. Widening wealth gaps among different regions could spur social instability.

Meanwhile, the state-run HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"China Development Bank is advancing urbanization projects. Beijing is also building a number of institutions -- the Silk Road Fund, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank and a Chinese insurance investment fund, along with the BRICS group's New Development Bank -- to promote infrastructure investment at home and abroad.

The question is whether lenders will pay heed to profitability and efficiency. Failure to do so could hamper China's economy.

China is moving toward liberalizing interest rates. In June 2015, it decided to scrap restrictions on bank lending, which were capped at 75% of deposits. Moreover, the government is working to internationalize the yuan and wants it included in the basket of currencies that underpins the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"International Monetary Fund's Special Drawing Rights.

If these financial reforms amount to monetary easing by another name, they might generate an economic bubble. Over the medium to long term, Beijing needs to free up capital flows and carefully reform its financial system.

The keys to medium-term growth will be strengthening institutions, facilitating business activity and tackling environmental problems.

China (optimistic scenario)

Thanks to success with structural reforms and an improved business environment, China under this scenario would maintain growth of around 5.5%, even from 2021 to 2025. The country would benefit from higher total factor productivity and a resultant rise in investment.

Total capital formation would also contribute to the growth rate -- around 2.5% -- in the same period due to increased domestic and foreign investment. Higher labor productivity would help lift wages and boost consumption as well. However, this would increase imports, meaning China's trade surplus would rise only modestly.

China (pessimistic scenario)

In this case, China's growth rate would fall significantly due to the economy's structural limits. Growth would decelerate sharply starting in 2017, with the rate dropping more than 1 percentage point on average each year.

In April 2015, Chinese Finance Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Lou Jiwei said the country would have a more than 50% chance of falling into the so-called middle-income trap -- unless it overhauls its agriculture, family registry, labor, land and social security systems over the next five to seven years.

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Lawrence Summers, professor at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Harvard University, and Barry Eichengreen, professor at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"University of California, Berkeley, note there are historical precedents for high-growth countries experiencing plunging growth rates.

If this happens to China, growth could fall to around 3% in the period from 2021 to 2025. Local governments would likely slip into default; rural areas would lag far behind urban centers in terms of growth in per capita cash income.

Nikkei Digital Media Inc. 

TPP talks should bolster WTO's core role in global trade liberalization

wanghaiqing 

30 July 2015

Xinhua News Agency

BEIJING, July 30 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Xinhua) -- As trade representatives from 12 Pacific Rim countries are busy hammering out what could be the world's largest FTA zone, they must bear in mind the terms to be written in the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) agreement should not seek to dim the core role of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO) in global trade liberalization.

Once signed, the TPP will form a free trade area with a population of 800 million, which accounts for 30 percent of global trade turnover and nearly 40 percent of global output.

However, the significance of the free trade deal is diminished by the fact that many countries in the TPP framework have already had bilateral FTA arrangements with each other and the United States and Japan account for about 80 percent of the trade conducted within the potential trade bloc.

To avoid the possibility of having only a few dominating the future course of the whole bloc, countries participating in the TPP talks should make all efforts they can to craft a mechanism that features equal rights of all members in key decision making.

To eliminate the danger of bigger players always call the shots, TPP negotiators should also be careful not to grant them unrestrained power in trade-dispute settlement, or market access issues involving sensitive sectors.

Another key remedy would be to keep the TPP door open, with no discriminatory terms set for newcomers. The TPP has seen its vitality increasing in the past few years only because it constantly brightens up its prospect by assimilating new members.

What's more, some TPP countries take pride in pushing for high standards for the trade blocs. But the problem is that it's not always good for every party to set the bar too high.

The controversy over the length of patent protection is just one example of how one member could opt for a higher standard only because it best suits its own interest.

So it is advisable that negotiators who are toiling to maximize gains for their respective countries keep clear-headed instead of being misled by seemingly noble proposals.

While it is understandable that countries, frustrated by the long-stalled Doha round of global trade talks, have turned their attention to various initiatives to set up regional FTAs, it is worth noting that the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO's central role in global trade liberalization should be maintained.

The apparent possible defects aside, the TPP arguably represents so far the closest try to establish a FTA in the geographically vast and culturally diverse Asia-Pacific region, and it offers hope, and possibly wisdom, to revive the Doha round negotiations.

Xinhua News Agency

Pacific trade talks in final stretch as ministers meet in Hawaii

Kayo Mimizuka Kayo Mimizuka 

29 July 2015

19:01

Kyodo News

LAHAINA, Hawaii, July 29 -- Talks on a multilateral Pacific free trade agreement are entering the final stretch with trade ministers from 12 countries kicking off their meeting Tuesday for make-or-break bargaining toward creating the world's largest free trade zone in decades.

The four-day meeting on the U.S.-led Trans-Pacific Partnership initiative on the Hawaiian island of Maui is viewed as the final opportunity to cut a deal by the end of the year. No further negotiating session is on the horizon given tight political schedules in the United States and some other member economies.

The trade chiefs "shared the goal of reaching a broad agreement during the current ministerial meeting," Japanese Economic and Fiscal Policy Minister Akira Amari, who is in charge of the country's TPP talks, told reporters after the first day of the gathering.

Expectations for striking a deal in Hawaii rose higher than ever after U.S. President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Barack Obama late last month signed a Trade Promotion Authority bill into law, giving him the power to negotiate international trade deals with limited interference from lawmakers.

Negotiation sources said the talks are in the end-game after chief negotiators thrashed out outstanding problems in the run-up to the ministerial meeting, but some thorny issues still remain to be resolved by the ministers. The course of the negotiations will not become clear "until the last five minutes," said one Japanese source.

Talks between the United States and Japan, the two largest economies accounting for around 80 percent of gross domestic product in the TPP framework, are viewed as very close to being settled, but they still have the difficult task of finalizing a bilateral agreement on opening up the Japanese rice market and abolishing U.S. tariffs on autos.

Prior to the plenary ministerial session on Tuesday, Amari met with U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman. According to people familiar with Japan-U.S. talks, Washington is likely to be considering scrapping its tariffs on many auto-related products as soon as a pact takes effect, in response to Tokyo's calls for expanding imports of Japanese automotive parts.

But Amari said it would be "difficult" to settle all the remaining issues between the United States on Tuesday, and he plans to meet with Froman "several times" during the Hawaii session.

Japan also held bilateral negotiations with Australia as well as New Zealand, a major agricultural exporter that is strongly calling for liberalization of trade in dairy products. Dairy is one of Japan's politically sensitive farm product categories.

Japan is proposing to expand imports of butter and powdered skim milk from the United States, Australia and New Zealand under low-tariff quotas, the sources said.

Tokyo is considering setting a quota of 20,000 tons for the United States, 15,000 tons for Australia, and 30,000 to 32,000 tons for New Zealand. But Wellington is not satisfied with the offer, the sources said.

There is also concern among negotiators over a delay in talks on the patent protection period for biological medicines that could affect the availability of generic medicines, an issue being discussed in the intellectual property chapter.

The United States, which had insisted the period be set at 12 years to protect the profits of pharmaceutical companies, is now considering a compromise plan of setting the period at less than 10 years, according to the sources.

However, it remains uncertain if Australia, which has proposed a much-shorter five-year monopoly period to promote generic medicine production, will accept the new U.S. offer.

Canada's resistance to liberalizing its protected dairy and poultry markets also remains one of the biggest sticking points, although Ottawa has been showing more flexibility in Hawaii, the sources added.

The trade ministers are expected to hold a joint press conference on Friday afternoon.

As an agreement takes shape, opponents of the controversial trade pact are intensifying their criticism, saying the TPP would push up medical costs, jeopardize the farming sector and food safety, and adversely affect people's lives for the sake of large companies' profits.

"Whether or not any real deal is made, a 'breakthrough' likely will be announced. But for whom would it be a breakthrough?" HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Public Citizen, a U.S.-based nonprofit organization, said in a statement. "For many people in the TPP countries, a deal based on the current text would not be good news."

The TPP, which would cover around 40 percent of global output, involves Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore, the United States and Vietnam.

Kyodo News

Drug patents issue continues to hamper Pacific trade deal

30 July 2015

Kyodo News

LAHAINA, Hawaii, July 29 -- Trade ministers negotiating a 12-country Pacific Rim free trade agreement struggled Wednesday to overcome differences over outstanding issues that have prevented a deal being concluded, including the issue of the data monopoly period for biological medicines.

"There still remains a huge gap" among the Trans-Pacific Partnership countries over uniformly setting a period for patenting medicines, which could affect the availability of cheaper generic medicines, Japanese Economic and Fiscal Policy Minister Akira Amari told reporters after the second day of the ministerial meeting wrapped up in Hawaii.

The issue has been one of the thorniest in the TPP negotiations, with the United States proposing a longer period to protect profits of big pharmaceutical firms, while Australia and other emerging economies are suggesting the period be shorter to promote the production of generic medicines.

While there have been reports that the United States, which leads the TPP, has shown some flexibility over the issue, Amari said he does not have such a feeling, signaling more concessions need to be made to resolve this problem.

Asked about whether a broad agreement can be reached during the current meeting, Amari said, "I am not sure if we can make it within the remaining two days. We cannot assume anything."

On a bilateral track, the United States is arranging to abolish its tariffs on imports of Japanese beef over a period of around 10 years under the TPP, negotiation sources said.

Washington is also planning to expand its low-tariff quota to 3,000 tons -- a 15-fold increase -- as soon as the pact takes effect, the sources said.

On Wednesday morning, Amari told reporters, "The important thing is that tariffs (on Japanese beef) will be abolished in the end. Our demand is taking shape."

Amari held a two-way meeting with U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman on Tuesday. Officials from the two countries continued their talks on Wednesday to resolve bilateral issues.

The United States levies a tariff of 4.4 cents per kilogram on Japanese beef. The tariff rate goes up drastically when the amount of imports exceeds 200 tons. On the back of the growing popularity of the Japanese "wagyu" beef brand, Japan exported 153 tons of beef to the United States in 2014.

The TPP, which would cover around 40 percent of global output, involves Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore, the United States and Vietnam.

Kyodo News

U.S. May Remove Tariffs on Certain Japanese Beef

30 July 2015

Jiji Press English News Service

Lahaina, Hawaii, July 29 (Jiji Press)--The United States is considering expanding its low-tariff import quota for Japanese beef and eventually remove its tariffs on imports within the quota, sources familiar with discussions between Tokyo and Washington said Wednesday.

Under a proposal being considered by the two countries, the U.S. import quota would first expand to 3,000 tons a year from the current 200 tons, the sources said.

The quota would eventually expand to over 5,000 tons over 10 years or more while tariffs on imports within the quota would be abolished within the period, they said.

The proposal emerged during bilateral talks as part of Trans-Pacific Partnership multilateral free trade negotiations.

"The important thing is that there will be no tariff ultimately and how much immediate expansion (of the U.S. import quota) we can accomplish," Japanese TPP minister Akira Amari told reporters on the Hawaiian island of Maui where the talks are under way.

"Much of our hopes are about to come true," said Amari, apparently confident of winning greater U.S. market access for Japanese beef.

The United States currently imposes duties of 4.4 cents per kilogram on up to 200 tons of imported Japanese beef a year while levying 26.4 pct of the price outside the quota.

For its part, Japan has offered to lower its 38.5 pct tariff on U.S. beef to some 9 pct in more than 10 years.

While offering to open the domestic market to a certain extent, Tokyo is pushing to promote exports of Japanese "wagyu" beef, which is recently gaining popularity overseas.

Jiji Press Limited

Restoring vibrant world trade is vital to driving global development

George Magnus 

30 July 2015

The Times

"A meeting of trade ministers in Maui, Hawaii this week will doubtless be drowned out by the cacophony of the Greek crisis, the volatility in China's stock market and economy and expectations about US and UK interest rates when the summer is over.

We should note that these ministers are in the final furlong of the most important free trade agreement for a long time, the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP). By laying down new rules for global commerce, it could help to breathe life into what has become one of the global economy's dead zones: world trade. For many countries, especially emerging economies, the exports on which they depend for growth and development have gone missing.

Until 2008, world trade in goods and services had been a significant driver of prosperity, growing at just over twice the rate of world output. Over the previous 25 years, it had grown from 13 to 27 per cent of GDP in developed countries, and from 20 to 40 per cent of GDP in emerging economies. Trade is now rising only in line with or below world output.

According to the independent CPB Netherlands Bureau of Economic Policy Analysis, the volume of world trade in May was more than 3 per cent lower than at the end of last year. Why has trade growth stalled?

The principal explanations are changes in international production relations, and the much less benign macroeconomic circumstances prevailing since the financial crisis.

According to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"International Monetary Fund, most of the weakness in world trade can be attributed to manufacturing goods. In a nutshell, one of the big trends of the 1990s and 2000s, the information technology-induced creation of global supply chains with back-and-forth trade in parts, has run its course.

In China, for example, the share of imports of parts and components in merchandise exports has fallen from 60 to about 35 per cent. Local firms now have the capacity to produce most previously imported inputs.

In the US, imports have been declining as a share of GDP, partly because fracking has slashed net energy imports. But the share of manufacturing imports in GDP has halved from 8 per cent in the decade before 2000. Softer consumption and in the future, a more pronounced reversal of outsourcing and a rise in local 3D printing production can be expected to affect trade patterns too.

Some countries have managed to stand apart from the slowdown. In Asia, Vietnam, Cambodia and Bangladesh are growing exports a lot faster than developing Asia as a whole, while a handful of East African countries, including Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania, are doing a lot better than their regional peers.

Because trade in services has held up better than trade in goods, because of modern production patterns and a technology-induced fall in relative prices, developed countries, which tend to have a much higher concentration of services, have done better than most emerging countries.

Economic growth in the past few years, and demand for consumer imports in advanced nations have remained soft, even allowing for the particular problems of the eurozone.

The consequences of rising debt and pressures to lower it is one reason.

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Bank for International Settlements estimates that a dozen of the largest industrial countries have added more than $50 trillion to debt outstanding since 2007, while a recent McKinsey report on debt in 47 countries noted a rise of 20 per cent of GDP over this period.

Financial deleveraging is also dampening global growth and trade as global banks shrink, partly because of new regulatory regimes and supervisory rules. Other post-crisis phenomena include weak wage and salary formation, income insecurity and inequality, and the cumulative effects of rapid ageing, for example as healthcare spending displaces that on, say, housing-related expenditures.

Emerging economies have not been able to pick up any of the slack in global trade because they remain dependent on consumer demand in the western world and on a growth model in China, which is a spent force and changing slowly. Many countries, including China, have allowed nonfinancial debt levels to rise rapidly and are trying to deleverage.

A swathe of emerging countries across Asia, Africa and Latin America has lost out as commodity markets have turned down as a result of changes in China, including the trend decline in economic growth. The fall in the commodity-intensity of Chinese growth has cut commodity prices and trade volumes and blown cold economic winds from Perth to Peru.

Whether or not the TPP, and its less advanced US-EU version, the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, will kick start trade and economic growth remains a moot point. The TPP covering 12 countries that account for about 40 per cent of world output, is also contentious. China was excluded but it has indicated it might join. It is principally about property rights, state aid and other trade restraints, which are more controversial than already low tariffs. And until now negotiations have been held away from public scrutiny. Yet, in their absence, we have little on which to hope for an end to the funk in world trade."

George Magnus is a senior independent economic adviser to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"UBS

News UK & Ireland Limited

Brazil sees progress on EU-Mercosur deal

29 July 2015

Buenos Aires Herald

The Mercosur bloc is working on the last details of its free-trade proposal and hopes to exchange offers with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union in October to move forward with a trade agreement between both blocs, Brazil's Agriculture Minister Katia Abreu said yesterday, warning that the country's entire industrial sector won't be able to join the deal at the same time.

“We agreed to exchange offers in the last quarter of the year, between October and November. But we are working to carry it out at the end of October,” Abreu said, speaking to reporters at Brazil's International Exhibition of Poultry and Swine. “A deal increases the export expectations of all sectors of the economy, especially agriculture.”

Mercosur foreign ministers met with the European Commissioner for Trade Cecilia Malmström in June and agreed to hold a new meeting before the end of the year and exchange offers if negotiators of both blocs see that they are solid enough. The bloc then met in Brazil weeks ago and showed a united front after previous claims from Uruguay and Paraguay to negotiate individually with the EU.

“We're optimistic about the deal and we should be able to exchange offers over the next few months. Now the ball is in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union's court. Our offer is almost ready, each country is working on the final details,” Abreu said. “Nevertheless, we'll need more time to include dairy, wine and cocoa in the agreement.”

In a bid to increase support for the deal, Brazil's agriculture minister quoted a recent report by the Getulio Vargas University (FGV), which said Brazilian agricultural exports would increase 20 percent thanks to the free trade agreement. The figure is in line with estimates from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Commission, which said a trade deal would benefit the Mercosur with overall GDP growth of up to three billion euros and a 40 percent increase in exports.

“There are some restrictions on the Brazilian industry but that doesn't mean those sectors won't be able to sell their goods, we'll need more time to adapt to the free trade scheme,” Abreu said. “One day we'll be able to include all goods in the free trade agreement. The agricultural sector almost doesn't have any problems.”

The Mercosur and EU officially relaunched trade negotiations at a summit in Madrid in May 2010 and since then the objective has been to negotiate a comprehensive deal. Negotiations have been hard-fought because the two trade blocs want to make sure the deal includes everything from industrial goods and agricultural goods to services and intellectual property.

Even if the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union and the Mercosur bloc exchange offers before the end of the year as Abreu said, a free trade agreement wouldn't be signed for at least another six months or even a year, EU Ambassador in Argentina Alfonso Diez Torres told the Herald weeks ago, warning that a new negotiation between both blocs would be almost impossible if a deal isn't reached now.

Herald with online media

Heraldo de Buenos Aires Ltd

END

 

 

 

cid:image001.png@01CC55E4.A4F90770

 

Josep Bosch, Information Officer

Information and External Relations Division

+41227395681

 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.
