WTO rules against Ukraine in dispute with Japan over auto duties
With $27 trillion in savings, Chinese are set to change the world
Senate Agriculture Committee Mulls Options on COOL
Farm groups ramp up TPP campaigns as negotiations heat up
Congress, WTO turn up the heat on COOL
 
WTO rules against Ukraine in dispute with Japan over auto duties
Japan Today- HYPERLINK "http://www.japantoday.com/category/business" Business 
Jun. 27, 2015 - 05:34AM 
 
GENEVA -  Emergency car import duties imposed by Ukraine in 2012 to safeguard its own auto industry violate global trade rules, the World Trade Organization said Friday, urging Kiev to lift them.
A WTO panel of experts found in favor of Japan, which brought the complaint against Ukraine, ruling that "Ukraine acted inconsistently" with a range of international trade rules, including the 1994 GATT agreement.
Ukraine should "bring its measures into conformity with obligations under those agreements," it ruled, also urging the country to "revoke its safeguard measure on passenger cars."
Japan brought the case against Ukraine in late 2013, complaining over Ukraine's decision in April 2012 to deploy what are known as safeguard measures, with import duties of up to almost 13 percent on certain vehicles.
Members of the 161-nation WTO are allowed to use temporary safeguard measures to protect a specific industry from an increase in imports of any product which is causing, or risks causing, serious harm to that sector.
But Japan maintained that Ukraine—which joined the WTO in 2008—did not play by the rules because it failed to notify the trade body about its measures, leaving no time for talks with fellow members.
It also claimed, and the WTO panel agreed, that Ukraine failed to justify the imposition of the measures, left them in place for too long, and applied them in a manner which was out of proportion to the impact of imports on the local auto industry.
The panel did not find in favour of Japan on all points, however, for instance ruling that Tokyo had not proved that Kiev had failed to progressively loosen the safeguard measure at regular intervals.
Both Ukraine and Japan can appeal the ruling if they do so within 60 days.
Disputes at the WTO are often highly complex and technical, and can last for several years, with appeals, counter-appeals and assessments of compliance with rulings.
WTO's disputes settlement body has the power to authorise retaliatory trade measures against a country if it fails to fall into line with its rulings.
Japan, along with the European Union, is also locked in a dispute with Russia over that country's rules on imported vehicles.
© 2015 AFP
 
With $27 trillion in savings, Chinese are set to change the world
WAtoday.au 
Date: June 26, 2015
 
Few events will be as significant for the world in the next 15 years as China opening its capital borders, a shift that economists and regulators across the world are now starting to grapple with.
With China's leadership aiming to scale back the role of investment in the domestic economy, the nation's surfeit of savings - deposits currently stand at $US21 trillion ($27.2 trillion) - will increasingly need to be deployed overseas. That's also becoming easier, as Premier Li Keqiang relaxes capital-flow regulations.
The consequences ultimately could rival the transformation wrought by the Communist nation's fusion with the global trading system, capped by its 2001 World Trade Organisation entry. That stage saw goods made cheaper across the world, boosting the purchasing power of low-income families at the cost of hollowed-out industries.
Some changes are easy to envision: watch out for Mao Zedong's visage on banknotes as the yuan makes its way into more corners of the globe. China's giant banks will increasingly dot New York, London and Tokyo skylines, joining US, European and Japanese names. Property prices from California to Sydney to Southeast Asia already have seen the influence of Chinese buying.
Other shifts are tougher to gauge. International investors including pension funds, which have had limited entry to China to date, will pour in, clouding how big a net money exporter China will be. Deutsche Bank is among those foreseeing mass net outflows, which could go to fund large-scale infrastructure, or stoke asset prices by depressing long-term borrowing costs.
'Historic proportions'
"This era will be marked by China shifting from a large net importer of capital to one of the world's largest exporters of capital," Charles Li, chief executive officer of Hong Kong Exchanges & Clearing, the city's stock market, wrote in a blog this month. Eventually, there will be "fund outflows of historic proportions, driven by China's needs to deploy and diversify its national wealth to the global markets," he wrote.
The continuing opening of China's capital account will also promote the trading of commodities in yuan, and boost China's ability to influence their prices, according to an analysis by Bloomberg Intelligence.
As was the case with China's WTO entry, where many of the hurdles had been cleared in the years leading up to 2001, policy makers in Beijing have been easing restrictions on the currency, the flow of money and interest rates for years. What's making 2015 notable is the International Monetary Fund's once-in-five- year review of its basket of reserve currencies. China wants in, and is accelerating reforms to get there.
Recent steps to promote its currency have included setting up five offshore yuan centers, a new link between the Shanghai and Hong Kong stock exchanges and letting the tightly controlled yuan trade against the dollar in a wider band. It has promised to remove a cap on interest paid to savers.
"The integration of China - the world's second-largest economy with the highest saving rate but still a low per capita income - into the global capital markets is an unprecedented event," China International Capital economists led by Beijing-based Liang Hong wrote in a note this month.
There are already signs of that potential. Chinese buy almost a quarter of new homes in Sydney and their outlay will more than double to $60 billion in the six years to 2020, according to Credit Suisse predictions.
In The US, Chinese buyers topped Canadians to rank as the biggest foreign purchasers of homes by sales and dollar volume in the year through March, accounting for more than a quarter of all international spending. 
Moving abroad
Lenders are speeding up their ambitions: Bank of Communications, China's fifth-largest lender, is making its first overseas acquisition by buying a lender in Brazil, while China Construction Bank Corp plans to open branches in Europe, Southeast Asia and Africa.
The global community is watching. US Treasury Secretary Jacob Lew said after meetings this week between US and Chinese officials that China is committed to pushing through necessary reforms to liberalise interest rates, open capital markets and open up more to foreign enterprises. The US wants more access to the world's second-biggest economy for its financial firms, something that's been elusive since China's WTO entry.
Few expect the yuan to soon threaten the US dollar's role as the global reserve currency, with a wave of domestic reforms needed first up to reassure international investors - such as bolstering liquidity in the local bond market.
While US policy makers are betting that a more open China will ease currency tensions between the two nations, any rapid depreciation in the yuan could trigger large-scale capital outflows, prompting intervention and new restrictions from China's policy makers.
Looking to the US
"If they're going to be gradually opening up to be like the US, then vast amounts of money are going to flow overseas," said David Dollar, who served as US Treasury attache in China and is now a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution in Washington. "I would speculate that it favours the US over everything else."
Other nations, from Argentina to South Korea, have suffered whiplash from volatile capital flows after they eased restrictions. While China is unlikely to tear down the barricades altogether, the opening of the nation's capital borders will reverberate across the world.
"I don't think you can find any significant economic system where deposits in the banking system are twice the GDP," said Nicholas Lardy, who has studied China for more than three decades and is a senior fellow at the Peterson Institute for International Economics. "That's the potential."
Bloomberg
 
Senate Agriculture Committee Mulls Options on COOL
Food safety Network 
By HYPERLINK "http://www.foodsafetynews.com/author/lzuraw/" Lydia Zuraw | June 26, 2015
The Senate Agriculture Committee held a HYPERLINK "http://www.ag.senate.gov/hearings/country-of-origin-labeling-and-trade-retaliation-whats-at-stake-for-americas-farmers-ranchers-businesses-and-consumers" hearing Thursday to discuss country-of-origin labeling (COOL) for meat, which requires that packages sold in the U.S. indicate the country, or countries, where animals were born, raised and slaughtered.
"It doesn't matter if you're pro-COOL (and many are) or anti-COOL (and many are), you cannot ignore the fact that retaliation is imminent and we must avoid it," Chairman Pat Roberts (R-KS) said in his opening statement.
He was referring to the tariffs Canada and Mexico plan to place on U.S. goods after winning the final case before the World Trade Organization that the program is an unfair barrier to trade.
Two weeks ago, the House of Representatives HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/2015/06/house-votes-to-repeal-country-of-origin-labeling-for-meat/,DanaInfo=.awxyCjtuk0jpp5.1tA9Rv87+" passed a bill to repeal COOL for beef, pork and chicken, and eyes are now trained on the Senate.
In her opening statement on Thursday, Ranking Member Debbie Stabenow (D-MI) added that "inaction from the Senate is not an option."
Five of the six witnesses appearing before the committee adamantly supported an immediate repeal of COOL, arguing that the $3.2 billion in potential retaliatory tariffs sought by Canada and Mexico would significantly harm the U.S. economy.
 "The Senate must act prior to the WTO's authorization of retaliation," Roberts said.
"Retaliation is imminent and inevitable unless and until the U.S. takes action to repeal the underlying COOL statute," wrote Mexican Secretary of the Economy Ildefonso Guajardo Villarreal in a letter this week to members of the committee, which Roberts read.
He also quoted a letter from Canadian Minister of Agriculture Gerry Ritz that indicated Canada's plan to retaliate unless the Senate votes to repeal COOL.
James Trezise, president of the New York Wine & Grape Foundation, told the committee that "unless this issue is resolved before the August recess, those tariffs could take effect in September."
Canada is a "key market" for New York wine and for wine from across the country, he added.
"The potential tariff increase by the Canadian government would roughly double the price of American wines to Canadian consumers overnight, drying up our sales and opening the door to competing wine regions from throughout the world," Trezise said.
Other witnesses, including Barry Carpenter, CEO of the North American Meat Institute, and Jaret Moyer, president of the Kansas Livestock Association, testified that COOL is costly and burdensome to meat producers, and that there is little evidence showing that consumers actually use the label.
However, Leo McDonnell, executive officer and director emeritus of the United States Cattlemen's Association, countered that "efforts to strip this program through a blanket repeal approach is unwarranted and unprecedented at this point of the process in arbitration."
He echoed lawmakers on the House floor who said that no retaliatory tariffs will be quickly inflicted because arbitration is going to take months.
But, Trezise said, foreign buyers are making decisions now, and there's a lot of uncertainty about whether American wines will continue to sell if the prospect of increased prices is looming.
"If there looks to be some more delay in terms of resolving this issue instead of repealing it, then the importers are going to stop making orders for American wine," he said.
On Wednesday, Stabenow HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/2015/06/michigan-senator-offers-voluntary-cool-draft-for-discussion-purposes/,DanaInfo=.awxyCjtuk0jpp5.1tA9Rv87+#.VYxUwPlViko" offered a draft bill for the committee's discussion that would make COOL voluntary for beef and pork.
When asked whether they would support voluntary labeling, the witnesses at Thursday's hearing mostly agreed.
Trezise and Chris Cuddy of Archer Daniels Midland Company said they would not object as long as the voluntary label was WTO-compliant. McDonnell expressed support for the voluntary label as long as its integrity is maintained.
Craig Hill, president of the Iowa Farm Bureau Federation, said that there could be a conversation about a voluntary label, but only after the mandatory rule is fully repealed.
"We really must avoid any kind of retaliation for even one day," Trezise said.
 
 
Farm groups ramp up TPP campaigns as negotiations heat up
ipolitics 
By HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/author/kelsey-johnson/,DanaInfo=.aiqqomyoj0Iml+" Kelsey Johnson | Jun 26, 2015 1:43 pm 
 
With reports suggesting the pending Trans-Pacific Partnership could be wrapped up by August, Canada's agriculture stakeholders are ramping up their positions on the pending multi-billion dollar trade deal – a multilateral pact that has Canadian farmers divided.
The slew of press releases from agriculture industry groups this week on the TPP comes after the U.S. Congress approved the Trade Promotion Authority bill. Commonly known as 'fast-track' authority, TPA turns any final vote on the yet-to be finalized TPP trade deal into a yes/no vote, without amendments. The legislative development was seen as indispensable to negotiators from the 12 countries — including the U.S., Canada and ten Asian economies — since without it, Congress could have rolled back key provisions of the deal.
Canada's export-based agriculture sectors – like canola, grain, beef, pork, and wine – are fearful Canada could be left out of the international trade deal, which encompasses 40 per cent of the world's economy.
Among the nations involved in the TPP negotiations are some of Canada's biggest trading partners – with Japan and the United States being significant markets for Canadian agriculture products.
"The TPP represents a historic opportunity to diversify Canada's exports to Asia and generate jobs through growing trade and investment," John Manley, President and CEO of the Canadian Council of Chief Executives, said in a joint press release with the Canadian Agri-Food Trade Alliance Thursday.
"Canada needs to be at the negotiating table, not on the outside looking in," the former Liberal cabinet minister said.
The Canadian Canola Growers Association echoed Manley's concerns on Friday, insisting in a press release "a TPP agreement that includes Canadian canola is a step forward; without, a dangerous slide in the opposite direction."
Ninety per cent of Canadian canola is exported, the association said, noting if Canada is not part of the TPP, canola farmers will likely face "lost market opportunities."
But Canadian dairy, egg and poultry farmers have a different view of the pending TPP deal. They're worried it could undermine Canada's supply management system, which shields their sectors from the fluctuations of world market prices.
Dairy Farmers of Canada recently launched an online petition and campaign, called the HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/petition/,DanaInfo=.awxyCmuk0q2szz5Nr43+support-canadian-dairy" 'Milkle down effect.' While the campaign doesn't explicitly mention the TPP, the site and accompanying petition does warn Canada's dairy industry is "under pressure from foreign interests."
"Would you rather buy the safe, high quality local dairy that you know — or foreign products that you don't?" asks the petition, which has gathered more than 1,300 signatures since the campaign was launched June 18.
The United States, Australia and New Zealand all want broader access to Canada's dairy, poultry and egg markets, a demand Canada was aware of before it joined the TPP negotiations in 2012.
Agriculture Minister Gerry Ritz has repeatedly said Canada will not be bullied into agriculture concessions, noting the American government offers heavy subsidies to cotton, rice, and sugar growers south of the border.
The Americans, Ritz has said repeatedly, must also be willing to budge on the agriculture file.
On Thursday, Prime Minister Stephen Harper told reporters in Quebec City it was "essential" that Canada be part of the pending TPP deal, but pledged a deal could be reached without undermining Canada's supply managed system.
"I believe these negotiations are going to establish what will become the basis of the international trading network in the Asia Pacific. It is essential in my view that Canada be part of that – that the Canadian economy be part of that," the prime minister told a news conference Thursday.
"At the same time, we are working to protect our system of supply management and our farmers in other sectors."
Canada always acts to protect the "interest of all of our sectors" in all trade talks, he added.
"We will continue to do that right to the end of these negotiations."
With files from Canadian Press


TPP agreement 'still hanging in the balance' despite fast-track authority
Today
Published: 4:17 AM, June 27, 2015
WASHINGTON/TOKYO — Sources close to the ambitious Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) warn that the initiative is still hanging in the balance, even though hopes are high that the 12-nation pact may soon be completed.
Negotiation sources said the "fast-track" legislation that was passed this week, or so-called Trade Promotion Authority (TPA) Bill, is not a silver bullet to overcome all remaining gaps among the member states, and easy concessions on sensitive issues could jeopardise final approval of the TPP by the legislatures of each nation.
Chilean Ambassador to the United States Juan Gabriel Valdes said at a panel discussion organised by the Atlantic Council in Washington earlier this week that some people have thought that approval of the TPA would resolve all matters pending in the negotiations, but that is "simply not true". 
"Let's not underestimate how much more there still is to be done," Singaporean Ambassador to the United States Ashok Kumar Mirpuri said at the same panel discussion as Mr Valdes. "We really need to move fairly quickly to achieve this objective of getting the TPP in place … The most complicated (part) will be going back again to Congress to get TPP approved even after we get over the TPA hurdle."
The passage of the TPA Bill was welcomed by TPP-member nations, who have said that it is vital to completing the pact, as it gives trading partners confidence that deals will not be picked apart in Congress. With the TPA, Mr Obama may submit trade deals to Congress for up-or-down votes without amendments. 
Japanese Economic and Fiscal Policy Minister Akira Amari said yesterday he was relieved that the long awaited TPA Bill is finally set to be enacted. "(The TPP) is expected to contribute to the stability and prosperity of the (Asian) region beyond the existing trade framework. Thus I believe all risks should be taken to conclude the pact," Mr Amari said. He had previously said earlier this week that it would be possible to reach a much-awaited broad agreement in issues by late July. 
"If we haven't actually got most of it by then (next month), it gets very difficult," said New Zealand Trade Minister Tim Groser in an interview. "It's going to be fast and furious in the next six weeks," Mr Groser added that another possible deadline is August.
Washington says that if the TPP is agreed on in late July or early August and all goes well, the deal could be up for a final vote in Congress in the first half of December. Other countries also have to seek lawmakers' approval.
"What we are trying to do now is work through and resolve all the issues that we can that don't require ministerial decision-making, to limit the number of issues that the ministers ... need to take up," United States Trade Representative Michael Froman told a recent forum organised by Foreign Policy magazine.
Among some outstanding issues, the US and emerging economies have yet to fill a huge gap over phase-out periods for tariffs and the issue of intellectual property rights, including the period of drug-patent protection, an issue that affects the availability of generic medicines for the poor. Canada has also so far avoided opening its protected dairy market to more imports, frustrating both the US and New Zealand.
"I'm not comfortable with the deal that's on the table for dairying and that will be our overriding priority. If we don't get a better deal, we won't be signing what's on the table at the moment," Mr Groser said.
The TPA may lead to a bilateral agreement by Tokyo and Washington, but it will not necessarily make it easier to conclude the overall TPP talks, one negotiation source said. 
Trade observers said key to the eventual success of the TPP is concessions by the US, whose hard-line stance has often frustrated other negotiating members. Mr Keisuke Hanyuda, a partner at Deloitte Tohmatsu Consulting, said the US could make substantial concessions as it is "pressed for time" given it will soon enter campaign mode for the 2016 presidential election in earnest.
Mr Obama, who has a strong incentive to achieve a TPP deal to make it his presidential legacy, "got the TPA so he could utilise it to the maximum. The US is now expected to show more flexibility" to reach an agreement, said Mr Hanyuda. AGENCIES
 
Congress, WTO turn up the heat on COOL
HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/contributors/3083/,DanaInfo=.awxyCpj3vtxq9Lp21+" King & Spalding LLP
Recent House Action
Lost amidst the debate over Trade Promotion Authority, Trade Adjustment Assistance, and the Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement, the House recently voted 300-131 to pass H.R. 2393, the Country of Origin Labeling Amendments Act of 2015, which repeals country-of-origin labels (COOL) meant to allow consumers to know where animals in beef, poultry and pork products were born, raised and slaughtered. Originally enacted in 2002, the labeling requirements have been under attack since 2008. The House vote followed the World Trade Organization (WTO)'s latest ruling against U.S. efforts to salvage its labeling regime. Without subsequent action by the United States to remedy the trade violations inherent in the labeling requirements, the WTO ruling allows Canada and Mexico—the United States' two largest export markets—to apply retaliatory measures amounting up to around 2.6 billion dollars in tariffs annually on U.S. exports to those countries. Enactment of H.R. 2393 would bring the U.S. into WTO compliance.
WTO Issues
Canada and Mexico had challenged U.S. COOL requirements at the WTO in 2009 claiming that the requirements violated U.S. obligations under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT 1994), the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT Agreement), the Agreement of Sanitary and Phyto-Sanitary Measures (SPS Agreement) and the Agreement on Rules of Origin. A dispute settlement panel found that the COOL measure violates Article 2.1 of the TBT Agreement by according less favorable treatment to imported Canadian and Mexican cattle and hogs than to like domestic cattle and hogs. The WTO Appellate Body upheld this finding, albeit for different reasons, in June 2012.
After making certain changes to the COOL requirements, the United States informed the WTO Dispute Settlement Body (DSB) on May 23, 2013 that it had brought its measures into compliance with the WTO's recommendations and rulings. Canada and Mexico did not agree that the changes had brought the United States into full compliance and sought review of the revised U.S. measures by a WTO compliance panel. That panel issued a report in October 2014 finding that the revised COOL requirements continued to violate Article 2.1 of the TBT Agreement and that the revised measure also violated Article III:4 of the GATT 1994 by increasing the original COOL measure's detrimental impact on the competitive opportunities for imported livestock. The WTO Appellate Body upheld the compliance panel's rulings on May 18.
Soon after the DSB adopted the Appellate Body report, both Canada and Mexico requested authorization to withdraw concessions to the United States (i.e. retaliate) under the GATT 1994 at annual levels of $2.5 billion and $713 million, respectively. The United States objects to these levels of retaliation and has requested that a WTO arbitrator establish the appropriate levels of retaliation. No retaliation can occur until the arbitrator has issued its determination.
Country of Origin Labeling and Trade Retaliation Hearing
Following the House action, the issue has moved to the Senate. Members of the U.S. Senate Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition and Forestry convened at a hearing on June 25, 2015 to consider how best to protect America's farmers, ranchers, business and consumers in the face of what Sen. Pat Roberts (R-KS), Chairman of the Committee, calls "imminent retaliation" from some of the United States' largest trading partners.
The majority of those in attendance supported quick action to repeal the mandatory COOL requirements. Failing to do so, according to Iowa State University economist Dermot Hayes, could result in the loss of billions of dollars and an estimated 17,000 U.S. jobs. Witnesses testifying in favor of repeal, including Chris Cuddy, Senior Vice President and President of Archer Daniels and Midland's Corn Processing Business United, believe that speedy repeal is the only way to respect the nation's obligations as a WTO member, reinforce the nation's standing as a responsible international trade partner, and avoid high costs across multiple sectors of the economy in almost every state.
There is not unanimity on the issue. Proponents of COOL argued for the development of a bipartisan pathway that would preserve the integrity of the labeling programs in place in the United States today and continue to empower U.S. consumers by providing them with relevant and useful information as well as choice in their local grocery stores. Toward that end, Sen. Debbie Stabenow (D-MI), Ranking Member of the U.S. Senate Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition and Forestry, recently released a draft proposal that offers such a pathway by (1) removing beef and pork mandatory labeling provisions under COOL and (2) putting in its place a completely voluntary labeling provision.
The reactions to Sen. Stabenow's draft proposal by members of Congress were mixed. In the House, Agriculture Committee Chairman Michael Conaway (R-TX) said in order to comply with the WTO ruling, a full repeal of COOL would be necessary before any alternative proposal could be considered.
What's Next for COOL? 
There is no action scheduled at this time in the Senate on the House bill. Considering the strength of the debate at today's hearing, it is possible that the Senate could act when it returns from the July 4 recess or shortly thereafter.
 



Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.