HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "Commerce international - De grands enjeux pour l'Afrique, selon le patron de l'OMC
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO members set to accept new trade facilitation agreement
·         HYPERLINK \l "ITC Uses Innovative Approach to Deliver Trade Facilitation Agreement Training in Sierra Leone
·         HYPERLINK \l "Japan May Take Taiwan's Food Import Curbs to WTO
·         HYPERLINK \l "Not COOLing Down: U.S.-Canada Trade Dispute Over Country-of-Origin Labelling Requirements
·         HYPERLINK \l "El Salvador Bans Poultry Imports from U.S. States Affected by Avian Flu
·         HYPERLINK \l "Fast-track trade bill faces key test in U.S. Congress
·         HYPERLINK \l "Trade debate hits currency conundrum
·         HYPERLINK \l "Canada says will defend dairy protection at Pacific trade talks
·         HYPERLINK \l "News Analysis: EU's quota-free dairy products more reliant on world market
·         HYPERLINK \l "Report Criticizes U.N. Agency Over Slow Response to Ebola
 
Commerce international - De grands enjeux pour l'Afrique, selon le patron de l'OMC
11 May 2015
All Africa
 
May 11, 2015 (Les Dépêches de Brazzaville/AllAfrica Global Media via COMTEX) -- Le directeur général de l'Organisation mondiale du commerce (OMC), Roberto Azevêdo a estimé, le 7 mai à Genève, que l'année 2015 présentait de « moments forts » pour stimuler davantage le développement des échanges sur et avec le continent noir.

L'Afrique qui représente un quart des membres de l'OMC ne participe qu'à environ 3% du commerce mondial. Et cet état des lieux préoccupe la direction de l'organisation. Au cours d'un entretien avec des journalistes africains francophones participant au séminaire sur le commerce multilatéral, organisé du 4 au 8 mai au siège de l'OMC à Genève (Suisse), le directeur général de cette organisation a indiqué que le moment était venu de changer la donne.

Ainsi, une initiative dite Aide pour le commerce est mise en place par cette organisation afin d'aider les pays en développement et les pays les moins avancés (PMA) à participer effectivement au système commercial mondial. Du 30 juin au 2 juillet prochain, des experts internationaux procéderont à un examen global de cette initiative.

Selon Roberto Azevêdo, l'un des grands défis du développement du commerce en Afrique demeure le manque de financement. « On estime que les besoins en financement du commerce qui ne sont pas satisfaits atteignent 120 milliards de dollars en Afrique. Ce problème est sérieux, et il nous faudra y remédier en travaillant de concert avec une série de partenaires », a-t-il estimé.

Dans cette optique, le patron de l'OMC a informé ses interlocuteurs de sa présence au mois de juillet à Addis-Abeba, en Ethiopie, où il participera à la conférence de l'ONU sur le financement du développement.

Un autre rendez-vous important pour le développement des échanges commerciaux en Afrique est la réunion ministérielle de l'OMC, à la fin du mois de juillet 2015 à Nairobi au Kenya. Premier évènement du genre organisé en Afrique, le directeur général pense que l'OMC doit tout mettre en œuvre pour que ce rendez-vous soit un succès.

L'Afrique a tout à gagner de l'aboutissement du cycle de Doha

En effet, plusieurs avancées y sont attendues dans le cadre des négociations actuelles sur le cycle de Doha dédié au développement, avec notamment la conclusion attendue d'un accord sur l'agriculture.

« L'Afrique, a estimé Roberto Azevêdo, aurait tout à gagner de l'aboutissement du cycle (de Doha). Premièrement, parce que l'OMC serait renforcée ; à une époque où les initiatives méga régionales se multiplient. Deuxièmement, parce que des avantages économiques directs sont en jeu. L'agriculture, une priorité africaine, étant l'une des grandes questions sur la table des négociations ».

Actuellement, de nouvelles propositions relatives à ce sujet ont été avancées, des approches nouvelles suggérées et les négociateurs sont dans une phase de recherche de solutions.

Ratifier l'accord de Bali pour faciliter les échanges

L'un des enjeux importants de la phase actuelle du développement du commerce international reste l'entrée en vigueur de l'accord sur la facilitation des échanges, signé en 2013 à Bali, en Indonésie. Ce dispositif prévoit une assistance et un soutien important aux pays en développement, afin de leur permettre de bénéficier des avantages qu'offre le commerce mondial.

Mais, la mise en œuvre de cet accord est conditionnée par sa ratification par au moins les deux tiers des 161 membres de l'OMC. Cela n'est pas encore le cas. En Afrique, seule l'Ile Maurice a ratifié l'accord. A l'OMC, on pense que les pays africains devraient agir avant la réunion de Nairobi pour optimiser les chances d'entrée en vigueur de cet accord.

Conclure le cycle de négociations de Doha sur le développement et achever le processus de ratification de l'accord de Bali sur la facilitation des échanges, voilà donc deux enjeux importants pour lesquels le responsable brésilien de l'OMC appelle les pays africains à agir vite, dans la perspective de la réunion ministérielle de décembre prochain au Kenya.

« La meilleure manière de célébrer notre anniversaire serait que la conférence de Nairobi et les autres activités prévues soient couronnées de succès », a exhorté Roberto Azevêdo. Rappelant que l'OMC, créée en 1995 à Marrakech au Maroc sur les cendres du GATT, a fêté ses 20 ans au mois d'avril dernier dans cette ville où étaient réunis essentiellement des représentants de ses membres africains. 
 
 
WTO members set to accept new trade facilitation agreement 
12 May 2015
Manila Bulletin
 
Members of the World Trade Organization (WTO) are set to formally accept the new Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA), with many affirming their hope of seeing the agreement enter into force by the WTO's 10th Ministerial Conference in Nairobi next December.

At a recent meeting of the WTO's Preparatory Committee on Trade Facilitation (PCTF), representatives from more than a dozen delegations said the domestic ratification process for the TFA was already underway, with some delegations outlining target dates for securing approval.

Ambassador Esteban Conejos of the Philippines, the chairperson of the PCTF, told members he understood a considerable number of additional WTO members have started the ratification process. The challenge, he said, is that the process is domestic in nature and differs from country to country.

However, a number of developing country members highlighted the domestic legislative hurdles that will need to be overcome to secure acceptance.  Several indicated they were not in a position to ensure ratification by the Nairobi meeting, which will take place on 15-18 December.

To date, four WTO members - Hong Kong (China), Singapore, the United States and Mauritius - have secured domestic acceptance of the TFA, which was concluded at the WTO's 2013 Bali Ministerial Conference. Two-thirds of the WTO's 160 members will need to ratify the TFA in order for the agreement to enter into force.

There is no deadline for securing the two-thirds threshold. However, Kenyan foreign minister Amina Mohamed has said she would like WTO members to achieve entry into force of the TFA by the Nairobi meeting.

Those reporting that domestic acceptance procedures are now underway were Chile, China, Colombia, El Salvador, the European Union, Georgia, Korea, Mexico, Morocco, Nicaragua, Norway, Saudi Arabia and Chinese Taipei.  Japan, New Zealand and Switzerland also gave more detailed explanations of their domestic acceptance processes now underway.

Several African delegations highlighted the challenges they face in securing acceptance, including the need to make changes in domestic legislation. Colombia also highlighted the long legislative process required domestically to ensure acceptance, which it believed other Latin American countries shared.
 
 
ITC Uses Innovative Approach to Deliver Trade Facilitation Agreement Training in Sierra Leone 
11 May 2015
All Africa
 
May 11, 2015 (International Trade Centre/All Africa Global Media via COMTEX) -- In an attempt to expand the reach of capacity building efforts while saving costs, ITC is working with Sierra Leone's Ministry of Trade and Industry to deliver training on the World Trade Organization Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA) via video-conference.

One end of the live video feed is at the World Bank office in Freetown, the capital of Sierra Leone, where a group of 25 representatives from the private sector, border agencies and national authorities will gather for each of the four sessions from 5-13 May. At the other is ITC's trade facilitation team, speaking from the agency's headquarters in Geneva.

This first national 'e-workshop' on trade facilitation was prompted by a request from the Sierra Leonean government for information and assistance on how to categorize its future obligations under the TFA and formally notify them to the WTO.

Under the TFA's ground-breaking provisions that link developing countries' obligation to implement the agreement with having the capacity to do so, governments must identify which of their TFA commitments they can put in place immediately ('Category A'), and which would require extra time ('Category B') or technical and financial assistance ('Category C') to implement. The trade facilitation agreement sets out rules for making border and customs procedures simpler, faster and more transparent. This in turn promises to reduce trading costs and times, which would be particularly beneficial for small and medium-sized traders.

The workshop aims at increasing Sierra Leonean stakeholders' awareness of the benefits of the TFA and the agreement's legal and policy implications. A key objective is helping the Government of Sierra Leone with determining how to categorize and notify measures resulting from the agreement. Sessions will cover trade facilitation principles, Sierra Leone's current trade facilitation performance and obligations under the TFA. The country's priorities for trade facilitation reforms are being debated.

At the end of the workshop, participants' recommendations on Sierra Leone's categorization of TFA commitments will be gathered into a synthesis document and submitted to national authorities for validation.

ITC and the Sierra Leonean trade ministry organised the workshop in collaboration with the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), as part of the Trade Negotiation Capacity Building Project co-funded by ECOWAS and the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency. The tripartite partnership and innovative delivery mechanism will allow ITC to support Sierra Leone's efforts to meet TFA deadlines and identify pressing trade facilitation reforms in an efficient and cost-effective manner. 
 
 
Japan May Take Taiwan's Food Import Curbs to WTO 
 
Tokyo, May 12 (Jiji Press)--The Japanese government may file a complaint with the World Trade Organization against Taiwan's tighter import restrictions on Japanese food, Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries Minister Yoshimasa Hayashi said Tuesday.

Taiwan will implement the enhanced restrictions on Friday, requiring place-of-origin certificates for all food products from Japan and radiation check certificates for some of them.

"The action is scientifically ungrounded and unilateral," Hayashi said at a press conference. Japan will continue to call on Taiwan to withdraw the restrictions, he suggested.

If Taiwan refuses to respond, Japan "will consider taking appropriate measures including the filing of a complaint with the WTO," he said.
 
 
Not COOLing Down: U.S.-Canada Trade Dispute Over Country-of-Origin Labelling Requirements
Kate Findlay 
11 May 2015
Mondaq Business Briefing
 
Canadian retailers and manufacturers in the food and beverage space should be aware of the upcoming decision of the Appellate Body of the World Trade Organization (WTO) regarding country-of-origin labelling (COOL) requirements in the United States. Previously expected on January 27, 2015, this highly anticipated decision will be released on May 18, 2015 and is likely to have a serious impact on both sides of the border.

Background

Since 2008, a U.S. agricultural policy law called the Food, Conservation and Energy Act of 2008 has imposed rules requiring detailed labels identifying the country of origin of beef, pork, chicken and certain other agricultural products sold in U.S. stores. The additional cost of sorting, labelling and storing Canadian-sourced meat differently in order to comply with the requirement has deterred some companies in the U.S. from purchasing Canadian meat.

Canada successfully challenged the COOL requirements before a WTO panel in 2010, with the panel finding that the COOL requirements are inconsistent with the U.S.'s WTO obligations. The U.S. appealed unsuccessfully in 2012 and was ultimately afforded until May 2013 to amend the COOL requirements in order to make them compliant with trade rules.

In 2013, Canada challenged the U.S.'s amendments before a WTO compliance panel, which agreed that the amended COOL measures remained in contravention of the U.S.'s trade obligations. The upcoming Appellate Body decision will be the result of a U.S. appeal of that compliance panel finding.

Canada's Proposed Retaliation

If the current U.S. appeal is unsuccessful, Canada will be permitted under WTO rules to retaliate by imposing import tariffs on U.S. goods. In June 2013, the Canadian government published a list of proposed retaliatory tariffs which would levy a 100% surtax on select U.S. imports, including:
·         corn
·         sugar
·         chocolate
·         pasta
·         cereal products
·         cheese
·         breads and pastries
·         orange juice

The Canadian government may be in a position to begin applying these retaliatory tariffs on U.S. imports by late 2015.

If implemented, the tariffs are likely to impact the highly-integrated North American agri-food supply chain, affecting industry players on both sides of the border.

The proposed tariffs are targeted almost exclusively at the food and beverage sector, which affects the business of a large cross-section of manufacturers and retailers, and may be passed on in the form of increased grocery bills for Canadian consumers.

What can be done?

Before tariffs are implemented, potentially affected manufacturers and retailers (and their U.S. affiliates) may reach out to advise the Canadian government of the impact of the proposed tariffs on their business and present alternatives.

If the proposed tariffs are implemented, potential avenues of legal recourse available to affected companies include: (1) taking action under Chapter 11 of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), which would generally proceed as an arbitration conducted in accordance with a specified set of international rules (such as UNCITRAL or ICSID); or (2) applying to the Federal Court to judicially review the decision to retaliate, the outcome of which, if successful, would be to obtain a declaration requiring the Canadian government to revise its decision to impose tariffs (rather than damages).
 
 
El Salvador Bans Poultry Imports from U.S. States Affected by Avian Flu
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, May 12, 2015
 
May 11 — El Salvador imposed a temporary ban on imports of U.S. poultry products from eight states that have reported cases of avian influenza, according to a recent notification of the World Trade Organization.
 
El Salvador specifically banned imports of fertile eggs, eggs for consumption, day-old birds and untreated poultry meat from Arkansas, California, Idaho, Kansas, Minnesota, Missouri, Oregon and Washington.
 
All other U.S. states are subject to existing preventive measures applicable to live birds and products from farms that have been certified avian influenza free, the notification said.
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture has confirmed cases of highly pathogenic avian influenza in more than a dozen states, including: Arkansas, California, Idaho, Iowa, Kansas, Minnesota, Missouri, Montana, North Dakota, South Dakota, Oregon, Washington and Wisconsin. The disease has affected nearly 30 million birds, both found in the wild and commercial poultry flocks.
 
El Salvador joins a growing list of more than 30 countries, including China and Mexico, that have implemented bans on U.S. poultry meat originating from the affected areas.
 
“Given that El Salvador is free from the avian influenza virus, it is vital to protect the country and its poultry industry by implementing measures to delay or prevent the introduction of the virus into national territory,” the notification submitted by El Salvador's Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock said.
 
 
Fast-track trade bill faces key test in U.S. Congress 
 
* Fast-track legislation faces key congressional hurdle
* Needs to clear 60-vote threshold to proceed

By Krista Hughes and Richard Cowan

WASHINGTON, May 12 (Reuters) - The Pacific trade agreement faces its first test in the U.S. Senate on Tuesday in a knife-edge vote that may hold the key to President Barack Obama's diplomatic pivot to Asia.

The Senate vote is one of a likely series of congressional hurdles to be overcome that will hinge on the support of a handful of Democrats. The White House has launched a campaign blitz directed at them in support of granting the president authority to speed trade deals through Congress.

Fast-track legislation gives lawmakers the right to set negotiating objectives but restricts them to a yes-or-no vote on trade deals such as the 12-nation Trans-Pacific Partnership, or TPP, a potential legacy-defining achievement for Obama.

"A loss would not be fatal ... but it's very important to keep the ball rolling forward," said Fred Bergsten, founding director of the Peterson Institute for International Economics.

The TPP would create a free trade zone covering 40 percent of the world economy - making it the biggest trade deal since the North American Free Trade Agreement liberalized trade between the United States, Canada and Mexico.

More than two decades later, that pact is blamed by many on the left for factory closures and job losses and has soured sentiment toward the TPP.

"It's incredibly important for American workers that we pass this bill," said Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, a Republican, on Monday. Without approval, he said, foreign companies would have easier access to U.S. markets than U.S. businesses would have to theirs.

Senate Democratic leader Harry Reid, a fast-track opponent, wants debate on the imminent expiration of federal transportation construction projects and a domestic surveillance program before Congress takes up fast track.

McConnell will have to find 60 votes in the 100-member Senate to overcome procedural obstacles before work can formally begin on the fast-track bill, which trading partners have said they want to see enacted before finalizing the TPP.

That requires support from at least six Democrats. But late on Monday, No. 2 Senate Democrat Dick Durbin questioned whether McConnell could find enough votes to bring the measure to the floor.

If the test vote succeeds, the Senate could start considering amendments to the bill including tough rules against currency manipulation in trade deals, which the Obama administration opposes, and human trafficking.

If it fails, Republicans could work on the transportation and surveillance bills and then try again, or push ahead on trade without limiting speaking time on the bill, virtually guaranteeing a lengthy debate.

Failure would send a worrying signal about the level of support for fast track, which unions, environmental and consumer groups strongly oppose, as do some conservatives.

"If the cloture vote fails, I think passage becomes less likely," said United States Business and Industry Council President Kevin Kearns, a fast-track critic.

The White House is pushing Democrats to support the TPP and fast track. Seven of 12 Democrats backed the bill during Senate committee debate.

"This is really an acid test on whether members of Congress believe in looking outward or looking inward," said Bill Lane, Global Governmental Affairs director for Caterpillar Inc , one of many companies pushing for the deal. (Reporting by Krista Hughes and Richard Cowan; Editing by Steve Orlofsky) 
 
 
Trade debate hits currency conundrum
By Victoria Guida 
POLITICO
5/11/15 6:07 PM EDT
If Harry Reid gets his way, the rising concerns in Congress over currency manipulation could play a role in sinking key trade legislation that President Barack Obama needs to complete his legacy-making trans-Pacific trade deal.
The Senate minority leader has threatened to filibuster controversial trade promotion authority legislation unless it’s wrapped into a package with other trade bills pending before the chamber — one of which contains language to address currency manipulation. He also wants highway and surveillance legislation to come up first before trade.
“This has become sort of a rallying cry, a proxy for ‘this is why I’m holding out against TPA. This is why I would never support TPP [the Trans-Pacific Partnership],” Dan Ikenson, director of trade policy studies at the libertarian Cato Institute, said of the push to move currency measures with the trade legislation.
The fight is expected to move to the fore this week with the Senate preparing for debate on the so-called fast-track trade bill, which would allow the president to expedite the passage of trade deals by submitting them to Congress for up-or-down votes, without amendments.
But the upcoming battle is only the latest chapter in a saga that has been playing out for years: Congress proposes currency legislation; one or neither chamber passes it; and the administration uses it as messaging to pressure trading partners without being bound to any particular legislative results.
The question this time is, has the issue reached an inflection point that will drive lawmakers to pass something concrete and enforceable?
“It’s not going to be easy,” said Sen. Rob Portman (R-Ohio), who’s leading a push with Sen. Debbie Stabenow (D-Mich.) to amend the fast-track bill with a mandate that the administration include enforceable currency language in the Asia-Pacific trade deal. “No one has a good whip count. I know it’s not going to be easy, but I’m going to fight for it because it’s the right thing to do.”
Republican leaders in Congress support Obama’s trade push and, like his administration, are against moving currency measures partly for fear they could be interpreted broadly to apply even to U.S. monetary policy. They say the fast-track legislation already addresses currency, although it only includes a suggestion, rather than a requirement, that the administration pursue binding obligations through the Asia-Pacific trade deal. The additional proposals are problematic enough that Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell has been trying to kill them behind closed doors, a Democratic aide said.
But while some congressional aides say the rancor over currency isn’t any worse than in years past, others point to growing bipartisan support for action. In 2013, 60 senators, including Portman, signed a letter calling for enforceable currency rules in the trans-Pacific trade deal. With 49 of those lawmakers still in office, supporters of the measures are in a strong position to push them forward.
“There’s a 60-40 shot that it’ll get through, which is better than it’s ever had,” a Democratic adviser said of the currency measures. “On the House side, I don’t know yet. On the Senate side, they’re very pragmatic. They’ll go where the votes are.”
Indeed, currency rules did pass the House in 2010 and the Senate in 2011, but in each case the other chamber didn’t take the legislation up.
Another question is whether putting currency in the mix will bring in needed support for the fast-track bill. For members like Sens. Chuck Schumer (D-N.Y.) and Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.), who are inclined to support trade deals but have hung their hats on the currency issue, including the language could be enough to sway their votes. But others, such as Sens. Sherrod Brown (D-Ohio) and Elizabeth Warren (D-Mass.), won’t be swayed from opposing the legislation because of their numerous other complaints about the trade deal.
The current legislation presents problems beyond just procedural gamesmanship, not the least of which is the lack of consensus on the issue. While the White House, Congress, businesses, unions and civil society groups all say currency manipulation is bad, they differ on which nations are doing it, how to stop it or even what “it” is.
Few would disagree that China’s devaluation of the renminbi or Japan’s of the yen gives those countries a trade advantage by making their exports cheaper and U.S. manufactured goods less competitive. But there is more than one way to lower a currency’s value, and not all of the methods are considered currency manipulation. For example, the Federal Reserve’s practice of “quantitative easing” is not explicitly for the purpose of devaluing currency, but it has the same effect.
Under the practice, the Fed uses new money to buy up securities and other assets from banks, which increases the money supply, lowers interest rates and encourages more loans, stimulating the economy.
Similarly, the Bank of Japan buys Japanese government bonds, driving down the value of the yen. The Obama administration has argued that trying to crack down on Tokyo and other countries by putting tough currency rules into the trade agreement could backfire on the United States by limiting the power of the Fed.
“We have a serious concern that in any trade negotiation other countries would insist that an enforceable currency provision be designed so it could be used to challenge legitimate U.S. monetary policy, an outcome we would find unacceptable,” Treasury Secretary Jack Lew told Portman and Stabenow in a letter last month. “Seeking enforceable currency provisions would likely derail the conclusion of the TPP given the deep reservations held by our trading partners.”
Tokyo has previously intervened in the currency market more directly, however, and some proponents of putting currency rules in the trade deal say such provisions would guarantee Japan could not do so in the future.
Detroit auto companies, Michigan lawmakers and others like Portman — who faces a tough reelection challenge from former Ohio Gov. Ted Strickland — want any currency rules in the trade deal to target Japan, shielding General Motors, Chrysler and Ford from more Japanese auto imports. They advocate snapping auto import tariffs back in place as punishment for violating the proposed rules, an approach Rep. Sander Levin (D-Mich.) especially favors.
Still, the Stabenow-Portman amendment didn’t make it through committee. The senators plan to try to advance it again on the Senate floor despite opposition from Republican leadership and the White House.
China presents a more clear-cut case for advocates of currency rules. Beijing manipulates the value of its currency directly by buying up U.S. dollars and selling renminbi, helping to keep the dollar’s value strong and renminbi’s value weak.
Schumer and Sen. Jeff Sessions (R-Ala.) introduced an amendment to a customs and enforcement bill that would require the administration to include the question of currency manipulation in investigating whether to establish protective duties in response to unfair trade practices — a clear shot at China, which faces multiple such investigations from the U.S. every year.
Manufacturers and labor groups say negotiating a trade deal without having some defense against currency manipulation in place will undermine all of the gains achieved by U.S. negotiators; and some lobbyists say the China-focused proposal has the better chance of passing.
However, the House version of the customs and enforcement bill doesn’t contain the currency language or several other controversial provisions, running the risk that the language could get taken out in a conference.
One Senate aide said that, like Reid, Oregon Sen. Ron Wyden, the Finance Committee’s ranking member and Democratic co-sponsor of the fast-track bill, wants customs to move with the other trade legislation, so McConnell will likely find it difficult to move one without the other.
As for the House, the Sessions-Schumer amendment “would absolutely pass if it came to the floor,” the aide said. “But it’ll be up to the speaker in terms of how he handles that, and the last few years we’ve tried to pass it, he hasn’t brought it up.”
The need for Democratic votes in the House could put some pressure on Speaker John Boehner to bring it up this time around, the aide said.
But of course, that’s not what the Detroit three or Michigan lawmakers prefer, although they support the measure.
“One of the ironies of this is the people that are going to get hosed here in a way are the auto guys because the amendment that’s going to stay in is the one they don’t want, rather than the one that they do want, which is kind of unfortunate for them,” a business source said.
Levin said the measure wouldn’t go far enough to address the overall problem.
“I think its prospects are not very bright,” Levin told reporters last week. “The administration has made very clear they’re opposed to that legislation.” He added that getting strong currency rules into the Asia-Pacific deal would be a historic opportunity.
House Ways and Means Committee Chairman Paul Ryan (R-Wis.) said he would be willing to examine the currency language when the customs bill goes to conference, but he would not agree to anything that could cause a trade war and thus potentially jeopardize the dollar’s role as the world’s reserve currency.
A Senate Republican aide said that while the two proposals are “complementary,” Japan’s currency practices are actually having a bigger effect on U.S. trade right now by making U.S. auto exports less competitive in important third markets like India, Brazil and even eventually China.
Also, the Trans-Pacific Partnership could include China someday. “If you’re concerned about China, then you’re going to support [the Stabenow-Portman] amendment because some people think there’s a universe where China may get into a trade agreement,” the GOP aide said.
Ikenson said one way to make an enforceable currency provision more palatable to those concerned about the potential for backlash on US. monetary policy would be to would “quadruple-lock” currency rules with safeguards that would allow the use of enforcement only in extreme circumstances.
He noted, as many trade experts do, that Schumer’s amendment could violate World Trade Organization rules. The WTO allows protective duties only in response to unfair subsidies specific to an industry or region, but currency manipulation could be interpreted as a subsidy for the entire country.
In his letter, Lew said the administration also opposes Schumer’s proposal. “The legislation raises questions about consistency with our international obligations, and other countries might pursue retaliatory measures that could hurt our exporters,” he wrote.
Lawmakers supporting the language say it was written with WTO jurisprudence in mind.
“We do very strongly believe we would be able to successfully defend any case that would be brought against this,” a Democratic aide said.
Whether or not the White House or WTO would get behind a currency measure, Ikenson said the political pressure over currency manipulation is now so high that Congress will have to try to do something.
“It’s a political problem,” he said. “We should at least have a political solution.”
 
 
Canada says will defend dairy protection at Pacific trade talks 
By David Ljunggren 
 
OTTAWA, May 11 (Reuters) - Canada will continue to defend a system of tariffs and quotas that protect dairy farmers, a senior official said on Monday, in comments that could worry nations negotiating a Pacific trade treaty.

Canada is under pressure at talks to create a Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) because concessions sought by the other 11 nations could cause trouble for the ruling Conservatives in this October's general election.

All three major political parties in Canada support the so-called supply management system of protection for the dairy and poultry sectors. TPP nations such as New Zealand say the system needs to be dismantled while others want to see it reformed.

"(We) will continue to promote and defend the interests of our supply management sector as we promote and defend our agricultural industry more broadly speaking," said Trade Minister Ed Fast when asked by an opposition legislator whether he would fully protect the system at the TPP talks.

"We did that with the negotiations (to create a recent free trade deal with the European Union), we will do that in our Trans-Pacific Partnership negotiations," he told a Parliamentary committee.

When Canada negotiated the EU trade treaty it gave away an extra 17,000 tonnes of cheese, less than 4 percent of the overall Canadian market.

Last week U.S. Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack said Canada risked getting left behind in the TPP talks because it had been reluctant to negotiate opening its markets.

Canadian officials say they are waiting to see whether the U.S. Congress passes the proposed "fast track" legislation that would make it easier for President Barack Obama to win passage of the TPP. Some Democratic lawmakers have resisted the fast-track legislation, which would require Congress to vote any agreement up or down without the chance of amending it. Opponents say the deal could hurt American workers.

Last Friday Canadian Farm Minister Gerry Ritz said Vilsack was "proving that he is worth his weight in gold when it comes to deflecting away from the fact" that the administration has not yet assured the passage of fast track legislation. (Reporting by David Ljunggren; Editing by David Gregorio) 
 
 
News Analysis: EU's quota-free dairy products more reliant on world market 
Maria Vasileiou/lf 
 
THE HAGUE, May 11 (Xinhua) -- European and Dutch dairy farmers will become more dependent on world market conditions in the coming years as a result of the milk production increase following the abolition of quotas, European Union (EU) and Dutch agricultural experts said.

This also means that the price of EU milk and dairy products will be more connected to the global market and therefore more likely to fluctuate.

"A large part of the EU's additional milk production will be sold in international markets as domestic consumption increase will be relatively low," said Roel Jongeneel, senior scientist and market analyst at the Agricultural Economics Institute (LEI) of Wageningen University, a major research institution in the agri-food sector.

"As the share of total milk production sold to world markets increases, so will the volatility of prices," Jongeneel told Xinhua in an interview following the abolition of the milk quota regime on April 1, which had been in place for more than 30 years.

PRICE VOLATILITY 
 
Prices of EU dairy products were more volatile during the past years due to policy changes reducing export subsidies and lowering intervention prices.

"More exports to countries outside the EU coupled with the adjustments in the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) towards a very low safety net price system for dairy products means more price volatility," the Dutch agri-food expert explained.

Milk production was expected to increase by around 17 percent in the next ten years in The Netherlands, and by 8 percent in the EU as a whole, the European Commission estimated.

In absolute terms, EU milk deliveries were expected to grow by 12 million tonnes in the next 10 years.

"Medium-term projections put the milk price at around 35 ct per kg on average in the next 10 years," said Tassos Haniotis, director of Economic Analysis, Perspectives and Evaluation in the Directorate for Agriculture at the European Commission.

However, these projections were made under certain macroeconomic assumptions, he warned.

"Lower oil prices, as currently forecast, could for example lead to a lower average EU milk price around 33 ct per kg," the expert in agricultural economics explained.

According to his predictions, the milk price would indeed vary from this average every time there was a temporary disequilibrium between supply and demand.

This could be affected by weather impacting supply, slowdown or acceleration of demand, or changes in macroeconomic conditions, he said.

PRICES UNDER PRESSURE 
 
Milk and dairy product prices were under pressure since the beginning of 2015, a clear indication that EU's reliance on third markets would increase in a quota-free world.

"Milk and dairy product prices are already under pressure and they will be for a period of years," said Jongeneel.

"Despite the fact that global milk production has eased in March, world prices expressed in U.S. dollars remained low, because Chinese and Russian imports are still weak," said Haniotis.

A recovery reported in January and February was followed by a downward trend in the EU over the last weeks, despite a weaker euro.

According to Haniotis, prices might slowly recover in the coming months if China, the top dairy importer, placed larger orders.

"The major uncertainty remains if and when the Russian import ban will be lifted," he pointed out.

CHINA AS LARGEST IMPORTER 
 
China and other Asian countries, the Middle East and parts of Africa were expected to import EU's additional milk production in the next decade.

Demand in these areas would increase as world consumption of dairy products rose by 2.1 percent annually during the same period. Population growth and changes in consumption patterns towards a higher intake of dairy proteins would be the main drivers.

Most of these regions would also see an increase in their production affecting the growth rate of world imports. These were expected to rise by around 2 percent annually, 1 percent lower than during the last decade.

However, according to European Commission estimates, in absolute terms, growth would be only slightly less (an additional 14 million tonnes in milk equivalent).

China was expected to maintain its position as the world's largest importer of dairy commodities, accounting for around 20 percent of world imports by 2024.

The annual increase in Chinese imports was, however, expected to slow down to around 3 percent a year, far lower than the annual rate of 16 percent recorded over the last decade, according to European Commission estimates.

The decrease in Russian imports was expected to continue, not only as a result of the import ban, but also because the country's population was expected to decrease by 0.3 percent a year.

MORE CHEESE AND MILK POWDERS 
 
A large part of the EU's additional milk production in the quota-free regime would be used to expand cheese and milk powder production, mainly skimmed milk powder and whey.

"We expect an increase in the production of cheese and skimmed milk powder in the EU and in The Netherlands," said Jonegeel. "EU is more competitive in these products."

Given the limited growth projections for these products in the EU's home market, a large part would be exported.

In developing countries, consumption of cheese and milk powder was expected to increase by 1.9 percent and 1.2 percent annually during the next decade.

As a result, the EU's market share in world trade of dairy products was likely to increase, in particular for whey (about 60 percent), cheese (close to 40 percent) and skimmed milk powder (around 30 percent), as it was pointed out in a recent LEI Wageningen report under the title "What will happen after the EU milk quota system expires in 2015?"

Even though New Zealand was expected to remain the largest exporter of milk, accounting for around a third of world exports, the EU would be close behind as it strengthens its position in the world market, the European Commission has estimated.

 
Report Criticizes U.N. Agency Over Slow Response to Ebola 
By Denise Roland 
12 May 2015
The Wall Street Journal Europe
 
LONDON -- A crisis over the largest Ebola epidemic on record could have been averted if the World Health Organization had moved faster to seek outside support, an international panel of experts found after an initial review of the agency's response to the deadly outbreak in West Africa.

An independent panel led by Barbara Stocking, former head of humanitarian charity Oxfam, said in its first report on the agency's response to Ebola that there was "strong, if not complete, consensus that WHO does not have a robust emergency operations capacity or culture."

It added: "Further, in this emergency, before August 2014 WHO did not appropriately seek support from other United Nations agencies and humanitarian actors in the United Nations Inter-Agency Standing Committee system.

"At an earlier stage, these resources could have been made available and known systems put in place; these might have averted the crisis that led to the need to establish the United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response."

The panel called on WHO member states to pour extra investment into the agency to strengthen its emergency-response capabilities.

More-radical solutions such as setting up a new agency for health emergencies or putting another U.N. agency in charge of responding to outbreaks would only complicate matters, because such bodies would need to coordinate with the WHO in any case, the panel added.

"As WHO already has the mandate to deliver on operational response, it would be a far more effective and efficient use of resources to make WHO fit for purpose," the panel said.

A spokeswoman for the WHO said the agency welcomed the report ahead of its World Health Assembly this month. "Now it's up to the member states to look at those findings and decide what should be taken forward," she said.

The WHO commissioned the panel in March to undertake an assessment of the agency's response to the Ebola outbreak. It will present its final report in July, after visiting and consulting with the affected countries.

The Ebola virus has devastated parts of Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone, with a death toll of 11,007 at the latest count, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The WHO declared Liberia free of Ebola over the weekend, after 42 days -- twice Ebola's maximum incubation period -- since the burial of its last confirmed patient without discovering a new case. But Guinea and Sierra Leone are still reporting cases, including 18 in the week ended May 3.

The epidemic also took a heavy economic toll on the three already-poor countries. The World Bank has estimated that the outbreak has eroded the gross domestic product of the three nations by a total of $2.2 billion.

The report also raised a number of questions about the WHO's response as the Ebola outbreak advanced across West Africa last year.

It said it was still unclear why early warnings failed to result in an effective and adequate response. The WHO first drew attention to the outbreak in April 2014, but this "was not followed by international mobilization and a consistent communication strategy" and Ebola wasn't declared a public-health emergency until August.

The panel said it would continue to investigate the role of "political, cultural, organizational and financial factors" in the delay.

It also drew attention to the "serious gaps" in the early months of the outbreak, when traditional cultural practices such as funeral and burial customs helped accelerate virus transmission and "bleak public messaging" that no treatment was available reduced communities' willingness to engage.

The panel also questioned why the WHO was unable to take greater command of how the crisis was portrayed in the media. It said the agency's communication strategy "was not able to counteract the very critical reporting on the work of the organization."
END
 
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.