China Focus: Heavy metal losses for China's rare earth companies
ECOWAS-TNCB Meeting On Trade Facilitation Agreement Kicks Off
When will Kazakhstan finally be allowed into the WTO?
Make 2015 a year of world trade action
We are getting frustrated with China: Rajeev Kher
Editorial: Exports policy won't help
India; Prime minister & BJP chief bat for farmers' welfare
Moldovan, Russian premiers discuss economic, energy cooperation, trade
Seychelles will become 161st member of WTO on 26 April
Le Maroc célèbre les 20 ans de l'OMC
Europa no debe rebajar el acuerdo con EEUU
Pelea fuerte México ante la OMC
 
 
China Focus: Heavy metal losses for China's rare earth companies
shihao 
3 April 2015
Xinhua's China Economic Information Service
BEIJING, April 3 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xinhua) -- Two of China's major rare earth miners reported sharp falls in profits in 2014, in the face of poor demand and weak prices.
Major producer, REHT reported on Friday 5.84 billion yuan (949 million U.S. dollars) in operating revenue in 2014, down 31.1 percent from 2013. Net profits plummeted by 57.4 percent to 643 million yuan, according to the company's annual report.
On the same day, China Minmetals Rare Earth Co. posted a 64.8 percent drop in operating revenue to 702 million yuan and its balance sheet turned from black to red with 55.8 million yuan in net losses.
China Minmetals deliberately reduced sales last year, leading to great losses. Both enterprises blamed weak demand and low prices. Rare earth prices are at a multi-year low, despite a slight rebound at the end of 2014. 
Upgrading the industry, big enterprises were merged with dozens of small miners around the end of last year to establish six major rare earth groups: REHT, China Minmetals, Xiamen Tungsten Co., HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Aluminum Corporation of China, Guangdong Rare Earth Co. and China Southern Rare Earth Group.
The rare earth branch of Xiamen Tungsten made a loss in 2014 and the remaining three firms have yet to release their annual reports. 
Rare earths, a class of 17 minerals, are some of the most sought after metals due to their military use and role in green technology like wind turbines and car batteries. China meets over 90 percent of the world demand, but at the cost of much pollution. 
To curb environmental degradation and protect resources, China began to set quotas and high duties on rare earth exports in 2010, causing friction with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union, Japan and the United States. A HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO ruling last August declared the measures inconsistent with HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO rules and China's Accession Protocol. China removed quotas on Jan. 1 this year and will cancel export duties on May 3.
China's rare earth industry has always been beset by problems including illegal mining, smuggling and a lack of competitiveness due to weak research and development. 
"When all barriers are lifted, regulators will face fresh pressure and will need effective instruments if the industry is to prosper," said Wu Yiding of Jiangxi University of Science and Technology.
China Economic Information Service of Xinhua News Agency
ECOWAS-TNCB Meeting On Trade Facilitation Agreement Kicks Off
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Momodou Faal
by Momodou Faal 
3 April 2015
All Africa
Apr 03, 2015 (The Daily Observer/All Africa Global Media via COMTEX) -- The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Economic Community of West African States Trade Negotiation Capacity Building (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" ECOWAS-TNCB) project, in collaboration with the Ministry of Trade, Industry, Regional Integration and Employment, yesterday began a two-day workshop on the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) Trade Facilitation Agreement, at the Kairaba Beach Hotel.
Funded by the ECOWAS Commission and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA), the meeting will focus on overview of TNCB Project, understanding the Trade Facilitation Agreement and its implication, categorising Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA) provisions into A, B, and C; the role of the National Trade Facilitation Committee, Special & Differential Treatment (S&DT) notification requirement, among others.
Speaking at the occasion, Fatim Njie, the deputy permanent secretary at the Ministry of Trade, Regional Integration and Employment, deputising for her ministry's permanent secretary, affirmed that the workshop is on the recently agreed HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement to assist The Gambia categorise its commitment into A, B, and C for notification recommendations under the agreement.
She explained that the Trade Facilitation Agreement contains provisions for expediting the movement, release and clearance of goods, including goods in transit and it also sets out measures for effective cooperation between customs and other appropriate authorities on trade facilitation and custom compliance issues.
DPS Njie pointed out that the Ministry of Trade has a central role in ensuring that trade is facilitated at all times and this is evident in the ministry's policies, measures, strategies and approach in consultation of stakeholders at any time on any trade policy decision.
In line with this, she went on, the ministry created the National Trade Policy Decision Making Committee with a view to mainstreaming trade and trade-related issues into national development strategies that could work in this direction.
The Trade DPS further stated that the meeting will continue to discuss the ways and means on HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" ECOWAS support for the improvement of the work of the Inter-Institutional Committee (IIC) and that it will help improve the technicians in formulating and implementing trade policies and programme measures in a way that is consistent with national and regional development aspirations.
"The workshop will avail us the opportunity to review the report of the needs assessment conducted under the agreement, and as well as enhance the participants' understanding of national obligations for the implementation of the TFA," she hinted.
Madam Njie added that this workshop for notification recommendations should pay attention to category C which will require them to identify the kind of technical assistance and capacity building needed to enable them implement the specific articles in the agreement.
According to her, the agreement has some flexibility favourable to the Least Developed Countries (LDC) like The Gambia.
"The deliberations of the meeting should be in the spirit of national interest and participants should discuss openly and frankly with a view to notifying The Gambia's commitment under the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement", she stressed.
The DPS therefore thanked ECOWAS Commission through Swedish Government for providing both the technical and financial support that enables them to conduct the meeting in The Gambia.
Kolawole Sofola, the TNCB Project coordinator, informed that a day's meeting of the Inter-Institutional Committee (IIC), which will review the functioning of the IIC and assess its future needs, would follow the two-day workshop.
According to him, this will provide them an opportunity to learn from the experiences of the Inter-Institutional Committee of The Gambia and share lessons from other committees.
Sofola indicated that in order to effectively achieve its targets in an increasingly interconnected and integrated world, The Gambia will have to maximise the advantages from global trading system through active participation and subsequent implementation in the multilateral and regional negotiations and agreements such as the Doha Development Agenda and the Economic Partnership Agreement (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EPA), and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" ECOWAS Common External Tariff (CET), which have received impetus with the historical reach at the 9th WTO Ministerial Conference held in Bali in December 2013.
The TNCB Project coordinator explained that the project, which is funded by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" ECOWAS and the Swedish International Development Cooperation, was set up to build the negotiation capacity of member states to enable them to benefit from their participation in the international trading system.
He intimated that in its 1st phase, the project concentrated setting up the project secretariat at the ECOWAS Commission and building on human capacity and agreements, whilst the second phase, which built on the achievements of the first phase, was geared towards assisting member states to strengthen or establish national inter-institutional committees required for more effective participation in international trade.
Mohammed Saeed, Senior Trade Facilitation adviser, Trade Facilitation and Policy for Business at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" the International Trade Centre made similar sentiments, while Madam Baturu Camara of the Ministry of Trade, chaired the occasion. 
All Africa Global Media
When will Kazakhstan finally be allowed into the WTO?
3 April 2015
Kazakhstan Newsline
KAZAEN
By John C.K. Daly
On January 1, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization, responsible for 97 percent of world trade, celebrated its 20th anniversary. On its website the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO defines its role as "the only global international organization dealing with the rules of trade between nations." The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO polices free trade agreements, settles trade disputes between governments and organizes trade negotiations and, most significantly, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO decisions are absolute and every member must abide by its rulings.
Of the 15 independent nations that emerged from the breakup of the USSR in 1991, only Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan remain outside the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO, a situation that Kazakhstan, the ninth largest country in the world, the second-biggest former Soviet republic and the largest economy in Central Asia, hopes to rectify later this year.
There are many yardsticks to evaluate Kazakhstan's changes. When the USSR collapsed in December 1991, Kazakhstan inherited the fourth largest nuclear arsenal in the world after Russia, the United States and Ukraine as well as a centrally planned economy emphasizing armaments production, directed from Moscow. Kazakhstan's government renounced nuclear weapons and by April 1995 had transferred all of its nuclear warheads to Russia, winning international plaudits. The nation's efforts to move away from its inherited centrally planned economy to a free market model globally integrated have been no less impressive, if much less heralded, which membership in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO is intended to crown.
It has certainly been a long process, as Kazakhstan's application to join the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO was submitted on January 29, 1996, less than five years after achieving full independence from the Soviet Union. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO on February 6, 1996 established a Working Party for Kazakhstan's admission to the organization.
But, 19 years after Kazakhstan expressed its desire to join the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO, the country is still waiting to see its membership approved, while Kyrgyzstan (1998), Latvia (1999), Estonia (1999), Georgia (2000), Lithuania (2001), Moldova (2001), Armenia (2003), Ukraine (2008), Russia (2012) and Tajikistan (2013) have all joined the trade organization ahead of it.
Kazakhstan, along with Belarus and Uzbekistan, remain "Observer governments" with pending applications, leaving only Turkmenistan as the sole post-Soviet state uninterested in HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO membership. In contrast to Kazakhstan's prolonged HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO application Kyrgyzstan, from HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO application to membership, took only two years and four months.
The Kazakh economy is rich in natural resources including oil, natural gas, and minerals. With its significant geopolitical location, Kazakhstan also serves as a strategic entry point to the rest of Central Asia and borders regional powers such as Russia and China.
Such opportunities would be welcome as the recent dramatic fall in global oil prices has inflicted substantial economic hardship. Kazakh Foreign Minister Erlan Idrissov has emphasized how important HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO membership is to Kazakhstan, remarking, "This is a balancer of our global economic relations. Through the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO, we will get access to an extensive global trading system, to its standards, rules and regulations. These same rules and regulations will apply to Kazakhstan in its trade with other countries. So, for us the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO is a signifier of growth, which we are consistently working towards."
The Working Party on Kazakhstan's accession to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO consists of 39 HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO member-states with the 28 HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union (EU) member states involved as a single entity. Kazakhstan has already signed bilateral trade protocols with 30 HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO member-states, including the U.S. and the EU and by the end of 2011 had completed bilateral negotiations with all of its Working Party members.
Since the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO was created in 1995, the U.S. administration has used the Geneva-based group to help resolve a growing number of disputes, rather than attempting to impose sanctions unilaterally, an option that in many cases is illegal under HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO regulations. To become members, candidate countries must agree to cut tariffs and change their laws to guarantee the rights of importers and exporters under HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO rules.
Kazakh President Nursultan Nazarbayev has long been sanguine about what HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO membership would mean for Kazakhstan. Speaking on Feb. 27, 1999 about the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization he commented about the aspirations of post-Soviet nations, "We are all holding talks, and we all want to join. But anyone who joins accepts certain conditions. He opens his own borders up fully and paves the way for a flood of Western goods into that country. In other words, regardless of whether we want to develop our own industries inside our own countries, Western goods will fill our markets up very cheaply, and our enterprises will stop producing. In that case, agreeing to open up fully -- let anyone who wants to bring his goods into our country -- threatens to cause unemployment and the shutdown of our enterprises."
While a number of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members welcomed progress in Kazakhstan's accession negotiations they still expressed serious concerns about the absence of inputs and progress in tariff adjustment, regulations and practices governing sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) measures and WTO-inconsistent trade-related investment measures (TRIMS), including those in state-owned enterprises.
Another stumbling block for Kazakhstan's HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO admission is its commitment to the Customs Union (CU) that it formed in 2010 with Russia and Belarus, which on January 1, 2015 became the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Eurasian Economic Union (EEU). The CU led to a rise in some trade tariffs disputes with other nations, subsequently requiring new discussions about the conditions of its HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO entry. In June 2010 EU foreign policy chief Catherine Ashton warned that the CU might harm international trade and pose "an additional barrier fencing Astana, Minsk and Moscow off from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO."
It is difficult to see these objections as anything other than a stalling tactic, however, as the activities of other international regional trading entities, including the EU and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" North American Free Trade Agreement (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" NAFTA) do not preclude or inhibit HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO activity. Despite this, seeing darker ulterior motives in the EEU beyond mere economics, a September 29, 2013 Washington Post editorial warned that the "Moscow-led customs union... would be an E.U. rival - and a means of realizing Mr. Putin's dream of recreating something like the Soviet Union."
More recently, objections have arisen among Kazakhstan Working Party members even though, in a rare display of bilateral accord in the wake of the Ukrainian crisis, both the U.S. and Russia support Kazakhstan's accession as soon as possible, along with the EU and China. On a visit last month to northeastern Kazakhstan Deputy Prime Minister Bakytzhan Sagintayev remarked, "We have almost completed all the preparations and the negotiation processes for the accession into the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO. But we still have some unresolved issues with Mongolia and Ukraine." As a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO Working Party has to make a unanimous recommendation to the General Council for admission, Kazakhstan's admission is being sidetracked yet again.
These delays do not only impact Kazakhstan. Kazakhstan is situated in the heart of the Eurasian continent so it could serve as a transit route from East to West and from South to North and has spent billions on developing its railways and roads with the aim of Eurasia transit hub, which will benefit all of its neighbors – China, Russia, Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan, transforming the country from "land-locked" to "land-linked." Looking at the future, Kazakhstan has launched its new Strategy 2050 to become one of the 30 most competitive nations in the world by 2050.
On November 25, 2014 WTO Director-General HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevêdo said that negotiations with Kazakhstan "are at an advanced stage of maturity and on the threshold of conclusion," adding that a formal decision should be announced in early 2015. Given Azevêdo's comments and the fact that it is now early 2015, Kazakhstan's long effort to join the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO seems on the verge of being fulfilled, an event that will not only benefit Kazakhstan, but all nations along the reviving Silk Road, according to UPI.com.
Dr. John C.K. Daly is a non-resident Senior Scholar at the Central Asia-Caucasus Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of Advanced International Studies in Washington DC.
Kazakhstan Newsline LLP
Make 2015 a year of world trade action
3 April 2015
EurActiv.com
EURACOM
International trade creates wealth and opportunities around the world. But the richest countries must take care to foster, not weaken the poorest, writes Anabel Gonzalez.
Anabel Gonzalez is HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" the World Bank Group's Senior Director for Trade and Competitiveness and the former Trade Minister of Costa Rica.
Just months into 2015, the world is poised to reset the stage of international trade. A new negotiating agenda is gaining momentum. Leaders are striking up important conversations about trade openness and making progress in mega-regional trade deals. This is good news. But if 2015 is the year of action in trade, let's make sure all are included.
The past 20 years has seen spectacular growth in world trade – new countries have joined the global marketplace, creating opportunities in places that otherwise might still be mired in poverty. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) has helped to drive growth and poverty reduction in ways that would have been hard to imagine at its founding 20 years ago.
Yet today, world trade is fragile. Before the 2007-08 crisis, trade was growing at almost twice the level of real global GDP growth. Today, trade growth lags behind global GDP growth, hovering at 3 percent or below. The causes for this are complex. They go beyond the slowdown in global growth and are related to more fundamental, long-term changes. Trade growth increased in the 80s and 90s as tariffs were lowered and production fragmented into global supply chains. It decreased in the 2000s as the pace of this process slowed.
But 2015 could be a turning point. Disappointment at the slowing engine of trade may provide fertile ground for policy action. Indeed, there are signs of new energy already.
For one, there is the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO Bali agreement, the most significant since the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO was established 20 years ago and a strong endorsement of multilateralism. The cornerstone of this achievement – the Trade Facilitation Agreement – promises to reduce trade costs in countries around the world. It is also a call for international assistance to developing countries, a rallying cry to help the world's poorest governments remove trade barriers, integrate into global value chains, and upgrade the value they bring to the global market.
There have also been significant signals recently that the United States, the world's biggest economy, stands behind global trade. One such is the discussion around the Trade Promotion Authority (TPA), which would speed the country's ability to approve trade deals.
Yet another sign is the growing energy around the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), a landmark preferential trade agreement. The TPP would define trade rules for an area covering 40 percent of global output and set a new standard. Countries negotiating other preferential trade agreements would likely attempt to match the quality and depth of integration codified in the TPP. This dynamic would give new momentum to discussions between the US and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union on the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP), and negotiations on the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP), a trade agreement involving 16 countries in the Asia-Pacific, including China.
In this new context, the international community must ensure the preservation of an inclusive system that gives voice to poor countries and maximises their gains from trade.
Three priorities would help make this happen: First, we need to bolster the strength of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO, where low-income countries are guaranteed a voice. The best guarantee of an inclusive trade system is progress in multilateral trade negotiations. This means taking concrete steps toward closing the Doha Round: the G20 Trade Ministers meeting next October will be an important milestone, as will the December Nairobi Ministerial Conference of the WTO.
Second, preferential trade agreements should be as open as possible, maximising gains for outsiders and minimising discrimination against them. Some changes through the mega-regionals will benefit all – improving transparency, streamlining regulation and opening the services sector, for example. But to maximise the long-term gains, membership should ultimately be available to all countries willing to meet the standards. International organisations should collect and analyse information on the terms of these deals. We must help countries identify policies that have harmful side-effects for countries not party to them, or policies that reduce the efficiency of the global trading system.
Finally, we should continue to provide development assistance. To build a strong and inclusive multilateral trading system, we must help poor countries meet the standards set in mega-regional deals. These agreements must provide an opportunity for faster, deeper international integration, while still preserving a sense of unity in the broader trade regime.
None of this will fall into place automatically. Leadership from key players is essential to make it happen. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" The World Bank Group is ready to play its part.
>> Read: HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" Development research at the World Bank 
communication@euractiv.com 
We are getting frustrated with China: Rajeev Kher
Asit Ranjan Mishra 
3 April 2015
New Delhi, April 3 -- The commerce ministry on Wednesday brought out its much-delayed five-yearly foreign trade policy (FTP) 2015-20. Commerce secretary HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Rajeev Kher is the author of the radical policy that includes a separate statement analysing the challenges and opportunities for Indian exports. The policy also amalgamates the myriad export subsidy schemes into a services and a merchandise exports promotion scheme. Kher spoke in an interview about why subsidy-based exports regime is not sustainable and the opportunity and challenges of mega-regional trade agreements. Edited excerpts:
What are the broad principles behind the FTP?
About a year ago, when we started looking at this, we thought the focus is too much on incentives. Clearly, these incentives are very important because they, to some extent, neutralize the difficulties of infrastructure, processes, etc. But they become the be-all and end-all for the industry. Policy and incentives are considered synonymous with each other.
Then, these incentives have to be rooted in something. You can't be providing 2% incentive to one and 3% to the other without a logic or context.
Thirdly, there is so much happening globally, (and) we seem not to acknowledge that. So the whole idea was to create a state-of-the-art document, which will give a sense of where we are and where we propose to go. And within that, we have rooted the incentives and processes.
The principle that governs this is...we have picked up from the already flowing menu on the table-Make In India, Digital India, Skills India, ease of doing business and trade facilitation. So we are trying to see how we can integrate with all of this. Most importantly, commerce is the front-end of economic activity. You cannot do anything unless the back-end is also taken care of. So we need to acknowledge that trade policy can do only good when the back-end is taken care of. That connect of back-end and front-end has to be brought in very carefully which is what this policy clearly acknowledges.
Are you preparing the ground for subsequent phasing out of export subsidies?
You cannot run a foreign trade regime purely driven by subsidies. Clearly, for a long time, China has done that, many countries are doing it and we have also been doing that. But the reality has to be faced. First of all, we still don't have deep pockets; we cannot offer the kind of subsidies that some of our trading partners have given.
Two, I have been speaking about the whole gamut of the subsidy agreement (under HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) and we need to recognize what is the reality of law and our commitment. Within this framework, we will have to adjust ourselves. In order to adjust, at some point we have to do away with the subsidies. I am not saying it will be at the end of these five years. But, you must prepare yourselves for a gradual phase out.
You have also spoken about high tariff protection some sectors are enjoying. Why not unilaterally reduce tariffs and negotiate with countries based on market potential?
Tariffs serve the traditional purpose of creation of a protective wall and the modern purpose of getting you into the value chain. I would like to subscribe to the second purpose. If you identify a value chain, see the point at which you enter the value chain and then create a tariff framework which has lower tariff, thus making it easier for imports to come in so that you can derive value added advantage. That does not mean we need to drastically reduce tariffs. I am not at all making a case for that. But there is case for rationalization or optimization of tariffs keeping in mind that we want to enter certain value chain and we want to add to the Make In India focus. Therefore, to derive advantage, if we need to optimize tariffs, we should.
Which are the sectors that are enjoying high tariff protection right now?
I don't want to get into that because whatever I say will unnecessarily create controversy. But we know there are certain sectors where there is high tariff protection. Those sectors clearly benefited by it and they acknowledge that and they have come to a point where they are a global industry.
You are referring to the automobiles sector.
I am basically talking about automobiles and auto components. But at some point, you need to ask, is there a case for me to bring down the tariffs, because the higher protective wall is now making me less and less competitive? Look at agriculture. To make India a processing hub, is there a case for me to make my tariffs rational which will help me in being a competitive processor? I am not saying we just need to pick up these two. I am just giving examples.
You have set an export target of $900 billion by 2020. Don't you think that is too ambitious?
I don't think so. $900 billion by 2020 is a CAGR (compounded annual growth rate) of 14%. Between 2004 and 2014, our exports have grown by 13.5%. I acknowledge that during that period, the economy has grown phenomenally, but then we are hoping for better days on two accounts. One, we hope the world economy will come out of this low; nobody has said that this (current downturn) will go on for more than two years. Two, domestic consumption and competitiveness is bound to increase because of all this focus on infrastructure and manufacturing. And also (because of) what is happening in our neighbourhood. There are trading partners (such as China) who are growing at a subdued rate compared to their earlier growth rate. So all of this will give us the opportunities. Therefore, I think a 13-14% growth rate is not unachievable.
But this projection comes at a time when our merchandise exports have been contracting for three consecutive months. Mega trade agreements such as TPP (Trans-Pacific Partnership) and TTIP (Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership) in which we are not part of, will pose significant challenge to our exports. So how do you see the $900 billion projection from that angle?
Yes, it is challenging. Our exports have shown sustained negativity in last three months. But the second thing, I don't consider a negative because if we play our cards well even without being members of these mega agreements, we can get benefit out of them. We need to strategize our relationships appropriately. That is something that I cannot speak out openly about. We can do that.
One of the biggest problems for India's trade policy has been the inability to penetrate the Chinese market. Where do you think we are lacking?
You can do only as much as possible within your reach. When it comes to market access in China, we have tried several permutations and combinations. There has been sustained campaign by us to find market access in China at least in three or four product areas such as meat, agricultural products, pharmaceuticals, information technology. There has been a lot of conversation with China. There have been a lot of paperwork, memorandums of understanding (MoUs). But when it comes to our exports, it is not happening. So clearly, something is missing.
On our part, we have focused on sending delegations continuously once in a few months. China has also invited us in many delegations and fairs. But the thing is you need to address the real pain. For example, in IT sector, the disadvantage that I have, aside from (lack of knowledge of) the Chinese language, is that I don't know the procurement profile of state enterprises. My industry needs to understand what is the market opportunity. If Chinese state-owned enterprises are not advertising, if they are following purchasing procedures that are not transparent...
In pharmaceuticals, market authorization in China takes up to three to four years. The fee is very hefty.
I had a conversation with the Chinese ambassador a few days ago. I have requested him to convey that we are getting a little frustrated in this exercise. We want that when the Prime Minister (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Narendra Modi) will be visiting China later sometime (next month), we should be in a position to show some concrete results, not just one more MoU. So we are hoping for the best.
Published by HT Syndication with permission from MINT. 
Editorial: Exports policy won't help
The Financial Express 
3 April 2015
Financial Express
The government has done well to streamline the process of export incentives, so while they have been reduced, they are more in line with HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO rules—this means, over a period of time, the incentives have to be phased out. As a result, while the Merchandising Exports from India Scheme (MEIS) seeks to replace 5 existing schemes, the benefits under it will range from 2-5% as compared to 2-7% earlier. And in the case of the Services Exports from India Scheme, the benefits will range from 3-5% as compared to 5-10% earlier. In order to compensate for the reduction in benefits that were also difficult to encash earlier, the schemes have been made simpler. The export credits under MEIS and SEIS, for instance, are freely transferable and can be used for payments of all taxes ranging from customs duties to service taxes. In the case of EPCG, the export obligations have been reduced.
And since the finance ministry has refused, so far, to budge on eliminating MAT and DDT on SEZs, units in these zones have been given the benefits of MEIS and SEIS. While the government has not given any target for manufacturing exports—targets over the past few years have been missed by a huge margin—it has set an overall one for both manufacturing and exports. At $900 billion by FY20, this is roughly doubling of exports in the next 5 years. While services exports rose from $142 billion in FY12 to just $151 billion in FY14, manufacturing exports rose from $306 billion to $314 billion.
Global growth collapsing, and especially in trade, has been the biggest reason for this poor performance. There are, though, equally important other reasons as well. Of the major export groups, only agriculture has seen its exports share rise—from 7.1% of all exports in FY10 to 10.3% in FY14, before falling to 9.6% in Apr-Jan FY15—but on-off export policies have prevented this sector from achieving full potential. Ore exports have collapsed, from a share of 4.9% in total exports in FY10 to a mere 0.7% in Apr-Jan FY15, a response to both mining bans in the country as well as the collapse in Chinese demand. The share of textiles in India's exports basket has risen a bit, but by and large, the market that China has vacated due to its appreciating currency has been captured by other countries.
The lesson, an obvious one, is that exports cannot be driven by sops, they need a lot more. To begin with, until India's infrastructure and labour productivity deficit is not addressed, there is a natural ceiling to growth. Two, the rupee is just too strong and the problem here is that the government seems to prefer a stronger rupee rather than a weaker one. SEZs and NIMZs have been seen as a way out of the infrastructure/ labour problem, but the government seems unwilling to go the whole distance on this as evidenced from the MAT/DDT imbroglio. While the Budget did well to try and address the issue of inverted duties, the fact that India let the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Nokia plant shut down indicates how the export effort needs to be very coordinated between all arms of the government. And finally, since exports are driven by companies, it is important that India be a part of global value-chains—that means trade policy has to focus on being a part of big regional trade pacts like the TPP; being a high import duty-zone is no longer an option.
India Express Mumbai Limited
India; Prime minister & BJP chief bat for farmers' welfare
ARCHIS MOHAN Bengaluru 
4 April 2015
Business Standard
Party wary of 2015 becoming its year of defeats due to anti-poor image
The top two in the government and in the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Narendra Modi and party President Amit Shah, respectively, spent the day trying to hard sell not just the contentious land Bill but also how the Modi government stood for the welfare of farmers.
Shah's inaugural address on the first day of the BJP national executive laid bare the party's unease at the Opposition's criticism that it runs a government at the Centre that is anti-poor and pro-corporate. Modi, at a rally at the city's National College Grounds, also tried to counter the Opposition's allegations by talking at length the government's proposed programmes for the welfare of farmers and to make agriculture more productive and reduce agrarian distress.
The prime minister elaborated his government's efforts in trying to improve farm yields through better irrigation, soil testing facilities and improved seeds. He said India's villages have been kept away from development — pucca roads, power supply, water for irrigating fields and homes. "Shouldn't villages get these facilities?" he asked.
"Those spreading lies do not know how to protect the interests of farmers," Modi said.
"How did farmers lose their land? Where did it go?... To get a job of a peon for their children or to make them a driver, they used to be compelled to sell their land to pay bribes.. The (previous) governments compelled them to (sell land)," Modi said on a day when the government re-promulgated the land acquisition ordinance a day before it is to lapse.
Modi said he knew of several farmers with landholdings of two to five bighas who would rather sell a portion of their land to raise money to bribe government officials and get their sons jobs as peons and drivers. "It is our governments of the past that have forced farmers to sell their lands," the PM said.
In his speech Shah said the Modi-led government was "of the poor, farmers and workers". He said BJP workers could claim with "utmost conviction" that the Modi government had not brought a single amendment to the land Bill that was anti-farmer. He described 2014 as a year of electoral triumphs for the BJP, with the party winning the Lok Sabha and the state Assembly elections that year. But he seemed wary that 2015, which started with the embarrassing loss in Delhi, could end with a reverse in Bihar. He asked the party to work hard to ensure a majority in Bihar.
Shah spoke at the meeting standing in front of a backdrop that read 'antyodaya hamara sankalp' or 'our pledge is to reach the last man, the poorest of the poor'. The BJP president spoke for an hour but rarely about the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Narendra Modi government notching up key successes in pushing its reformist agenda during the Budget session of Parliament. He mentioned these legislative triumphs only in passing and that too to illustrate how the current government has corrected the scam-ridden years of United Progressive Alliance (UPA) governments by a transparent auctions of coal mines and spectrum.
Much of Shah's speech was devoted to asking the party to work for Dalits, the poor and the marginalised, and protect the interests of the farmers. He said the Modi government had refused to acquiesce at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) to phase out the minimum support price (MSP) by 2016.
Business Standard Limited (India) 
Moldovan, Russian premiers discuss economic, energy cooperation, trade
3 April 2015
BBC Monitoring Ukraine & Baltics
Text of report by Moldovan news agency Infotag
Chisinau, 3 April: Moldovan Prime Minister Chiril Gaburici discussed issues of bilateral cooperation with Russian Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Dmitriy Medvedev by phone today. Gaburici told his Russian counterpart that his government will facilitate resumption and expansion of bilateral ties and resumption of constructive dialogue to step up volumes of trade between Moldova and Russia.
Chiril Gaburici thanked HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Dmitriy Medvedev for help in evacuating Moldovan citizens from the zone of hostilities in Yemen. The statement by the Moldovan government's press service said that the interlocutors touched upon cooperation in the energy and economy sectors. Both prime ministers expressed the wish to work together in the area of trade between Russia and Moldova and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO countries.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Dmitriy Medvedev congratulated his Moldovan colleague on the appointment to the prime ministerial post, expressing readiness to hold a meeting of the heads of government ahead of a sitting of the two-party commission on economic cooperation.
Source: Infotag news agency, Chisinau, in Russian 
Seychelles will become 161st member of WTO on 26 April
3 April 2015
Bulletin Quotidien Europe
Agence Europe All Rights Reserved 
Brussels, 02/04/2015 (Agence Europe) - On 24 March, the National Assembly of the Republic of Seychelles unanimously ratified the accession protocol to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO of this Indian Ocean archipelago, meaning that it can officially join the multilateral organisation on 26 April.
The General Council of the WTO gave its approval to this accession on 10 December last year, putting an end to a process that was started in 1995 and that was strongly supported by the EU. During their accession negotiations, the Seychelles concluded 17 bilateral agreements with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO: eight on access to the goods markets, and nine on access to the services markets. The conclusion of an agreement with the EU in October 2013 speeded up the accession process.
Fishing and tourism are the pillars of the economy of this 90,000-inhabitant archipelago. The EU is the Seychelles' main trading partner, accounting for 66% of its exports and 33% of its imports. In 2013, the total value of EU goods exported to the Seychelles was €316 million, while imports from the archipelago to the EU amounted to €294 million. Over 90% of the Seychelles' exports to the EU are fish and fishery products. The EU's main exports to the Seychelles are frozen fish, machinery, electrical equipment, ships and boats. Bilateral trade in goods is governed by the interim economic partnership agreement, which has been provisionally applied since May 2012. (Emmanuel Hagry)
Agence Europe SA
Le Maroc célèbre les 20 ans de l'OMC
3 April 2015
Al Bayane
ALBAYA
French
Actualités Écrit par La Rédaction
En réunissant son DG, ministres et parlementaires africains à Marrakech
Le Maroc va célébrer les 20 ans de l'Organisation mondiale du commerce (OMC) à travers la tenue d'une conférence ministérielle et parlementaire africaine les 8 et 9 avril à Marrakech, a souligné jeudi l'ambassadeur représentant permanent du Royaume à Geneve, M. Mohamed Auajjar. Dans le cadre de ces célébrations, le Directeur général de l'OMC, M. Roberto Azevedo, effectuera pour la premiere fois une visite au Maroc durant laquelle il prendra part à cette conférence et aura des rencontres avec plusieurs responsables marocains. Placée sous le Haut patronage de SM le Roi Mohammed VI, la conférence de Marrakech se tiendra sous le theme «20 ans de l'OMC: célébrations des succes et défis pour l'avenir «, avec la participation des ministres africains du Commerce. M. Auajjar rappelle qu'«il y a 20 ans, grce à la justesse de la vision et la clairvoyance qu'avait eue pour Marrakech et le Maroc, SM le Roi Hassan II, que Dieu ait son me, ainsi que le Prince Héritier d'alors, SM le Roi Mohammed VI, cette ville a abrité un événement mondial historique». Il s'agit de la Conférence de Marrakech qui a marqué la fin des négociations du cycle de l'Uruguay débouchant sur la création le 1er janvier 1995 de l'Organisation mondiale du commerce. La conférence africaine de Marrakech sera une excellente opportunité pour enrichir le débat à l'OMC, a-t-il estimé, précisant que les avis et les contributions des ministres et parlementaires vont permettre de mieux comprendre les besoins et les attentes des populations africaines et de corriger, voire modifier si besoin est, l'orientation de l'organisation.
Elle offre aux ministres et parlementaires du continent «une tribune de choix pour porter la voix de l'homme et de la femme africains», a-t-il relevé.
L'ambassadeur a formulé le voeu que l'esprit de Marrakech puisse insuffler une nouvelle dynamique pour l'avenir de l'OMC et tout particulierement pour l'élaboration du programme de travail post-accord de Bali et la conclusion du Programme de Doha pour le développement (PDD). La conférence ministérielle africaine va traiter de themes portant sur le bilan des 20 ans de l'OMC, sa contribution à la croissance et à l'emploi en Afrique, le renforcement des capacités de production et d'exportation pour une meilleure intégration de l'Afrique dans l'économie mondiale et la ratification de l'accord de Bali, conclu en décembre 2013. Le processus de négociations post-Bali pour la conclusion du PDD et les préparatifs pour la 10eme conférence ministérielle de l'OMC programmée en décembre prochain à Nairobi sont également au menu de cet évenement. En parallele, la conférence parlementaire africaine organisée conjointement avec le secrétariat de l'organisation vise notamment la sensibilisation des parlementaires africains pour l'accélération du processus de ratification par les parlements africains de l'accord de facilitation des échanges conclu lors de la conférence ministérielle de Bali. L'entrée en vigueur de cet important accord commercial nécessite une masse critique des deux tiers des membres de l'organisation. En tant que membre fondateur de l'organisation, le Maroc est un fervent défenseur du systeme commercial multilatéral et continue de jouer un rôle important dans les travaux de l'OMC et les négociations du cycle de Doha en particulier. Le Royaume a été coordinateur du Groupe africain OMC tout au long de l'année 2013 et a présidé ce groupe lors du processus préparatoire de la 9eme conférence ministérielle de Bali en décembre de la même année. Ses efforts ont permis au groupe des pays africains de jouer un rôle fondamental dans le succes de la conférence de Bali et la conclusion de l'accord sur la facilitation des échanges.
Copyright Casanet 2015. All rights reserved. Provided by SyndiGate Media Inc. (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" Syndigate.info
Bayane SA
Pelea fuerte México ante la OMC
Ulises Díaz 
3 April 2015
Reforma
México es el segundo país de América Latina que más veces ha utilizado los recursos de solución de controversias de la HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Organización Mundial de Comercio (OMC), sólo después de Brasil, documenta la Comisión Económica para América Latina (Cepal).
Entre 1995 y 2014, los años que ha existido esta institución, el País ha iniciado 4.71 por ciento de los casos como reclamante y ha sido el demandado 2.87 por ciento entre la totalidad de los casos, según documenta el estudio "La participación de América Latina en el mecanismo de solución de controversias de la OMC".
En la región, Brasil es el que más ha usado este recurso, con 5.53 por ciento del total como reclamante y 3.07 por ciento como demandado.
Después del País sigue Argentina con 4.1 y 4.51 por ciento, respectivamente, y Chile está en cuarta posición con 2.05 y 2.66 por ciento del total.
Según este reporte, los países latinoamericanos son altamente activos dentro de la actividad de solución de controversias de la OMC.
"Estos cuatro países ocuparon el primer, segundo, cuarto y octavo lugar, respectivamente, entre las 10 naciones en desarrollo que más frecuentemente recurrieron al MSD como reclamantes entre 1995 y 2014.
"Incluso Brasil, México y Argentina superan a China -principal exportador mundial- en su presencia en el mecanismo y se ubican en un rango similar al de países industrializados como Canadá y Japón", señala el documento.
Entre los casos que México ha presentado ante la institución en los últimos años están el caso del etiquetado requerido por Estados Unidos para productos cárnicos, la prohibición de venta de atún mexicano en mercado estadounidense, las restricciones que China pone a la venta de minerales raros y la imposición de medidas discriminatorias por parte de Argentina.
El documento señala que en 40 por ciento de los casos que México ha demandado fue contra Estados Unidos.
Reclamante
México es el segundo país en desarrollo que más casos ha presentado en el mecanismo de solución de controversias en la Organización Mundial de Comercio.
Países en desarrollo que más casos como demandante han iniciado en la OMC
(A.Número de casos, B. Participación en el total, 1995-2014)
               A   B
Brasil         27  5.5%
México         23  4.7
India          21  4.3
Argentina      20  4.1
Corea del Sur  17  3.5
Tailandia      13  2.7
China          12  2.5
Chile          10  2.1
Indonesia      9   1.8
Fuente: Cepal
Editorial
Europa no debe rebajar el acuerdo con EEUU
389 words
3 April 2015
Expansión
El acuerdo de libre comercio que negocian la Unión Europea y Estados Unidos está topando con más obstáculos de los esperados al inicio de las conversaciones en febrero de 2013. El último de ellos es la legislación excesivamente proteccionista que está vigente en EEUU respecto a la contratación pública. Las cláusulas que dan prioridad a las empresas estadounidenses en las adjudicaciones que realicen los organismos públicos de aquel país dificultarían la reciprocidad en la que se debería basarse un acuerdo que supondría un crecimiento anual adicional del PIB europeo de entre 68.000 millones y 119.000 millones de euros en el año 2027, y una expansión de la economía estadounidense de entre 50.000 millones y 95.000 millones en ese mismo año.
Sin embargo, en este punto los negociadores de ambas potencias han pinchado en hueso, debido a las fuertes resistencias de la clase política estadounidense a eliminar estos privilegios, algunos de los cuales se remontan a 1920, por el coste electoral de cara a las elecciones presidenciales de 2016 que conllevaría una decisión de este calibre y que dificultaría sobremanera la ratificación del acuerdo de libre comercio por el Congreso norteamericano.
Para vencer estas resistencias, la Comisión Europea propone que se establezcan una serie de excepciones que faciliten a empresas de la Unión Europea participar en estas adjudicaciones. Una maniobra posibilista que, sin embargo, equivaldría a reducir de forma notable la ambición del pacto comercial entre Europa y Estados Unidos, sobre todo si algunos gobiernos de países comunitarios exigen a cambio una menor apertura en otros ámbitos.
Algo que las autoridades de Bruselas deberían evitar a toda costa. No sólo por los menores beneficios que se derivarían para las compañías y consumidores europeos, sino también por sus consecuencias para el proceso de apertura comercial a nivel global que, aunque bloqueado en las instituciones multilaterales como la HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Organización Mundial del Comercio (OMC) por las dificultades para lograr avances entre sus 160 países miembros, podría revitalizarse si otras regiones optan por emular el acuerdo de libre comercio que alcancen la UE y EEUU. Pero ello sólo será posible si la apertura bilateral es lo suficientemente extensa en todos los campos del acuerdo, que debería estar cerrado a finales de este mismo año, para que sus beneficios futuros sean incontestables.
Unidad Editorial Revistas
END