HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO Director Calls 2015 A ‘Decisive’ Year, Says WIPO GI Act A Boost To WTO IP Talks
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO Talks to Cut Export Subsidies Gain Steam, Show Promise for December Meeting
·         HYPERLINK \l "China Re-Engages On GPA Entry, But Stops Short Of Promising New Offer
·         HYPERLINK \l "India's patent law may face legal hurdle at WTO
·         HYPERLINK \l "Repealing COOL Divides Senate Agriculture Leaders
·         HYPERLINK \l "Razor-edge U.S. Congress vote to decide fate of Obama Pacific trade pact
·         HYPERLINK \l "Rules Committee Waters Down Currency Provisions In House Customs Bill
·         HYPERLINK \l "China to release cotton from state reserves this year - NDRC
·         HYPERLINK \l "Brussels launches antitrust investigation into Amazon
·         HYPERLINK \l "IMF quits Greece talks amid ‘air of unreality’ as deal unravels
·         HYPERLINK \l "French president calls for universal social dialogue at ILO conference
 
WTO Director Calls 2015 A ‘Decisive’ Year, Says WIPO GI Act A Boost To WTO IP Talks 
Posted By Catherine Saez On 11/06/2015 @ 1:28 pm 
http://www.ip-watch.org 
 
World Trade Organization Director General Roberto Azevêdo said at a press event yesterday that 2015 is a decisive year for the organisation. One of the main features is the potential conclusion of the Doha Development Agenda. He also said a recent agreement on geographical indications at the World Intellectual Property Organization would provide a boost to IP talks at WTO. 
 
The tenth WTO Ministerial Conference will be held for the first time in Africa, in Nairobi, Kenya, from 15-18 December.
 
Intellectual property issues that are part of the Doha Round discussions include the international register for geographical indications, and disclosure of origin in patent applications, Azevêdo said. However, discussions have not yet gone very far on IP issues, as the conversation on IP has not truly started, he said.
 
Asked whether the recent agreement of the Geneva Act of the Lisbon Agreement on Appellations of Origin and Geographical Indications at the World Intellectual Property Organization would influence discussions at WTO about geographical indications, he said it is a positive development for WTO.
 
WIPO is more about IP rights and obligations themselves, he said, while the WTO conversation is more focused on trade-related aspects of IP.
 
To the extent that members are discussing these issues in WIPO, “I think it is a positive development for us because part of the ground of the discussion is already being covered in WIPO. It should make things more expeditious when we discuss some of those issues in the WTO,” he said.
 
More broadly, Azevêdo said two main areas of focus of the WTO’s work at the moment are the “Bali Package” adopted in 2013, and the implementation of the Trade Facilitation Agreement also agreed in 2013. However, the agreement needs to come into force, with two-thirds of the WTO membership applying it.
 
A core element of the Bali decision is the delivery of outcomes for the least-developed countries, he said, including rules of origin, and preferential market access.
 
Work is also ongoing on the work programme to conclude the Doha Round, which is planned to be achieved by the end of July with all issues “back on the table,” he said. For the moment the core focus of the discussions is around three main subjects, he said: agriculture, industrial goods, and services. Services are lagging behind as members are waiting to see progress made on the two first issues, he said.
 
However, he said, at this point in time, political decisions are missing. Although WTO members are in “solution-finding mode, we are still not converging,” even if members are now mapping differences, which had never been the case, he said.
 
“We are floating ideas and testing ideas … but I do not feel the sense that we are coming to an agreement, even conceptually,” he said.
 
In a 1 June press release, Azevêdo remarked on the slow progress in key negotiating areas.
 
On the possibility that the Doha Round negotiations fail, the WTO director general said members will have to talk about what they want to do next. “But it is not the scenario I am working with,” he said.
 
Azevêdo was also asked if WTO was overshadowed by trade agreements. He said regional trade agreements were not a new phenomenon. However, he said, trade agreements are now involving big economic powers, and are covering broader disciplines than market access, such as intellectual property or the environment.
 
Ideas have traditionally been tested in bilateral trade agreements and if they prove to be working, those ideas are brought to the multilateral system for discussion, he said.
 
Other negotiations are ongoing at the WTO, he said, such as on two plurilateral agreements, which if negotiations are successful will apply to the whole WTO membership. The first is the Information Technology Agreement, which seeks to eliminate duties on IT products, and comprises 80 members. The second concerns environmental goods and services and pursues the same goal of lowering or eliminating tariffs on such goods and services.
 
This year the WTO is also celebrating its 20th anniversary and on Sunday 14 June will open its doors to the public. The open door event is named “Merci Genève,” as a tribute to the WTO host city.
 
 
WTO Talks to Cut Export Subsidies Gain Steam, Show Promise for December Meeting
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, June 12, 2015
 
June 11 — World Trade Organization members resumed negotiations this month to reduce or eliminate export subsidies in line with the 2008 revised draft modalities for agriculture, although it remains unclear whether the U.S. will support an export competition agreement at the December ministerial conference in Nairobi, Kenya.
 
Members said at a recent WTO Agriculture Committee meeting that spending on export subsidies in recent years had declined significantly, making the objective of fully eliminating export subsidies more doable than ever.
 
Support for an outcome in the export competition pillar of the WTO's negotiation arm could result in one of organization's deliverable outcomes at the Nairobi ministerial.
 
The discussions will continue in September as members seek to overcome deep conceptual differences about the best way to modernize trade rules regarding farm goods, industrial goods, and services. The U.S. urged members to update their export competition notifications in order to better inform the discussion going forward.
 
Secretariat Report
 
The WTO Secretariat previously circulated a report that suggested annual, dedicated discussions to examine developments in the field of export competition to enhance transparency and improve monitoring on the issue.
 
The WTO's discussion of export competition covers the following trade practices: export subsidies; export credits, credit guarantees or insurance programs; international food aid; and agricultural exporting state trading enterprises.
 
The secretariat report builds upon the agreement of the 2013 WTO ministerial conference in Bali, Indonesia, where trade ministers promised to “exercise utmost restraint” in using any form of agricultural export subsidy, and to work towards the elimination of such subsidies (237 WTO, 12/10/13).
 
Cairns Group Paper
 
Export subsidies among WTO members generally have fallen to zero, with the exception of a few members—Canada, Norway and Switzerland—according to a recent report released by the Cairns group.
 
The Cairns group paper said many members had not provided adequate information about whether their export programs are self-financing, one of the requirements of the 2008 revised draft modalities. Modalities are formulas for various outcomes, including reducing tariffs and trade-distorting remedies, last revised in 2008.
 
The Cairns group paper also said most of the reported programs have repayment terms that exceed the 180-day limit set out in the 2008 text, most notably the U.S. Export Credit Guarantee Program.
 
It remains unclear if the U.S. will support an export competition agreement at the Nairobi ministerial. The U.S. urged members to update their export competition notifications in order to better inform the discussion going forward.
 
 
China Re-Engages On GPA Entry, But Stops Short Of Promising New Offer
Inside U.S. Trade - 06/12/2015
 
The Chinese government has re-engaged on the issue of joining the Government Procurement Agreement (GPA) in meetings with key trading partners in Geneva, but has stopped short of promising major improvements to a December 2014 offer that other members consider insufficient in terms of covering central, sub-central and state-owned entities.
 
At the June 3 session of the GPA committee, China said it has not changed its position on acceding to the GPA as soon as possible and is willing to work on trying to find a solution to its membership terms. China also urged trading partners to take a practical attitude toward its fifth revised offer, proposed in December 2014, and gave no indication that it would make another one.
 
In his concluding remarks, GPA Committee Chairman John Newham asked China for a timeline of when it would submit a sixth offer, but China did not respond, according to Geneva sources. China's delegation to the meeting consisted of technical experts and did not include high-level officials.
 
Members said they hoped to continue substantive discussions at their next meeting in September and encouraged China to bring high-level officials to that meeting. China first filed for accession to the GPA in December 2007.
 
Newham urged members to be ambitious and to aim to conclude at least one if not two or three accessions. He also said that parties should consider holding a ministerial-level meeting on the margins of the WTO ministerial scheduled for December in Nairobi. He said such a meeting would be useful in advancing the committees work.
 
At the June 3 GPA meeting, members generally took a conciliatory tone toward China. The U.S., which had not held a bilateral meeting with China that week, said that its earlier efforts to seek improvements in December 2014 offer were still valid. The U.S. noted China's commitment to acceding to the GPA as soon as possible and said it would work toward achieving that goal.
 
Several members including the EU, Japan, South Korea and Canada stated that they held constructive bilateral meetings with China, but they also emphasized the need to improve the last offer even though it was better than earlier offers.
 
The United States, EU and Japan said China's fifth revised accession offer did not sufficiently expand the potential coverage of GPA to enough central, sub-central and state-owned entities, which are addressed in Annexes 1-3, respectively.
 
At a Feb. 11, 2015 meeting, China said it was not willing to add any entities to Annexes 1-3 and indicated that negotiations should continue on its fifth revised offer because it was unsure whether it would put forward another revision (Inside U.S. Trade, Feb. 20). China's most recent offer included five additional provinces for a total 15, along with the four municipalities included in previous offers, one source said.
 
One potential way of improving the offer would be to remove some of its restrictions on doing business with the entities.
 
In a related development, Australia filed its application for GPA accession this week and said it would make its initial market access offer "in the coming months," according to a June 2 communication to GPA members from Australia.
 
Requests by Costa Rica and Thailand for observer status to GPA were also accepted at the meeting, bringing the total up to 31 members.
 
 
India's patent law may face legal hurdle at WTO 
D. Ravi Kanth 
12 June 2015
Mint
 
Geneva, June 12 -- India's amended national patent law, particularly a provision which defines what inventions are, could face a legal challenge arising from an aggressive move by the US and Switzerland.

The move, which could hurt India's pharma companies, arises from efforts by the US and Switzerland to terminate the existing moratorium on non-violation complaints to the World Trade Organization's trade-related intellectual property rights (TRIPS) agreement.

Non-violation complaints refer to complaints by a WTO member that claims another member's actions or policies caused it a loss, even if there is no violation of a WTO agreement. Developing countries such as India are understandably wary of these complaints. Currently, there is a moratorium on such complaints till later this year.

The US, which has always opposed the moratorium, has specifically raised concerns about the section 3(d) in the amended Indian patent Act on the ground that it "may have the effect of limiting the patentability of potentially beneficial innovations" in its 2015 Special 301 Report.

In reality, the 3(d) provision prevented pharmaceutical companies from continually extending their 20-year drug patents by tweaking with minor changes or improvements, an "evergreening" process in the IPR jargon. The provision led to the cancellation of the patent for Novartis AG's cancer drug Glivec.

India will have to forego these flexibilities and policy space if non-violation complaints are allowed under the TRIPS agreement, analysts said.

On Wednesday, India and Brazil with support from a large majority of countries, including Norway, asked the WTO's TRIPS council to recommend to the upcoming 10th ministerial conference in Nairobi, Kenya, later this year that non-violation complaints "shall" not apply to the settlement of disputes under the TRIPS agreement.

The majority of countries at WTO want a permanent moratorium in place, a South American trade official said.

During the meeting, the US and Switzerland stood completely isolated in their demand for terminating the moratorium, several participants said.

The US and Switzerland must "seriously reflect on the concerns expressed by overwhelming number of delegations in this meeting and earlier and should join the consensus that non-violation complaints as identified in Article XXIII:1 (b) and (c) of the GATT 1994 be determined inapplicable to the TRIPS agreement, in the interest of the stability and certainty of the multilateral system," an Indian official said at the meeting.

Ahead of the meeting, India and Brazil submitted a joint proposal, which was co-sponsored by 17 other countries, including China, Bolivia, Colombia, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, Indonesia, Kenya, Malaysia, Pakistan, Peru, Russia, Sri Lanka and Venezuela, calling for continuing with the moratorium on non-violating complaints under the TRIPS agreement.

"The TRIPS agreement, unlike other WTO agreements," said India and Brazil, "is a sui generis agreement which is not designed to protect market access or the balance of tariff concessions but rather to establish minimum standards of intellectual property protection, which, if abused, may even undermine market access."

Therefore, non-violation complaints are unnecessary as they raise "serious concerns on the ambiguity, incoherence and limit on flexibilities" that members currently avail in the TRIPS agreement, an Indian official told the meeting.

Moreover, such complaints affect the development of robust pharmaceutical industry in developing and poorest countries due to the legal challenges and enormous litigation costs, the official argued.

Currently, non-violation complaints are only allowed for trade in goods and trade in service to ensure tariff and market access concessions are not undermined because of opaque governmental actions. Effectively, they only deal with market access in goods and services.

But the complaints are not permitted in the TRIPS agreement, which deals only with minimum standards to be implemented by WTO members for protecting intellectual property rights. The TRIPS agreement is not about the market access and currently there is a moratorium in force for not allowing these complaints to apply to TRIPS agreement since 2003.

On behalf of the big pharmaceutical companies such as Pfizer Inc., Merck & Co. Inc.,Eli Lily & Co., Bristol-Myers Squibb Co., Roche Holdings Ltd, and Novartis, the US and Switzerland are mounting a warlike effort to end the moratorium at WTO's 10th ministerial conference in Nairobi.

The US and Swiss companies which lost major IPR disputes in various developing countries, including India, reckon that patent provisions such as 3(d) in the amended Indian patent Act or compulsory licensing provisions can only be stopped in their tracks by raising non-violation legal complaints at WTO under the TRIPS provisions, said a pharma analyst in Geneva.

Given the rising strength of the Indian generic companies in the international market, the US and Switzerland can only regain their dominance and market access in India and elsewhere through launching disputes under non-violation complaints at WTO, the analyst added.

The US and Swiss IPR officials made a strong case that the time has come for terminating the moratorium saying that if there is no consensus on extension of moratorium at the 10 ministerial conference in Nairobi then non-violation complaints will automatically apply, according to participants at the meeting.

 
Repealing COOL Divides Senate Agriculture Leaders
By Catherine Boudreau
WTO Reporter, June 12, 2015
 
June 11 — The House voted 300-131 late June 10 to pass legislation (H.R. 2393) that would repeal country-of-origin labeling (COOL) requirements for beef, pork and chicken, leaving the next course of action to the Senate.
 
Senate Agriculture Committee Chairman Pat Roberts (R-Kan.) said that while he continues to take suggestions from other lawmakers, repeal remains the surest way to protect the U.S. economy from retaliatory tariffs on products ranging from beef and pork to wine and cheese.
 
“We can sit here and let this happen. Or we can move. Let's get a move on,” Roberts said.
 
There is no time line for committee action yet, a spokesman for the senator said.
 
The U.S. is facing an estimated $3.2 billion in retaliatory measures by Canada and Mexico following a May 18 World Trade Organization (WTO) ruling that U.S. COOL regulations accord less favorable treatment to imported livestock than to domestic animals, a violation of international trade rules (111 WTO, 6/10/15). COOL requires U.S. meat packers to indicate on retail packaging where livestock was born, raised and slaughtered.
 
Sen. John Boozman (R-Ark.) noted that the WTO has ruled against COOL four times. “We keep doing the same thing and getting the same result. It's time for a different approach. It appears that the only viable solution is full repeal.”
 
Alternatives to Repeal
 
Repealing COOL isn't the answer because consumers should have more information about where their food comes from, not less, according to the top Democrat on the agriculture panel, Sen. Debbie Stabenow (Mich.), and Sen. Heidi Heitkamp (D-N.D.).
 
The senators plan to work on legislation that would meet U.S. trade obligations and give consumers the opportunity to make informed decisions about the meat they buy.
 
Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack said June 8 that Congress may ultimately have to allow a voluntary label for U.S. processors that want to distinguish products as sourced completely from the U.S.
 
Meat Packers, Ranchers Weigh In
 
COOL was enacted by the USDA according to a provision in the 2008 farm law (Pub. L. No. 110–234) to the dismay of meat processors that argue compliance costs more than outweigh any consumer benefits.
 
Research has shown no increase in demand for products bearing COOL after it took effect, Barry Carpenter, president and chief executive officer of the North American Meat Institute (NAMI), said following House passage of repeal.
 
“We hope the Senate will move quickly to vote for repeal so the President can sign the bill and put this failed experiment behind us,” said Carpenter, whose trade groups has members like JBS S.A. and Tyson Foods Inc.
 
An organization representing U.S. cattle producers said consumers need COOL to distinguish meat produced exclusively by U.S. farmers and ranchers from meat produced from imported livestock.
 
“United States farmers and ranchers need COOL so competition, and not corporate market power, dictates where meatpackers will source their livestock to meet consumer demand,” said the Ranchers-Cattleman Action Legal Fund, United Stockgrowers of America (R-CALF USA).
 
In the meantime, the Obama administration plans to object to the $3.2 billion claim in damages by Canada and Mexico through a WTO arbitration process.
 
 
Razor-edge U.S. Congress vote to decide fate of Obama Pacific trade pact 
 
* Twin 'nailbiter' votes likely
* Lawmakers to debate worker aid, fast track

By Krista Hughes and Richard Cowan

WASHINGTON, June 12 (Reuters) - President Barack Obama's goal of strengthening U.S. economic ties with Asia will hang in the balance in Congress on Friday when divided lawmakers vote on legislation central to his hallmark Pacific Rim trade deal.

The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), Obama's 12-nation pact, encompasses 40 percent of the global economy and is close to completion. It would be greatly advanced if Congress gives him "fast track" authority for it.

That question is expected to culminate in a very close vote in the House of Representatives, which has been wrestling with fast-track for weeks. The Senate has already backed it.

Fast-track authority would let lawmakers set negotiating objectives for trade deals, such as the TPP, but restrict them to only a yes-or-no vote on the finished agreement.

With a legacy-defining achievement on the line for Obama, House approval of fast-track would boost his hopes for a swift completion of the TPP, which would harmonize trading standards and lower trade barriers among the signatory countries.

Rejection by the House of fast-track, or of a companion measure meant to aid workers hurt by trade, would be a massive blow to Obama. He has lobbied hard to win over skeptical Democrats and forged an unusual alliance with the Republicans who control Congress.

"We're expecting two close votes, probably two nailbiters," said Gabe Horwitz, economics director at the centrist Democratic think tank Third Way, who expects both measures to pass.

House Speaker John Boehner, a Republican, declined to guarantee victory but said he had worked to address concerns raised by both sides.

"I'm encouraged. We've had good discussions this week on a bipartisan basis," he told reporters.

Although some Republicans are likely to oppose fast-track, the party has 246 House seats, meaning it could lose 28 votes and still cross the 218-vote threshold needed for passage.

A Democratic aide said 26 Democrats were ready to vote "yes," with another four leaning that way. Vote counters are betting that level of Democratic support will be enough to compensate for any weakness on the Republican side.

The trade debate has pitted business groups and iconic U.S. brands such as Nike Inc against environmental and consumer groups and unions. In an unusual move and a sign of the severity of the opposition, the unions are also lobbying against the worker aid program, an issue dear to many Democrats.

Democrat Jan Schakowsky, who hails from Obama's hometown of Chicago and was an early supporter of his 2008 run for the White House, said some Democrats were willing to see the worker aid program die if it means stopping fast-track and the TPP.

"There are plenty of those who feel that's not such a bad price to pay for saving American jobs," said Schakowsky, a trade skeptic. (Additional reporting by David Lawder and Susan Cornwell; Editing by Kevin Drawbaugh and Richard Chang) 
 
 
Rules Committee Waters Down Currency Provisions In House Customs Bill
Inside U.S. Trade - 06/12/2015
 
The currency provisions in the customs reauthorization bill that the House is slated to consider June 12 would make it easier for the administration to avoid having to directly pressure countries that undervalue their currency, compared with the language sent by the Ways & Means Committee to the Rules Committee. That language was identical to the language approved by the Senate.
 
The watered-down currency language now contained in the customs bill was approved by the House Rules Committee as an amendment to H.R. 644 at the request of Ways & Means Chairman Paul Ryan (R-WI). In a floor speech, Ways & Means Ranking Member Sander Levin (D-MI) hammered the provision as "more rhetorical language without any teeth."
 
The Ways & Means and Senate provisions would have required the Treasury Department to commence "enhanced bilateral engagement" with countries flagged as pursuing an undervalued currency in the department's annual report on currency and other macroeconomic policies.
 
But under the Ryan amendment, Treasury can invoke a waiver if it determining that such bilateral negotiations would have an adverse impact on the U.S. economy that is greater than the benefits or that it would cause "serious harm to the national security of the United States."
 
The Treasury secretary then "shall promptly certify" such a determination to Congress but it does not have to justify the decision. Under the earlier version, Treasury could make an "exception" to the requirement that he pursue bilateral talks but had to justify that decision to Congress by explaining how a given country's currency and other macroeconomic policies address its currency undervaluation, as well as its trade and current account surplus.
 
The Ryan amendment, however, maintains the same consequences if a country fails to change its policies after a year of bilateral engagement. These largely include actions that the administration already has the authority to take, however, and in all version of the bill the president can invoke a waiver to avoid taking such steps.
 
The remedial actions, for example would include prohibiting new financing from the Overseas Private Investment Corporation for a project in such a country and denying government procurement contracts unless it would violate international obligations of the United States. Another option is enhanced scrutiny in the International Monetary Fund of the macroeconomic and currency policies of such a country.
 
The Ryan language would also give more flexibility to Treasury on what to pursue in bilateral negotiations, saying it should pursue three goals, but only "as appropriate." The goals are are urging policies that address the currency, undervaluation, trade surpluses with the U.S., and current account surpluses.
 
Under the bill, the "enhanced bilateral engagement" would be triggered for countries that meet three criteria. These include having a "significant" bilateral trade surplus with the U.S., a "material" current account surplus and has been engaged in persistent one-sided intervention in the foreign exchange markets.
 
The countries would also be subjected to extra scrutiny in Treasury's biannual report, and the Ryan language adds a new factor to be considered, which would be the "macroeconomic policy mix of that country and its pattern of savings-investment imbalances."
 
The Ryan language adds a new provision that states Treasury must publicly describe the factors it will consider in assessing whether a country has a significant trade surplus with the U.S, a material current account surplus and has engaged in persistent one-sided intervention in the foreign exchange market.
 
According to a description on the Rules Committee website, the currency language would reduce the administration's "discretion and clearly [direct] action by the Administration to address unfair currency practices." It also requires the administration to issue "clear guidance" on how it intends to assess the objective criteria for determining whether a foreign country is manipulating its currency within 90 days of enactment, according to the summary.
 
 
China to release cotton from state reserves this year - NDRC 
By Dominique Patton

NINGBO, China, June 11 (Reuters) - China said on Thursday it will start to sell down its massive cotton stockpile this year, in a move likely to depress demand as the country's mills hold off buying in anticipation of sales of discounted fiber.

Market rumors have swirled for weeks that Beijing was preparing to release some of its holdings, which have swelled to around 10 million tonnes - more than 40 percent of world stocks - under a now-abandoned state buying scheme to support farmers.

China, the world's top consumer of the fiber, would issue detailed sale plans in the next 10 days, Yin Jian, an official at state planner the National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC) told an industry conference.

Yin added to China's repeated indications that it does not want to pressure the market, saying the conditions for the stockpile release were stable market prices and a stable market.

"We will not pressure market prices," he told Reuters on the conference sidelines.

However, industry participants have said old crop fiber from reserves would have to be heavily discounted to attract buyers.

Expectations of a stockpile selldown have already exacerbated sluggish demand for cotton in China as mills have kept inventory to a minimum ahead of anticipated state auctions.

December cotton on ICE Futures U.S. fell as much as 1.8 percent on the news to a session low at 64.59 cents a lb, and were trading down 1.6 percent at 64.77 cents a lb as of 10:03 a.m. EDT (1403 GMT).

"On the initial release, the market puked," said Ron Lawson, a partner at commodity investment firm Logic Advisors in Sonoma, California. "The tricky part's going to be how do they gradually reduce their inventory without killing the price of cotton."

Global cotton prices have been tracking around five-year lows for the past 10 months, under pressure from weak demand and large stocks.

Yin told the conference that it would take several years for the market to digest China's state-held cotton reserves.

FROM STOCKPILE TO SUBSIDY

While Beijing is under pressure to release stocks to recover part of its stockpiling costs, big discounts could risk pushing down market prices, and lead to increased costs for the government under its subsidy scheme to farmers.

China currently sets a target price for cotton and pays farmers the difference between the target price and the average market price.

The subsidy scheme replaced the previous stockpiling scheme, but is likely to face further changes.

China is under pressure to find new ways of supporting farmers, with farmer groups in the United States and other markets recently complaining that China has gone beyond what is allowed under World Trade Organization (WTO) rules.

The NDRC has said that it needs time to perfect the new subsidy policy currently covering cotton and soybeans before extending it to other crops.

Dai Gongxing of the China Cotton Association, told the conference the country could explore new forms of subsidizing its farmers, including insurance, subsidies for technology and infrastructure construction and sales promotion.

Cotton output in China, the world's second biggest producer after India, is widely expected to drop after the overhaul of support policies.

Yin said China's northwestern region of Xinjiang would continue to be the country's main cotton producing area, while farmers in other regions are expected to reduce their cotton acreage. (Reporting by Dominique Patton; Additional Reporting by Luc Cohen in New York; Editing by Richard Pullin and Meredith Mazzilli) 
 
 
Brussels launches antitrust investigation into Amazon
Christian Oliver in Brussels and Henry Mance in London
Financial Times
Last updated: June 11, 2015 1:09 pm
 
The European Commission has launched an antitrust investigation to determine whether Amazon, the US-based online retailer, unfairly kept competitors out of the market for electronic books, in the latest legal move by Brussels authorities against a US technology company. 
 
The Commission said on Thursday it would examine whether Amazon insisted upon clauses in contracts with publishers that reduced the choice for European consumers in the largest markets: English and German-language ebooks. 
 
“It is my duty to make sure that Amazon’s arrangements with publishers are not harmful to consumers, by preventing other ebook distributors from innovating and competing effectively with Amazon. Our investigation will show whether such concerns are justified,” said Margrethe Vestager, the EU’s competition commissioner. 
 
Amazon is more dominant in the ebook market in Europe than it is in the US, accounting for more than 90 per cent of ebooks sold in the UK, according to estimates from Enders Analysis.

The Commission’s move was not in response to a specific complaint. However, both British and German publishers have called for domestic competition authorities to investigate Amazon. 
 
Richard Mollett, head of the UK Publishers Association, called the announcement a “welcome development”. 
 
Brussels said the investigation would focus on two types of contractual clauses which “appeared to shield Amazon from competition”. 
 
In the first type, Amazon seeks to be informed of more favourable or alternative terms offered to competitors. In the second, it seeks the right to terms and conditions at least as good as those of its competitors. 
 
“In the US the law is very sceptical about challenging things like that because they’re designed to lower prices. But in Europe, they are more open to challenging practices that disadvantage competitors,” said Michael Keeley, a partner at Axinn Veltrop & Harkrider, the law firm. 
 
In 2009, the Commission fined Intel, the chipmaker, €1.06bn for behaviour that weakened its smaller rival AMD.

Amazon immediately rejected the concerns. “Amazon is confident that our agreements with publishers are legal and in the best interests of readers. We look forward to demonstrating this to the commission as we co-operate fully during this process,” it said. 
 
If the EU finds wrongdoing, it has sweeping powers to demand a shake-up of the way the company does business and could exact a fine of up to 10 per cent of the previous year’s turnover. 
 
Ms Vestager’s move against Amazon comes as part of a broad push by the EU to forge a digital union and resolve a number of longstanding concerns in the technology industry. 
 
In April, she launched a landmark antitrust case against Google pril to determine whether it was abusing its dominance in the online retail sector. Google denies the charge. 
 
Amazon’s tax arrangements in Luxembourg are also squarely in the sights of Ms Vestager, who is expected to rule shortly on whether they amount to illegal state aid. 
 
The commission has prioritised tax justice and has vowed to limit multinationals from using complex cross-border schemes to reduce their tax bills. The first cases launched were investigations into the sweetheart deals offered to Apple by Ireland, to Starbucks by the Netherlands and to Amazon and Fiat by Luxembourg. 
 
Amazon last month overhauled its much criticised tax structure, booking sales more widely across Europe and raising expectations that it would pay more tax in Germany, Spain, Italy and the UK. 
 
However, the commission insisted that the changes would have no immediate impact on the Luxembourg investigation, which focuses on past conduct.
 
 
IMF quits Greece talks amid ‘air of unreality’ as deal unravels
Peter Spiegel in Brussels, Shawn Donnan in Washington and Kerin Hope in Athens
Financial Times 
June 11, 2015 8:13 pm
 
Only a week ago, officials on both sides of the negotiating table believed that a solution to Greece’s agonising and excruciating stand-off with its creditors was mercifully at hand.

In a late-night meeting on the 13th floor of the European Commission headquarters in Brussels, Jean-Claude Juncker, the commission’s president, presented a five-page plan for Greece that had been hammered out days earlier among Europe’s most powerful leaders in private talks at the chancellery in Berlin.

If Alexis Tsipras, the Greek prime insister — who had flown in especially for the session — could accept the deal, or something close to it, the country would soon gain access to €7.2bn in bailout aid and avoid defaulting on its debts.

After the four-hour session, Mr Juncker thought he had a deal: Mr Tsipras had accepted new budget surplus targets that were tougher than Athens had hoped but lower than the existing bailout programme. Mr Tsipras disagreed with raising taxes on energy and many of the pension cuts, but agreed to return with a counter-proposal that would identify cuts elsewhere to make up the difference.

Since that moment last Wednesday, however, the putative agreement has fast unravelled. 
 
Members of Mr Tsipras’s radical Syriza party angrily denounced the plan as soon as they caught wind of the details. Faced with a political firestorm back home in Athens, Mr Tsipras cancelled a follow-on meeting with Mr Juncker and instead delivered a strident rejection of the plan before the Greek parliament, calling it “absurd” and containing “irrational, blackmailing demands”.

Adding insult to injury, Mr Tsipras opted to delay a €300m payment due the same day to the International Monetary Fund — even though he had told his creditors he would not do so. Christine Lagarde, the IMF managing director, was caught out, having just hours earlier assured the public that Athens would make the payment.

For many Europeans, attitudes hardened during a weekend summit in Bavaria of leaders of the Group of Seven leading industrialised economies, according to a senior official. During a closed-door session, Barack Obama told EU leaders he was sympathetic to their difficulties with Athens — a sharp change for the US president, who has in the past used G7 and G20 summits to prod Europeans to be more magnanimous.
 
When a Greek counter-offer finally arrived — hand-delivered on Monday evening by some of Mr Tsipras’s closest advisers, including Nikos Pappas, his long-time political aide-de-camp — EU officials were stunned. Instead of proposing a redistribution of cuts, as Mr Tsipras had promised, Athens wanted to renegotiate lower budget surpluses. 
 
“The disappointment in the incompetence and deviousness is immense,” fumed one senior eurozone official. Mr Juncker, incensed at what he viewed as Mr Tsipras’s double-dealing, told a meeting of his fellow commissioners in Strasbourg earlier this week that Greece had “lost the European Commission”.

On Thursday, hours after Mr Tsipras held an inconclusive, late-night meeting with his French and German counterparts in Brussels, the IMF finally intervened. It announced it was pulling its technical team out of the talks — a move intended to inject urgency into the negotiations. The gesture arose out of frustration with what one official described as an “air of unreality” around the talks. 
 
Since Monday, team members had not held a single meeting with their Greek counterparts, according to one official. 
 
The prospect of the IMF leaving the bargaining table is particularly troubling for Berlin. It has been adamant throughout the crisis that the fund — whose technical skills and rigour it values over those of the commission — should remain fully involved in the talks 
 
The IMF’s concerns grew in part because of the increasingly political nature of the discussions. Gerry Rice, a spokesman for the fund, said on Thursday that the key sticking points remained pensions, taxes and Greece’s financing needs.

But the IMF is also frustrated that the European side has been unwilling to address the issue of Greece’s debt pile seriously.

According to the IMF’s calculations, putting the Greek economy on a sustainable path now requires — at the very least — an extension of the maturities on Greece’s outstanding debts. But European officials, wary of public opinion, have been reluctant to discuss even that.

In Athens, reaction to news of the IMF pullout was subdued. A government spokesman said the Greek side wanted to continue negotiations with the aim of striking a deal “even within hours”, but did not explain how talks would resume without the IMF representatives at the table.

Just as tempers have flared in Brussels, tensions within Syriza have also mounted this week. Some members of the prime minister’s more moderate faction are suggesting that Greece should break off talks with the creditors rather than accept pension and labour market reforms that would contradict Syriza’s official platform.

Since April, the government has kept alive hopes of a deal with weekly promises that it would be agreed “within a few days” — a strategy aimed at soothing public opinion and averting a bank run that could trigger a financial collapse.

With the ball now squarely in Greece’s court, analysts struggled to predict Mr Tsipras’s next move. George Pagoulatos, an economics professor at Athens business university, doubts the government has a fallback plan in case a deal cannot somehow be revived. 
 
“There’s clearly no desire within the Syriza government to tackle the consequences of a default — let alone a ‘Grexit’,” he said.
 
 
French president calls for universal social dialogue at ILO conference 
 
GENEVA, June 11 (Xinhua) -- The International Labor Organisation's (ILO) World of Work Summit, held on Thursday in Geneva, explored the implications of climate change for workers, enterprises and communities across the world.

Invited speaker French President Francois Hollande said that the "struggle for energy transition will engender substantial changes to economies," while creating both opportunities for growth as well as challenges.

Despite these changes, Hollande stressed that certain principles including labor contracts, social security and the dignity of workers should remain inviolable.

During the speech he made to delegations, Hollande highlighted the harsh labor realities which continue to affect the world and much of its labor force.

This is part of the 104th Session of the ILO, taking place between June 1 and June 13.

He mentioned that 250 million people are jobless worldwide, and that "no region or country is spared from this scourge," while denouncing the lack of social security for many people across the world.

He also added that over 2 million workers die each year as a result of their jobs and that 170 million children are exploited despite existing labor regulations strictly forbidding child-labor.

The French president furthermore brought to the fore the importance of social dialogue on a global scale as well as the crucial role played by the ILO, headed by its Director-General Guy Ryder.

Ryder reiterated Hollande's points, stating that "to act for the climate is to act for justice as well as employment."

He also underlined the importance of normative rules which allow for universal benchmarks to be set to improve labor conditions and regulations.

France will host the UN Climate Change Conference in Paris from Nov. 30 to Dec. 11 this year. 
END


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.