South Korea should lift unscientific import ban before WTO ruling
US supports rapid deployment of solar energy in India: official
Russian payment system alternative to SWIFT to be finalized in six months
How to save the Australian steel industry without tariffs or subsidies
APEC to simplify ROO to entice more FTAs, RTAs
APEC summit in Manila to discuss India’s membership
US elections: Tell the truth about free trade
Washington's CEPR says gains from TTIP are greatly overstated

South Korea should lift unscientific import ban before WTO ruling
3 September 2015 The Japan News

It is important to ensure that South Korea scraps its unscientific import restrictions, a task necessary for rectifying the damage done by unfounded rumors about Japanese food products.

Japan earlier filed a complaint with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization over South Korea's total ban on imports of marine products from Fukushima and seven other prefectures in this country. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO is expected to decide to set up a dispute settlement panel in response to Japan's demand as early as at the end of this month, despite South Korean objections to the move.

Japan has insisted South Korea's import ban is a violation of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO agreements. In explaining the reason for its import ban, South Korea cited the contaminated water problem arising from the accident at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Tokyo Electric Power Co.'s Fukushima No. 1 nuclear power plant.

Japan has repeatedly urged South Korea to abolish the ban since it was put in place in September 2013. However, Seoul has never accepted Tokyo's demand.

The fishery commodities in question are shipped only if sample inspections detect no radioactive materials exceeding safety standards. Japan had good reason to bring the case before the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO, saying South Korea's import restrictions had "no scientific grounds."

Failure to settle the issue through bilateral talks between Japan and South Korea symbolizes a cooling off in their relations, even as this year marks the 50th anniversary of the two countries' diplomatic normalization.

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO agreement prohibits scientifically groundless and "arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination" regarding trade restrictions for the protection of health. We hope the dispute will be swiftly resolved under HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO rules.

Groundless restriction

South Korea is not convincing when it asserts the import ban has been imposed in consideration of the safety of its people, saying the ban does not infringe on the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO accord.

Seoul's decision on the import ban came as the country had to respond to a sharp decrease in the sales of fishery commodities, including its own domestic products, due to rumors related to leakage of contaminated water from the Fukushima nuclear facility.

The import ban has also made it possible, in effect, to ban the distribution of Japanese marine products from areas other than the eight prefectures if even a minuscule level of radioactive cesium is detected from them. Meanwhile, it permits the distribution of fishery commodities produced in South Korea if their cesium level falls within the safety criteria. South Korea's stance can only be described as a double standard.

Japan laid down the world's most rigorous safety standards for food products after the nuclear accident. Water quality surveys are also conducted in addition to sample inspections on marine products.

Late last year, South Korea sent an expert panel to Japan, and carried out on-the-spot inspections. The result of the South Korean team's research has served to support the credibility of the Japanese inspections. However, the panel only revealed the data collected through its surveys with no further action. South Korea's refusal to express an opinion on the safety of Japanese food products is unreasonable.

About 50 nations and regions imposed import restrictions on Japanese food products after the nuclear accident. Fourteen of them, including Australia, have lifted such bans.

Chief Cabinet Secretary Yoshihide Suga has urged South Korea to make a reasonable decision on its own import ban, saying, "[Seoul] should abolish its restrictions at an early date, not waiting for the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO to arrive at a conclusion." The Japanese government needs to persistently urge South Korea to lift the ban through diplomatic channels. (From The Yomiuri Shimbun, Sept. 2, 2015)

The Yomiuri Shimbun

US supports rapid deployment of solar energy in India: official

3 September 2015

Press Trust of India

From Lalit K Jha

Washington, Sep 3 (PTI) The US strongly supports rapid deployment of solar energy around the world, including in India and will continue to work to ensure that the best products and technologies are available to global consumers, an American Trade Representative official has said.

"In line with the numerous actions President Obama has taken to advocate for clean energy at home and abroad, the US strongly supports the rapid deployment of solar energy around the world, including in India," Andrew Bates, spokesman US Trade Representatives told PTI yesterday.

"The US will continue to work to ensure that the best products and technologies are available to global consumers regardless of the country of origin," Bates said in response to a question on the reported ruling by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organisation (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO) on America's complaints against India's solar policy.

He said the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO had not yet announced the outcome of the enforcement case that the United States brought against India based on "discriminatory policies" in the solar energy sector.

According to multiple media reports coming from Geneva, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO is reported to have ruled in favour of the US over protection for local crystalline silicon and thin-film solar cells.

In February last year, the US had dragged India to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO against New Delhi's domestic content requirement.

"These domestic content requirements discriminate against US exports by requiring solar power developers to use India- manufactured equipment instead of US equipment. These unfair requirements are against HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO rules, and we are standing up today for the rights of American workers and businesses," US Trade Representative Michael Froman had told reporters then.

In its ruling, which is officially not out yet, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO is reported to have said that India's domestic content requirements under its solar power programme were inconsistent with the international norms.

India will now appeal against the ruling of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO's dispute panel in the next two months, an official said. Press Trust Of India Limited

Russian payment system alternative to SWIFT to be finalized in six months

3 September 2015

06:21

ITAR-TASS World Service

Russian payment system alternative to SWIFT to be finalized in six months

VLADIVOSTOK, September 3. /TASS/. Russian payment system - alternative to SWIFT - will be finalized within six months, Deputy Finance Minister Alexei Moiseev told TASS Thursday.

"In general the work [on creating SWIFT analogue for BRICS - TASS] is in progress. First we need to finish developing a separate system. Once it is finally completed - and I think it will happen in six months - then we will continue moving forward," he said.

ITAR-TASS Information Telegraph Agency of Russia

How to save the Australian steel industry without tariffs or subsidies

Stephen Jones 

3 September 2015

The Guardian

Australia has to compete on both quality and price, and we can. Government assistance aside, BlueScope management needs to strike a deal with its workforce

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"Port Kembla steelworks and industrial workforce have shaped the character and folklore of the Illawarra. Like the 1938 Dalfram dispute, when 150 wharfies refused to load pig iron onto a ship destined for Japan. The 11-week dispute was sparked by the Japanese Imperial Army’s invasion of China. The wharfies knew that every scrap of iron sent to Japan would stoke its imperial war machine. The workers weren’t going to be part of it.

Related: HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"BlueScope Steel's Port Kembla plant 'on a knife edge', says CEO, flagging job cuts

Today the region faces another crisis. Unlike the Dalfram dispute, the concern is not about Australian steel going to China but the stuff coming the other way. Over the last 10 years China has boosted its steelmaking capacity to over 800m tonnes to meet its own needs. That’s half the world’s annual output.

As China’s growth slows, so does its demand for steel. Its surplus of 100m tonnes – 20 times the Port Kembla output – has created massive disruption as it hits the world market. Australian is not immune.

Our two domestic producers – BlueScope and Arrium, which was spun-off by BHP when it exited the steel business – are struggling to compete with cheaper, often subsidised, products. They both operate blast furnaces in Port Kembla and Whyalla respectively.

Many argue that the Illawarra can get along just fine without its heart of steel. I don’t agree.

Some analysts argue that BlueScope would be better if it stopped making steel and concentrated on its profitable coated products division, which produces market-leading products like Colorbond steel roofing and cladding.

I don’t agree. If we lose steel we lose the jobs and the know-how forever.

On the company’s own estimates, 5,000 jobs go from the Illawarra. This is a big hit anywhere, but 9,500 people are already looking for work here. Our unemployment levels are 2% above the national average and have been for most of the last decade.

The economic impact is widespread: contractors, suppliers and every business that relies on the pay cheque of steel workers. A recent HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"University of Wollongong study modelled the impact of a complete closure (something the company is not contemplating) at $3.3bn.

To survive in the long term our Australian steel industry has to be able to compete on both quality and price. Without the subsidies or the scale of many of our competitors, this will not be easy. Despite much of what has been written, BlueScope’s Port Kembla plant is in the middle of the pack when it comes to efficiency, but as a small volume producer it will have to make improvements to survive.

Related: HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"Someone needs to go broke in the Australian iron ore industry, says analyst

It’s natural for a community like ours to look to elected representatives and government for help. Given that governments have spent over $88bn on regional adjustment around Australia over 10 years, the case for regional-level assistance is easy to make. Government has to assist workers to retrain and redeploy, facilitate new investment build confidence and economic opportunity.

There is also a role for government within the industry but not in the way that some argue.

Tariffs and subsidies are not sought by the company and are not the answer. They only shift the cost or burden from one sector of the economy to another. For steel, it means shifting the cost on to the fabricators (themselves large employers who are exposed to international competition) or the customers, who often decide to buy a cheaper substitute product like plastic gutters and pipes instead of steel, or a wooden fence rather than a Colorbond steel one.

Dumping is a different matter. Governments can and should protect against the practice of dumping subsidised steel into Australian markets, below production costs.

The Anti-Dumping Commission, established by Labor, is understaffed. It should be given the resources required to do its job. As the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"OECD steel committee pointed out in a recent report, many countries are doing just that.

We can also help Australian steelmakers win government funded projects. Local content rules are being pushed as an option and many of our trade partners themselves require government projects to use domestic steel.

But we shouldn’t kid ourselves. We can’t build a profitable steel company around government procurement alone, which doesn’t use enough steel. According to BlueScope’s CEO, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Paul O’Malley, Australian governments purchase up to 300,000 tonnes of steel per year in direct purchasing.

Related: HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"Car industry exit: manufacturing is declining but it is still a vital cog

That’s about 30 days production for BlueScope. Useful, but no silver bullet.

The majority of the repair work needs to be done by BlueScope itself. Management need to convince shareholders and financiers that the plan to turn the business around will work.

This requires striking a deal with a workforce that is often sceptical at best. I’ve spoken to many of the workers who cite a string of poor decisions, some going back decades, as evidence of that some of the bosses aren’t up to it. This is not helpful.

These are tough decisions for union leaders, workers, CEOs and governments, but for a region like Wollongong, too much is at stake to let it fail. Australia can and should continue to be a country that makes steel, and Wollongong is the best place in the country for that to happen.

Guardian Newspapers Limited

APEC to simplify ROO to entice more FTAs, RTAs

3 September 2015

Manila Bulletin

CEBU CITY - HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"APEC) is working towards the simplification of Rules of Origins (ROO) among member economies including the Philippines so that more free trade agreements (FTAs) or regional trade agreements (RTAs) will be put into reality.

During the opening of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"APEC third senior officials meeting (SOM3) dialogue on FTAs and RTAs on Wednesday, Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) Assistant Secretary Ceferino Rodolfo said as a consistent supporter of the multilateral trading system, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"APEC's challenge is to ensure that RTAs and FTAs contribute to the health of world trade.

“FTAs and RTAs are here to stay and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"APEC must continue to do its part to improve the co-existence of bilateral, regional and multilateral trade agreements… One area of work we can continue to focus on, building on HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"APEC's advances on trade facilitation and transparency, is to deal with the spaghetti bowl or the noodle bowl of rules of origin [ROO],” Rodolfo said in his welcome remarks.

“By harmonizing and simplifying ROO and making its application simple and non-restrictive across different RTAs, it will help simplify trading conditions and contribute greatly to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"APEC and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO [HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization],” he further said.

He also explained that by simplifying and streamlining ROOs, the region can now facilitate the access of the micro, small and medium, sized enterprises (MSMEs) to preferential markets, an initiative already highlighted in the Boracay Action Agenda (BAA).

The BAA is an HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"APEC initiative that seeks to put MSMEs, which comprise more than 90 percent of the establishments in the region, at front and center of the region's trade cooperation work.

“Trade is only a tool for development and that giving market forces free rein will not be enough to spread the benefits of trade and globalization to all. The instruments that we develop and the RTAs and FTAS that we build should harness trade potential ensuring that both developing and developed economies and all sectors of our economies benefit from our work,” Rodolfo said.

As of now, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"APEC members have enforced 144 FTAs, which represents more than half of all FTAs in place globally.

“The Asia Pacific region has long been an advocate for the centrality and primacy of the multilateral trading system. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"APEC members have worked tirelessly to strengthen the rule based, transparent, non-discriminatory, open and inclusive multilateral trading system as embodied in HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO,” Rodolfo said.

“We hope that through this dialogue we are holding today [Wednesday] we will be able to contribute to the intellectual and policy foundation for the step by step work towards a comprehensive and quality FTAAP [Free Trade Area of the Asia-Pacific],” he added.

The FTAAP is at the top of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"APEC agenda.

In the organization's 2010 declaration, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"APEC leaders announced that they have agreed to explore possible pathways to achieve FTAAP.

To this end, they have “instructed HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"APEC to take concrete steps toward the realization of the FTAAP, which is a major instrument to further HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"APEC's Regional Economic Integration (REI) agenda.”

The idea is that the FTAAP should be realized as a comprehensive free trade agreement that could be built through regional undertakings, such as ASEAN+3, ASEAN+6, and the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP). To date, there are three proposed pathways to the FTAAP: The United States-led TPP, the ASEAN-based Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) process, and the Pacific Alliance.

Rodolfo also noted that it is also important that the FTAs and RTAs are all of high quality.

Manila Bulletin Publishing Corp

APEC summit in Manila to discuss India’s membership

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Nayanima Basu

New Delhi 

3 September 2015

Business Standard

India’s long-pending demand to be included as a member of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"APEC) trade body, will be taken for discussion at the coming HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"APEC summit to be held in Manila from November 15-18, according to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Kevin Rudd, former prime minister of Australia.

Rudd, who is also heading the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"APEC Task Force, said it was "fundamentally important” to include India into the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"APEC membership, even as he highlighted that the step should have been taken long back.

“We wonder how we managed in HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"APEC without India for the last 25 years. The time has come to turn this around … The membership was closed all this while. Now, applications for new membership will be considered. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"APEC summit in November is now going to consider all applications. Besides India, other countries will also be considered – Myanmar, Laos and Latin American countries,” Rudd said here on Wednesday after the meeting of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"APEC Task Force that took place under the aegis of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Confederation of Indian Industry and Asia Society. According to Rudd, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"APEC membership is about financial integration, bringing regulatory coherence among all the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"APEC economies. Since the grouping is not about market access and trade negotiations resulting in tariff impositions, there should not be any reservation in India in the domestic front to join the pact. Presently, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"APEC has 21 members — Australia, Brunei Darussalam, Canada, Chile, China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Japan, Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Russia, Singapore, Chinese Taipei, Thailand, US and Vietnam — comprising 60 per cent of the global gross domestic product, 50 per cent of world trade and accounting for 50 per cent of foreign capital flows. “HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"APEC is the missing link in our ‘Act East’ policy. Membership to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"APEC will assert the fact that India is an important HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"APEC economy. Obviously, there is a transition period and it will not happen overnight. Of course, there has to be some painful decision making but HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"APEC is business oriented and aspirational,” highlighted Shyam Saran, co-chair of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"APEC Task Force and chairman, Research and Information System for Developing Countries or RIS. Saran added since HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"APEC was about setting benchmarks, India needs to improve its standards of goods and services exports across the board. “It is time for India to become a member of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"APEC. Some diplomatic and political work remains to make this a reality. I believe that India can leverage regional economic integration to unleash the full potential of its economy,” said HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Sung-Hwan Kim, former minister of foreign affairs and trade, Korea, and member HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"APEC Task Force.

Business Standard Limited (India)

US elections: Tell the truth about free trade

BY JERRY HAAR 

Miami Herald

2 September 2015

The Miami Herald

Two of the leading contenders in the presidential race, Donald Trump and Bernie Sanders, disagree on almost every policy issue except one -- trade. Both regard HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"NAFTA and the proposed Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) as "disastrous." Trump excoriates American companies for investing in Mexico and threatens hugely punitive taxes on their exports to the United States. Sanders claims TPP will benefit only big corporations and Wall Street.

South Floridians should be especially concerned about the candidates' positions since trade is so vitally important to our economy. Any honest discussion of the impact of free-trade agreements will conclude that these accords produce mutual benefits.

Every nonpartisan assessment of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"NAFTA demonstrates convincingly that marginal benefits (output, employment) exceed marginal costs. The trilateral agreement (United States, Canada, Mexico) links a market of 450 million people and a collective GDP of $21 billion.

Both Trump and Sanders cite negative employment effects, runaway plants and trade imbalances as proof of the evils of trade agreements. They're wrong. To begin with, trade agreements are not intended as job creators or job destroyers.

They are merely liberalizing accords that strip away the barriers to cross-border commerce, finance and investment so that companies and entrepreneurs can do business efficiently and allow consumer choice at affordable prices.

Technology, not trade agreements, is the principal source of labor reduction.

While it is true that this country runs a $53-billion deficit with Mexico in its $534-billion trade relationship, this pertains to merchandise trade only (which includes oil). In services and agriculture, the United States produces surpluses with Mexico.

NAFTA-bashers should also note that 80 percent of Mexico's imports come from the United States versus 20 percent of China's, and that those imports are overwhelmingly high value-added manufactures, often produced by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"AFL-CIO members.

As for lower-value goods such as apparel, shoes and produce, poor people and those on fixed incomes are grateful beneficiaries of Mexican imports.

About jobs and factories moving to Mexico: Donald Trump constantly harangues HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Ford Motor Co., a firm with a long history of investment in that nation, but seems unaware that global automobile companies, including HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Nissan, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Mazda, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Kia, Mercedes-Benz and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"BMW, are serving the fast-growing Mexican market and European markets -- not just the United States -- given that Mexico has 40 free-trade agreements versus 20 for the United States.

Most important, Mexican auto plants are mainly involved in assembly operations, with most inputs imported from the United States.

Let us not forget that inward bound foreign investment supports more than 6 million U.S. jobs, one-third in manufacturing; and average salaries are 33-percent higher than the national average.

Mexico's investment of over $30 billion is led by manufacturing, banking and wholesale trade. Elektra, Alfa, Cemex, Bimbo, Gruma, Herdez, Bochoco, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Mexichem and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Cinépolis are among the leading Mexican multinational firms invested in the United States.

Messrs. Trump and Sanders need to be reminded that their states (New York and Vermont, respectively) continue to benefit from HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"NAFTA. New York, the No. 4 exporter of U.S. goods to Mexico, sold nearly $3 billion of manufactured products into that market last year -- a 235-percent increase since the accord was implemented.

Vermont's exports have grown 454 percent since HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"NAFTA, 63 percent of which consist of sophisticated manufactured goods. Florida has seen a 194-percent jump in exports to Mexico since 1994, the majority consisting of high-value manufactures.

As the tragicomedy of the 2015-2016 election season plays out, falsehoods, hyperbole and mean-spirited attacks among contenders will proliferate. The issue of trade (along with illegal immigration) will be the proverbial whipping boy in this contest.

While the contenders choose not to be fully informed of the facts, there is no excuse for individual citizens not to be.

Jerry Haar is a business professor at FIU and a Global Fellow of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars in Washington, D.C.

The Miami Herald

Washington's CEPR says gains from TTIP are greatly overstated

2 September 2015

Bulletin Quotidien Europe

Brussels, (Agence Europe) - Rather in favour of the Democrat party's ideas, the Washington-based think tank HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Center for Economic and Policy Research (CEPR) set the cat among the pigeons this summer by unveiling a study, on 13 August, concluding that the projected gains from the future transatlantic trade and investment partnership agreement (TTIP) would be very “small” and are “greatly overstated”.

According to the Washington-based CEPR, TTIP would only deliver modest gains of 40 cents per person per day in the US, and €0.20 per person per day in the EU. Supporters of TTIP have touted the supposed gains, but these gains would be easily dwarfed by the losses the great majority of workers would experience due to increased inequality, the US CEPR warns, underlining that the initial studies on TTIP did not examine the costs from protections for pharmaceuticals and other non-tariff barriers. “The projected gains from the proposed TTIP would be so small that it would take 38 TTIPs to make up for the long-term damage the US economy has suffered over the last decade”, says Washington-based CEPR co-director, Mark Weisbrot.

Led by economist HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"David Rosnick, the Washington-based CEPR study looks at a widely cited study by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Centre for Economic Policy Research in London (not affiliated with the Washington study), which estimates that by 2025, under an ambitious scenario, TTIP would increase average consumption in the US by 20-40 cents per person per day, and average consumption in the EU by €0.10-0.20 per person per day. According to the London-based CEPR, tariff reductions under TTIP would increase US GDP by only 0.04% by 2027, Rosnick notes, raising consumption by a little more than a dollar per person per month in the US. In Rosnick's opinion, these optimistic projections come from the London-based CEPR's “significant underestimating” of the costs from patent protections for pharmaceuticals, copyright enforcement and other protections under TTIP “that could increase the price of a product by thousands, or tens of thousands, of percent”. (Emmanuel Hagry). Agence Europe SA

