HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S., China Row Over Changes to WTO Agricultural Subsidy Rules
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO Dispute Settlement Body to Consider EU's Agricultural Disagreement With Russia
·         HYPERLINK \l "Compulsory licensing soon for export of generic drugs by India
·         HYPERLINK \l "Brazil secures car quota extension with Mexico, avoids free trade
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO rules may stop Russia easing imports embargo for Spain - minister
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S. officials back complaint about imported paper from China, others
·         HYPERLINK \l "Canada Assesses Provisional Duties on Solar Panel Imports from China
·         HYPERLINK \l "Conclusion of Asia free-trade talks eyed by Dec.
·         HYPERLINK \l "China February trade surplus hits record $60.6 bn: govt
·         HYPERLINK \l "Swiss Voters Reject Initiative to Replace VAT System With Carbon Tax
·         HYPERLINK \l "Gains and gaps in women's fight for gender equality since 1995 – report
 
 
U.S., China Row Over Changes to WTO Agricultural Subsidy Rules
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, March 9, 2015
 
March 6 — Deputy U.S. Trade Representative Michael Punke and Chinese Ambassador Yu Jianhua had a sharp exchange over the issue of domestic support for agriculture during a March 6 meeting in Geneva.
 
Yu rebuffed Punke's question as to how emerging economies could adjust their levels of trade-distorting domestic support in addition to the provisions of the 2008 draft modalities (Rev. 4), according to officials who attended the meeting.
 
The discussion then devolved into finger pointing about the impact of the U.S. and China's respective agricultural subsidies on global markets.
 
The meeting of the World Trade Organization's Agriculture Committee in Special Session ended without a clear resolution to the debate.
 
If the policy division between the U.S. and China continues unabated, it could threaten the WTO's aspirations of wrapping up the 2001 Doha Round.
 
Difficult Conversation
 
Friday's debate focused on a section of the Rev. 4 text that provides flexibilities to recently acceded members—such as China—with regard to their obligations to reduce overall trade-distorting domestic support policies. The U.S. suggested that recently acceded members could forego an exemption of their de minimis entitlements under paragraph 12 of the Rev. 4 text.
 
Yu said that China “would make no contribution toward new disciplines on domestic support,” said one official who was present at the meeting.
 
The U.S. then pointed to new research “highlighting the tens of billions spent by China and India on domestic support programs, and pointed to the impact of those subsidies on poor farmers in other developing countries,” the official told Bloomberg BNA
 
Yu said that on a per capita basis, Chinese farmers receive a much smaller fraction of agricultural subsidies when compared to the subsidies the U.S. provides to its farmers.
 
“The debate became particularly heated when Punke referenced figures from the independent International Cotton Advisory Committee showing that China's cotton subsidies are ten times higher than any other cotton subsidizer in the world,” the official said.
 
Creative Ideas
 
The U.S. approach is to place the onus on emerging economies to explain their positions without offering any concessions in return, Geneva trade officials told Bloomberg BNA in separate interviews.
 
Indeed, the U.S. has not yet signaled to WTO members how it would modify its current agricultural policies to advance the goals of the Doha Development Agenda (DDA).
 
Some Geneva trade officials said that the U.S. is reluctant to volunteer any concessions until Congress passes legislation to grant trade promotion authority to the president.
 
“We are at the table, ready to explore whether there are creative ideas to address disciplines on trade distorting subsidies that cover all major subsidizers, including emerging economies,” a U.S. trade official told Bloomberg BNA via e-mail. The Chinese mission did not respond to multiple requests for comment.
 
2015 Timeline
 
The work of the agricultural negotiating committee is considered a crucial component of the WTO's effort to advance a detailed work program by July 31, with the goal of concluding the Doha round.
 
Geneva trade officials said that any ambition in the non-agricultural market access and services negotiations would be linked to the achievements, or lack thereof, in the agricultural negotiations committee.
 
Though the discussions between China and the U.S. exhibit an increased level of engagement on particularly thorny elements of the DDA, some members are beginning to question the viability of the July 31 goal.
 
It is more likely, Geneva trade officials told Bloomberg BNA, that the WTO's work program negotiations will extend to the Dec. 15–18 Ministerial Conference in Nairobi, Kenya.
 
This week, European Union Trade Commissioner Cecilia Malmstroem said that the goal of the WTO's December ministerial meeting is to reach a political agreement on the Doha round.
 
“I think it is possible. I'm not saying that it will be easy. But it's a little bit now or never,” Malmstroem said at a March 5 speech in Brussels. “If we manage to conclude the Doha round, with of course the emphasis for the developing world, we can regain a little bit the credibility of [the] WTO, and we can start thinking about the post-Doha agenda”
 
 
WTO Dispute Settlement Body to Consider EU's Agricultural Disagreement With Russia
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, March 9, 2015
 
March 6 — The World Trade Organization's Dispute Settlement Body (DSB) will consider four requests for panel investigations during a meeting scheduled for March 10 in Geneva.
 
The DSB will consider a European Union request to examine Russian duties on imports of paper, palm oil and refrigerators. Last month the EU said that Russia's duties were higher than the levels Russia had agreed to when it joined the WTO in 2012 (39 WTO, 2/27/15).
 
The DSB will consider a Korean request to study U.S. tariffs on steel products used for oil drilling called oil country tubular goods (OCTG). The U.S. Commerce Department imposed dumping margins of nearly 16 percent on Korean OCTG in violation of the WTO's 1994 General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and Anti-Dumping Agreement, according to the Korean complaint (37 WTO, 2/25/15).
 
The DSB will consider Canada's request for a panel investigation of China's antidumping duties on imports of Canadian cellulose pulp. The body will also look at Taiwan's request for an investigation into Canada's antidumping measures related to imports of certain carbon steel welded pipe originating from Taiwan.
 
Market Access, Trade Review
 
On March 9 WTO members will convene for an informal meeting of the Market Access Committee. The committee, which monitors tariff commitments among WTO members, last met in May 2014.
 
On March 9–10 the WTO will hold its biennial trade policy review of Japan.
 
The WTO found that Japan's average tariffs on imports increased by 0.5 percent during the country's last trade policy review in 2013 (34 WTO, 2/20/13). The WTO also noted that the Japanese government provided “substantial” support to its protected farm sector between 2011 and 2013.
 
Azevedo in Berlin
 
WTO Director-General Roberto Azevedo will attend a March 11 meeting of international organizations hosted by German Chancellor Angela Merkel in Berlin.
 
On March 13 the WTO Working Group on Trade and Transfer of Technology will meet in Geneva. The panel's role is to examine the trade and transfer of technology between developed and developing members.
 
WTO members will consider the status of negotiations aimed at eliminating tariffs and trade barriers on environmental goods and services at a March 13 meeting of the Committee on Trade and Environment in Special Session.
 
Tobacco Plain Packaging
 
Australia is expected to provide its first written submissions in the WTO dispute over its rules regarding plain packaging of tobacco products.
 
Five WTO members—the Dominican Republic, Ukraine, Honduras, Indonesia and Cuba—are challenging Australia's 2011 Tobacco Plain Packaging Act, which mandates colors and text for tobacco packaging.
 
The countries argue that such laws impose unfair restrictions on the use of trademarks, geographical indications and other markings in violation of the Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights Agreement, the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
 
The WTO's Dispute Settlement Body is not expected to issue its final decision on the complaint against Australia's tobacco labeling rules until the first half of 2016.
 
 
Compulsory licensing soon for export of generic drugs by India 
NAYANIMA BASU New Delhi 
9 March 2015
Business Standard
 
The Indian pharmaceutical industry is expected to receive a massive boost if a recent attempt by the World Trade Organization (WTO) to amend its TRIPS (Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights) Agreement on the access to essential medicines goes through.

If it happens, it will enable India to export generic versions of some costly life-saving drugs made under compulsory licensing to third world countries, especially in Africa, which do not have the production capacity for such medicines.

In a meeting of the General Council on February 20 at the WTO headquarters in Geneva, Director-General Roberto Azevêdo said for the ratification to go through, it still requires 27 member-countries to approve. If so, the amendment can come into force by December, a top official told Business Standard.

“It is an effective means of keeping prices of such drugs down because patent holders loathe seeing production licensed to other companies. India has ratified it. In fact, because of its production capacity, India has been seen as one of the countries that might be a third-country producer,” the official added.

The 2001 Doha Ministerial Conference had decided to amend the TRIPS Agreement by allowing generic copies made under compulsory licences to be exported to countries lacking production capacity, if certain conditions and procedures are followed. Generally, a country issues a compulsory license to produce generic versions of a patented drug for domestic consumption. However, in 2003 it was agreed that such a provision could be expanded for export purposes, for the benefit of least developed countries and those lacking manufacturing capacity.

This was agreed in 2003 and implemented in 2005 but the ratification process could never be completed. What it says is the countries that lack the capacity to produce generic, life-saving drugs can import these from third countries under compulsory licensing provisions in the TRIPS agreement.

Presently, countries that require generics produced under compulsory licensing to be imported have used the waiver mechanism under the TRIPS pact.

However, this isn’t enough. Countries with the wherewithal to export have to also change their domestic laws. So far, this has been only done by India, Norway, Canada and the European Union.

 
Brazil secures car quota extension with Mexico, avoids free trade
 
BRASILIA, March 8 (Reuters) - Brazil has negotiated the renewal of its car quota treaty with Mexico, Brazil's foreign ministry said on Sunday, trumpeting a deal designed to protect its struggling automotive sector.

The original 2012 treaty imposed tariffs of up to 35 percent on exports above an annual limit of about $1.5 billion, with free trade of vehicles allowed after its expiration on March 19 this year.

The two countries have now agreed to renew the treaty for four years, a Brazilian foreign ministry spokesman said, adding that the quota amount and other details will be released in a press briefing with authorities from both countries on Monday.

Struggling with dwindling car sales, Brazil urged Mexico to extend the agreement to ease the pain for an industry that has fired hundreds of workers in recent months. Mexico, meanwhile, had wanted free trade to bolster its own flourishing car sector.

Brazil sees unrestrained Mexican exports as a big threat to its domestic auto industry. A car sold in Mexico can cost as little as half the retail price in Brazil, where high taxes, transportation bottlenecks and powerful unions have hurt competitiveness.

Hit by falling demand in the face of a weakening economy, Brazil was overtaken by Mexico last year as Latin America's biggest car producer. Brazil posted its first annual trade deficit in 14 years in 2014. (Reporting by Alonso Soto; Editing by David Goodman)
 
 
WTO rules may stop Russia easing imports embargo for Spain - minister 
 
MOSCOW. March 8 (Interfax) - Russia's embargo on food imports from the European Union has hit Spain much more than most of the other EU countries but World Trade Organization rules may hinder potential Russian concessions for Spain, according to Spanish Foreign Minister Jose Garcia-Margallo.

"As for the partial opening of the Russian market to individual EU countries, it will first need to be assessed how much such measures comply with the WTO rules that have been signed both by Russia and by the European Union," Garcia-Margallo told Interfax when asked whether Spain was going to ask Russia to ease its embargo for Spain as it is considering doing for Greece and Hungary.

"We have been affected much more that an overwhelming majority of our EU partners," he said. "For Spain, which mainly exports fresh fruit and vegetables, the measures imposed by Russia … last summer have become a heavy blow and entailed very serious damages."

Garcia-Margallo is on a visit to Moscow.

 
U.S. officials back complaint about imported paper from China, others 
 
WASHINGTON, March 6 (Reuters) - U.S. trade officials on Friday found reasonable evidence that the local paper industry is at risk from cheap imports of uncoated paper, including copy paper used in homes and offices across the country.

The affirmative vote by the U.S. International Trade Commission means investigations will continue into imports from China, Indonesia, Brazil, Portugal and Australia after a complaint from Domtar Corporation, Packaging Corporation of America (PCA), Finch Paper LLC and P.H. Glatfelter Company.

The complaint covers uncoated paper in sheets used to make envelopes, book pages and even monthly phone bills.

The Department of Commerce is due to make a preliminary determination on whether to impose duties for subsidies in April and for dumping in June. (Reporting by Krista Hughes; Editing by Alan Crosby) 
 
 
Canada Assesses Provisional Duties on Solar Panel Imports from China
By Peter Menyasz
WTO Reporter, March 9, 2015
 
March 6 — The Canada Border Services Agency has assessed provisional duties of up to 286.1 percent against solar energy equipment from China on the basis of a preliminary determination that the goods are being exported to Canada at dumped and subsidized prices.
 
Imposition of the duties was accompanied by the Canadian International Trade Tribunal's launch of its injury inquiry on the Chinese exports, as well as publication of the tribunal's reasons for a preliminary finding that the dumped and subsidized Chinese goods were causing harm to domestic producers. The tribunal found increased imports in part related to the impact of a World Trade Organization ruling against an Ontario program to support the renewable energy sector (112 WTO, 6/11/14).
 
The provisional duties apply to certain photovoltaic modules and laminates originating or exported from China that are usually classified under Harmonized System number 8541.40.00.22, the Canada Border Services Agency (CBSA) said March 5 in a statement. A statement of reasons outlining the basis for its preliminary determination of dumping and subsidy is to be issued by March 20, 2015.
 
Duties applied to nine exporters who responded to questionnaires issued by the CBSA ranged from 9.14 percent to 202.5 percent, while duties applied to all other Chinese exporters were set at 286.1 percent, based on an estimated margin of dumping of 202.0 percent and an estimated subsidy amount of 84.1 percent. The duties were levied under Section 38(1) of Canada's Special Import Measures Act.
 
Evidence filed with the CBSA estimated that the share of Canadian imports held by Chinese manufacturers jumped to 85.1 percent between October 2013 and September 2014 from 55.5 percent in 2012, and the agency indicated that its internal data confirmed those estimates.
 
Provisional duties applied to specific Chinese exporters are (estimated margin of dumping and subsidy amount, respectively, in brackets): Wuxi Suntech Power Co Ltd., 202.5 percent (202, 0.5); Canadian Solar Manufacturing (Changshu) Inc., 174.2 percent (90.1, 84.1); Changzhou Trina Solar Energy Co. Ltd., 126.5 percent (125.7, 0.8); Zhejang Jinko Solar Co. Ltd., 115.9 percent (114.2, 1.7); Jinko Solar Co. Ltd., 111.8 percent (110.7, 1.1); Hanwha SolarOne (Qidong) Co. Ltd., 103.3 percent (103, 0.3); Hefei JA Solar Technology Co. Ltd., 50.6 percent (47.5, 3.1); Wuxi Taichen Machinery & Equipment Co. Ltd., 27.7 percent (25.9, 1.8); Renesola Jiangsu Ltd., 9.14 percent (9.1, 0.04).
 
The duties apply to photovoltaic modules and laminates consisting of crystalline silicon photovoltaic cells, including laminates shipped or packaged with other components of photovoltaic modules and think-film photovoltaic products produced from amorphous silicon, cadmium telluride or copper indium gallium selenide.
 
Exempted are modules, laminates or thin-film products with a power output of less than 100 watts, as well as those incorporated into electrical goods not used for power generation or that consume the electricity generated by the photovoltaic product.
 
The CBSA launched in December 2014 an investigation into imports of the Chinese products, based on a complaint filed by four Ontario manufacturers—Toronto-based Eclipsall Energy Corp., Sault St. Marie-based Heliene Inc., Mississauga-based Silfab Ontario Ltd. and Woodbridge-based Solgate Inc.
 
Tribunal Launches Injury Inquiry
 
The Canadian International Trade Tribunal (CITT), meanwhile, launched March 5 its formal injury inquiry into whether the dumping or subsidization of the Chinese solar panels was causing injury or threatening to injure Canadian production of like products. The inquiry will include a public hearing to be held in Ottawa starting June 1, with a final determination to be issued by July 3.
 
The CITT also issued March 5 a statement of reasons for its Feb. 3 preliminary finding of injury against the dumped or subsidized Chinese products, which concluded that there was a “reasonable indication” that the Chinese goods were harming or threatening to harm domestic production .
 
Evidence submitted by the Canadian producers who filed the complaint indicated that, until recently, the domestic solar panel industry was shielded from the full impact of the dumped and subsidized goods by a domestic content requirement imposed by the Ontario government under its Feed-In Tariff (FIT) Program, the statement of reasons said. The FIT Program provided renewable energy producers with a guaranteed, preferential rate on electricity produced using domestically made equipment, it said. However, the program's domestic content requirements were relaxed in response to a ruling by the World Trade Organization Appellate Body that concluded that violated WTO rules, it said.
 
“The circumstances in a key part of the domestic market have changed significantly to allow suppliers of foreign goods, including the subject goods, to compete directly with like goods,” it said. “The Tribunal does not consider that the elimination of the domestic content requirement, in and of itself, is threatening to cause injury to the domestic industry. Rather, the threat of injury to the domestic industry arises from the presence of the dumped and subsidized goods in the new market environment.”
 
The Chinese exports, which now compete directly with Canadian-made products, are entering the market in prices that are likely to have a significant depressing or suppressing effect on domestic production and are likely to increase demand for further imports, it said. The volume of imports from China increased by 26 percent during the first half of 2014 compared to the same period in 2013 and accounted for an increasingly dominant share of the import market, it said.
 
In addition, Chinese producers of solar modules have significant excess capacity and significant inventories, with additional capacity expected to come on-line soon as two major Chinese manufacturers are expanding their facilities, it said.
 
The CITT also noted the imposition of anti-dumping and/or countervailing duties imposed in other jurisdictions, including the U.S., European Union and India. “It seems plausible, in the circumstances, that increasing volumes of the subject goods will find their way to Canada,” it said.
 
 
Conclusion of Asia free-trade talks eyed by Dec.
 
BEIJING (Reuters) 8 March — China hopes to finish talks on creating an Asian free-trade bloc estimated to cover 28 percent of the world economy by the end of this year, the country’s trade minister said on Saturday.
 
Gao Hucheng said on the sidelines of China’s annual session of parliament that China would work hard to wrap up talks for the RCEP, or Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership, before the end of this year.
 
RCEP, which comprises of the 10-nation ASEAN club plus six others — China, India, Japan, South Korea, Australia and New Zealand — is a Beijing-backed trade framework that has gained prominence as an alternative to U.S. trade plans.
 
ASEAN, or the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, groups Vietnam, Thailand, Singapore, the Philippines, Malaysia, Myanmar, Laos, Indonesia, Cambodia and Brunei.
 
The United States has been leading negotiations on a more comprehensive U.S.-backed Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) trade plan that involves 12 countries, not including China.
 
Gao said China was closely monitoring and assessing the impact of the TPP deal on global trade, and that the Chinese government welcomed any trade framework that was open and transparent.
 
China will “continue to unswervingly push forward and quicken the pace of China’s free-trade agreement strategy,” Gao told a news conference.
 
 
China February trade surplus hits record $60.6 bn: govt 
8 March 2015
Agence France Presse
 
China's monthly trade surplus hit $60.6 billion in February, the government said Sunday, a new record for the world's second-largest economy.

Exports leapt 48.3 percent year-on-year to $169.2 billion while imports fell 20.5 percent to $108.6 billion, Customs said on its website.

The country's trade surplus, long a source of tensions with its trading partners, rose above a previous all-time monthly high of $60.0 billion recorded in January.

The growth in exports last month was well ahead of the median estimate for a 14 percent jump in a Bloomberg survey of economists.

But analysts were pessimistic about the outlook for exports and blamed the weak imports reading on falling commodity prices, with stringent bank financing for traders also a factor.

China is a key driver of global growth but its economy grew 7.4 percent in 2014, its weakest for almost a quarter of a century, and recent indicators show signs the slowdown is continuing.

Customs attributed the surge in exports to a rise in outbound shipments ahead of the Lunar New Year, which fell on February 19 this year.

"Affected by the Spring Festival factors, export companies in the country again rushed to export ahead of the holiday and only resumed working after it," the statement said.

The Lunar New Year fell on January 31 in 2014, followed by a week-long national holiday, leading to a low comparison base for this February.

For the first two months of the year, China's trade surplus totalled $120.7 billion, said the statement.

The figure stood at $8.9 billion in the same period last year, Customs data showed.

"We still see strong headwinds facing China's exports this year," ANZ economists Liu Ligang and Zhou Hao said in a research note, pointing to a continuing contraction streak in export orders.

The high increase in February's exports was partly led by a low base in the same month last year, when authorities also cracked down on over-invoicing by traders seeking to disguise capital flows, they added.

Premier Li Keqiang on Thursday announced a lowered growth target of "approximately seven percent" for 2015, and -- underscoring concern -- the central People's Bank of China last weekend cut benchmark interest rates for the second time in three months.

Li also cut China's trade growth target for this year to "around six percent", after trade expanded 3.4 percent last year, below the 7.5 percent goal and the third consecutive year it had been missed amid softened domestic and foreign demand.

China's huge trade surpluses were long a source of friction with the United States as the workshop of the world pumped out manufactured goods and US debt mounted, but the issue has receded in more recent years.

In the January-February period, China's exports to the European Union, the United States and the 10-member Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), the top three trade partners of the country, increased by 13 percent, 21.2 percent and 38.4 percent respectively.

But imports from all three regions declined, falling 10.3 percent with the EU, 16.7 percent with the US and 18.2 percent with the ASEAN countries, indicating domestic demand in China remained weak.

China's exports to Japan, with which it is embroiled in bitter disputes over maritime territory and wartime history, fell 4.1 percent in the two-month period, while imports from the neighbour decreased by 13.8 percent.

 
Swiss Voters Reject Initiative to Replace VAT System With Carbon Tax 
By Neil MacLucas 
8 March 2015
Dow Jones Institutional News
 
ZURICH--Swiss voters Sunday overwhelmingly rejected an initiative that would have scrapped the Alpine country's value-added-tax system and replaced it with a carbon tax, a move that would have made gasoline, heating oil and other forms of power more expensive for consumers.

Roughly 92% of voters opposed the initiative, known as "Energy Rather than VAT," while 8% supported the measure, according to preliminary results from 13 of the country's 26 cantons.

The initiative would have encouraged Swiss households to use renewable energy sources, including solar and wind, which would have been exempt from taxes. The initiative, which was introduced by the Green Liberal Party of Switzerland, was designed to help lower carbon emissions and reduce global warming.

The Swiss cabinet had recommended voters reject the proposal because it would likely have caused a falloff in revenue for the federal government. The current VAT tax, which ranges from 2.5% to 8%, generated income of 22.6 billion Swiss francs ($22.92 billion) for the federal government in 2013, according to government data.

The initiative was backed by the Green Liberal Party of Switzerland and supported by the Green Party of Switzerland, the World Wildlife Fund and Greenpeace Switzerland.

Swiss voters also followed the government and parliament's recommendation and rejected an initiative calling for the dropping of taxes on government subsidies to families with children.

At present families receive at least 200 francs a month for each child under 16 years, and 250 francs a month for children between 16 years and 25 years still undergoing education.

Popular initiatives form a key part of Switzerland's system of direct democracy, and are triggered when at least 100,000 signatures are collected to seek changes to the country's constitution.
 
 
Gains and gaps in women's fight for gender equality since 1995 – report
By Lisa Anderson 
 
NEW YORK, March 9 (Thomson Reuters Foundation) - In the past 20 years the world's women and girls have made significant progress in health, education and legal rights but wide gender gaps remain in economic participation, political leadership and security, according to research released Monday.

An aggregation and analysis of global data drawn from a host of international agencies, including the World Bank, the World Health Organization, various U.N. agencies and polls, the research identifies gains and gaps in women's progress towards gender equality since 1995.

That year 189 nations at the U.N. Fourth World Conference on Women signed the landmark Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action calling for the "full and equal participation of women in political, civil, economic, social and cultural life."

The "No Ceilings Full Participation Report" is the result of a year-long global project led by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and the No Ceilings initiative of the Bill, Hillary & Chelsea Clinton Foundation. Its launch coincided with the start of the 59th session of the United Nations' Commission on the Status of Women.

"This report shows that progress is possible--and that more work remains," former U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton said in a statement launching the report.

The data provide evidence that when women and girls participate fully, the positive effects create a ripple effect that increases well-being in communities, growth in economies and security in nations, the report said.

Among the most positive findings were those in health, edcuation and legal rights.

Due to improvements in access to health care services, girls born today can expect to live an average of almost 73 years, about four more years than in 1995, the report said.

The rate of global maternal mortality dropped by 42 percent in 20 years; the mortality rate for infant girls decreased by half and adolescent births fell by almost a third.

More work needs to be done, however, in reducing HIV infections in women, which are nearly double the number in 1995, particularly among adolescent and young women. Also, more than 220 million women around the world want to use modern contraception but often lack access.

In education, the report found that the global gender gap among primary school-age children has "virtually closed." But in secondary school, considered an important factor in girls' ability to avoid child marriage and contribute to their families and communities, the gender gap has narrowed but is still there; it is particularly wide in Sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia.

In terms of legal rights, more than 95 percent of the 56 national constitutions adopted after 1995 guarantee gender equality, compared with 79 percent in 1995. By 2013, 76 of 100 countries had passed laws against domestic violence, compared with 13 in 1995.

Security is an area of great concern for women. Violence against women "remains a global epidemic." Implementation and enforcement of laws protecting women are often lacking and laws restricting women's rights still exist, the report found.

Lack of progress is also worrying in women's economic participation, which has virtually stagnated since 1995, with 55 percent of women in the workforce compared with 82 percent of men. Often working in the informal economy, women still earn less than men in almost every country.

More than 150 countries lack laws guaranteeing equal access to capital and property ownership while nine nations legally restrict women's freedom of movement.

Although twice as many women hold political office now as in 1995, their political participation has grown relatively slowly. Women hold 22 percent of seats in national legislatures, an increase from 12 percent 20 years ago. They also still are significantly rare in formal peace processes, where only 10 percent of peace negotiators are women.

"Data is knowledge and knowledge is power--in this case, the power to help women and girls build a better future," Melinda Gates, co-founder of the Gates Foundation, said in the preface to the report. (Reporting by Lisa Anderson, Editing by Tim Pearce) END
 


  ________________________________  
Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.