Trade talks lead to 'death of Doha and the birth of a new WTO'; Global economy
Rich nations agree to end farm subsidies
Australian farmers welcome global agreement to scrap agricultural export subsidies
India returns empty-handed from WTO meet: Anand Sharma
German business: WTO Nairobi result must be used to revive trade body
 
Trade talks lead to 'death of Doha and the birth of a new WTO'; Global economy
By Shawn Donnan
21 December 2015
Financial Times
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation is facing the biggest shake-up of its agenda in a generation after its members in effect abandoned the long-stalled Doha round.
For the first time since the round was launched amid great fanfare in 2001, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's 164 members in Nairobi on Saturday declined to "reaffirm" Doha's mandate. They also opened the door to discussing new issues and focusing more on delivering smaller packages of trade reforms.
The move, one senior trade official said, amounted to "the death of Doha and the birth of a new HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO".
It also marked a victory for the US and EU, who alongside other developed economies have argued that clinging to the long-stalled Doha negotiations was making the institution irrelevant in a changing global economy.
For 14 years of its 20-year history its negotiations have been conducted - many would say frozen - under the Doha Round banner and since 2008 the growing view of many outside Geneva has been that Doha ought to be buried.
That frustration has led to a push for large regional and sectoral trade agreements. The Obama administration in October concluded negotiations with Japan and 10 other economies on a vast new Pacific Rim pact, the Trans-Pacific Partnership.
It is also negotiating a similar agreement with the EU and leading other sectoral talks in Geneva on the global trade in services and environmental goods.
That has also had an effect on the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO. Under HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevêdo, WTO director-general, the onus is now on what is achievable and delivering smaller packages of reforms.
In Nairobi, ministers agreed on a narrow package of reforms that included a global ban on agricultural export subsidies that Mr Azevêdo called the "most significant" achievement on agriculture in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's history. They also concluded long-running discussions on liberalising the global trade in IT products.
Those deals followed the conclusion in 2013 in Bali, Indonesia, of an agreement to remove red tape and speed the flow of goods through borders.
"We know that we can negotiate," Mr Azevêdo told the FT. "What we need is an agenda."
However, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO is still divided over its priorities, and Mr Azevêdo said tough negotiations lay ahead.
The US hailed the Nairobi decision, saying it had cleared "the road to a new era for the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO".
India, which has been the most vocal advocate of sticking with Doha, complained that "some members" had blocked its continuation. It said it was a "significant departure from the fundamental HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO principle of consensus-based decision making".
Some of the fundamental problems facing the negotiators have not been resolved. The Chinese economy has changed significantly since 2001 when the Doha talks were launched. But it is still classified as a developing economy and exempt from many obligations - much to the annoyance of Washington.
The tension is akin to that in UN-sponsored climate talks. This month's climate agreement in Paris was reliant in many ways on developing countries such as China recognising that the world had changed since the Kyoto protocol of 1997, which bound advanced economies but not developing nations. But at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO that is something developing nations have failed to do.
The Financial Times Limited (AAIW/EIW) 
Rich nations agree to end farm subsidies
21 December 2015
Cape Times
NEGOTIATIONS at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation's (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) ministerial conference in Nairobi agreed to end direct export subsidies on farm produce even as 14 year-old talks on trade development remain unresolved.
Developed countries will immediately eliminate export- subsidy entitlements while developing nations must end direct support by the end of 2018, according to the ministerial declaration accepted at the weekend in the Kenyan capital.
Talks at the trade body's first ministerial conference on the continent ran more than 24 hours past the group's self-imposed deadline. "The decision you have taken today on export competition is truly extraordinary," WTO director-general HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevedo said at the closing session of the conference. "It is the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's most significant outcome on agriculture."
The declaration gives developing countries the right to use a special safeguard mechanism that allows them to raise tariffs temporarily to deal with a surge in imports or falling prices. It will also make it easier for so-called least-developed countries to benefit from preferential market access for their goods.
"Our work to secure a global ban on export subsidies will help level the playing field for American farmers and ranchers," US Trade Representative Michael Froman said. "The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's actions in this area will put an end to some of the most trade-distorting subsidies in existence."
There was no consensus in the final declaration on the future of the Doha talks, named after the Qatari capital in which they started in 2001 with the aim of adding billions of dollars to global trade by stimulating cross-border commerce.
Negotiations on the trade development talks have been stuck since 2009 because of differences between wealthy and poor nations, chiefly over subsidised farming in the developed world.
"We recognise that many members reaffirm the Doha Development Agenda (DDA), and the declarations and decisions adopted at Doha and at the ministerial conferences held since then, and reaffirm their full commitment to conclude the DDA on that basis," the ministerial declaration said.
"Other members do not reaffirm the Doha mandates, as they believe new approaches are necessary to achieve meaningful outcomes in multilateral negotiations."
Agricultural subsidies in the rich world have been a key stumbling block in trade talks for more than 15 years. Trade leaders agreed to end cotton subsidies in developed countries immediately and in developing countries by the start of 2017.
African producers threatened earlier to open a case under the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's dispute-settlement mechanism as early as January, in the event rich nations do not significantly reduce or eliminate trade-distorting support to their farmers.
The outcome is "better than I expected, it does something for cotton, it does something for export competition", Andrew Crosby, the managing director for operations and strategy at the Geneva-based International Centre for Trade and Sustainable Development, said.
"It does some things that are important, but they are agreeing to disagree on Doha."
Negotiators are leaving Nairobi without the required two-thirds majority of members needed to ratify the compromise Trade Facilitation Agreement, a deal mooted in Bali at the body's ministerial gathering two years ago that seeks to improve customs procedures for goods from least-developed countries.
This could increase merchandise exports by as much as $1 trillion (R15 trillion) a year, according to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO. Six countries assented to the accord last week, bringing the total to 63 out of the required 108.
Earlier in the week, trade leaders announced the expansion of the Information Technology Agreement, which will cut tariffs on $1.3 trillion of IT (information technology) products. A proposal to explore ending subsidies that lead to over-fishing in parts of the world was not contained in the final declaration. - Bloomberg
Australian farmers welcome global agreement to scrap agricultural export subsidies
Anna Vidot
21 December 2015
Australian Broadcasting Corporation (ABC) News
Australian farmers say a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO agreement to scrap agricultural export subsidies puts them on a level playing field.
Australian farmers say an international agreement to scrap agricultural export subsidies will put them on a level playing field with their competitors from overseas.
More than 160 member countries of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation have agreed to remove the subsidies, which include direct payments, loans, tax breaks and other financial arrangements used by countries to support their exporters.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Dairy Australia's trade manager Charlie McElhone said those measures have distorted the global milk market.
"So where the price for whole milk powder might be worth $3,000 a tonne today, if the export subsidy comes on and it's worth $1,000 a tonne, overnight the export price will be $2,000 a tonne," he said.
"Those are mechanisms by which they undercut the world price for dairy products, and which have been used quite widely within the dairy industry over many years.
"To see that we can no longer return to those bad old days is a real confidence boost for Australian dairy exporters."
Australia welcomes successful end to long campaign against export subsidies
The Australian Trade Minister Andrew Robb said the agreement will scrap $15 billion worth of subsidies, with the United States and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union responsible for $11 billion of those.
Australia has not subsidised its agricultural exports for decades.
"We'll have a level playing field, Australian farmers will be far more competitive, we'll keep markets that we otherwise would have lost, and it just generally puts us in a much, much stronger position than we've been in decades," Minister Robb said.
"[Export subsidies] started really in a big way with the Europeans and the Americans back in the 1970s and '80s; Australian governments and industry have been fighting this issue for decades now.
"Many would recall the big stockpiles of dairy products and meat and grain that built up in Europe at different times off the back of these major subsidies.
"They've caused enormous loss of markets and loss of income over decades, and it is critical that this decision was taken."
Australian sugar producers, still smarting from a disappointing conclusion to the Trans-Pacific Partnership negotiations, will also benefit from this agreement, according to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" the National Farmers' Federation trade manager Tony Mahar.
Countries such as India, which offers a subsidy to help sugar producers get their product to port, will have to phase that out over eight years under the agreement.
"What that effectively means is that they're getting their products onto the market in a cheaper way than Australian cane farmers here are, and that means that the global price is affected by that subsidy," Mr Mahar said.
"It really does depend on which product we're talking about and into which market, so it will vary from product to product, but the endgame here is that the countries have agreed to eliminate those subsidies, and that means that Australian farmers will be much better off."
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO system needs a post-Doha overhaul
While it will banish export subsidies, the agreement does nothing to address domestic agricultural subsidies used by the US and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU, among others, to reduce production costs and risks for their own producers.
It also does not address market access, or lift restrictions placed on imported agricultural goods.
Trade Minister Robb acknowledged there's "no realistic prospect" that the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's Doha round of trade talks can resolve those issues, despite originally conceived as the framework to do just that.
He said the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO system need an overhauled.
"There are still major issues that we're nowhere near [resolving]," Mr Robb said.
"I think there's a general acceptance from many, many countries that have been at these negotiations, that the process is deeply flawed.
"Yes we got an outcome this time, but it's one of many, many issues that should and could have been resolved years and years ago."
Australian Broadcasting Corporation
India returns empty-handed from WTO meet: Anand Sharma
Arun S
21 December 2015
The Hindu
NEW DELHI,BUSINESS The Congress and other opposition parties will start an agitation within and outside Parliament on the issue of what they call the failure of the government to protect India’s interests at the recently concluded Nairobi meet of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO.
The government’s official delegation, led by Commerce Minister, Nirmala Sitharaman, which represented India at the Nairobi, has returned empty-handed, Deputy leader of the Opposition in Rajya Sabha and former Commerce Minister, Anand Sharma, said.
India did not secure any commitments at the Nairobi meet on a Special Safeguard Mechanism (a tool to help developing countries protect poor farmers from import surges and price falls of farm items) and on a permanent solution for the issue of public stockholding for food security purposes. Mr Sharma told The Hindu .
“This is a huge failure at a time of agrarian distress and when many farmers are committing suicide. We will agitate within and outside the Parliament,” he said.
He questioned how the government, after agreeing to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO’s Ministerial Declaration in Nairobi, could release statements saying ‘India opposes non reaffirmation of the Doha Development Agenda’. “Such statements have made already India a laughing stock,” Mr Sharma said.
Mr. Sharma, who is a senior Congress leader and who as the commerce minister in the previous UPA regime had represented India at the 2013 Bali Ministerial Conference, said the NDA government “miserably failed to build upon the gains we made in Bali, including the one on obtaining a 'peace clause' (during which the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO member countries cannot challenge the agriculture subsidies given by nations saying they violate the provisions of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO norms).”
He said Ms. Sitharaman had earlier made a statement in Parliament that the U.S. President Barack Obama had reaffirmed to Indian Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Narendra Modi about a permanent solution to be in place by December 2015.
Sharma said since that statement was made in Parliament, Ms. Sitharaman and the NDA government should apologise to the Parliament as it has not come true.
Kasturi & Sons Ltd
German business: WTO Nairobi result must be used to revive trade body
20 December 2015
dpa International Service in English
Berlin (dpa) - The agreements on agriculture and development that were struck at the Nairobi HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) talks must be used as an opportunity to revive the global trade body, Germany's entrepreneurs said on Sunday in Berlin.
"Multilateral agreements are and will remain the best way for creating a fair and transparent world trading system," said Volker Treier, a spokesman of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Association of German Chambers of Industry and Commerce.
At the end of their high-level meeting on Saturday, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO member countries agreed on phasing out government subsidies for agricultural exports by 2030. They also made decisions on preferential conditions for less developed countries.
However, the more than 160 HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members failed to agree on whether to continue the stalled Doha round of negotiations on a global free trade framework, which would create fair conditions for developing countries.
"The Nairobi package has to be the starting signal for reviving the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO as a central forum for trading rules," Treier said.
The United States and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union want to scrap the Doha format and want to broaden the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's focus by including talks on regulating globalized trade and investments.
Large emerging countries like China and India seek to stick to the Doha agenda that was adopted in 2001, as it classified them as developing countries, providing them with corresponding preferential trade conditions.
Lack of progress on the global Doha round has led to the development of several regional free trade treaties, such as the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which was concluded in October, and the EU-US Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, which is still being negotiated.
