HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO Members to Discuss Assistance to Developing Countries; Azevedo to U.S.
·         HYPERLINK \l "India-US solar issue: WTO's dispute panel to meet next week
·         HYPERLINK \l "India sugar mills seek govt help to dispose of supply surplus
·         HYPERLINK \l "Alberta Officials to Address COOL, Energy Issues During Washington, New York Trips
·         HYPERLINK \l "Strong UAE economy a role model for world
·         HYPERLINK \l "Taiwan makes donation to WTO for animal, plant health initiatives
·         HYPERLINK \l "FOCUS: U.S. gearing up for TPP conclusion, hopes for deal with Japan growing
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S. News: Drug Patents Pose a Major Hurdle to Pacific Trade Deal
·         HYPERLINK \l "Statistical revisions add shine to India growth
·         HYPERLINK \l "The perils of a strong US dollar
 
 
WTO Members to Discuss Assistance to Developing Countries; Azevedo to U.S.
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, February 2, 2015
 
Jan. 30 — World Trade Organization members in Geneva plan to focus on issues related to developing nations during the first week of February.
 
First up is an open-ended informal meeting of the Special Session Committee on Trade and Development scheduled for Feb. 2.
 
Committee Chairman Ambassador Harald Neple of Norway recently held a round of informal consultations aimed at “finalizing a number of agreement-specific proposals” expected to become the basis of the Special Session's work program, according to comments from WTO Director-General Roberto Azevedo.
 
Going forward, members of the committee intend to table a “list of the provisions where they would like to see work being done,” Azevedo said. “Substantive proposals explaining the rationale, and the problems identified, are expected to be submitted at the second stage,” he said.
 
High-Level LDC Meetings
 
The WTO group of least-developed countries (LDCs) plans to hold a pair of high-level meetings on Feb. 5-6 to consider ways to aid developing countries in trade-related services.
 
The objective is to discuss in which services sectors and modes of supply LDC services and service suppliers would be granted preferential treatment.
 
WTO members agreed in 2011 to provide preferential treatment to LDCs services and services suppliers, though no concrete steps have been taken to put that agreement into place.
 
The meetings will be held in Geneva and are considered to be formal meetings of the Council for Trade in Services.
 
Azevedo to U.S
 
Azevedo has not scheduled the year's third informal Heads of Delegation meeting.
 
The meetings, part of an intensive process launched by Azevedo in January, are aimed at advancing a detailed work program on the remaining elements of the 2013 Bali Ministerial agreement and on the Doha Development Agenda by July 31.
 
Instead, Azevedo will travel to the U.S. to meet with leaders of Caterpillar Inc. at the 2015 Leadership Summit in Atlanta Feb. 3.
 
Azevedo will meet with members of the Americas Society and the Council of the Americas in New York Feb. 4. He will deliver the Gabriel Silver Memorial Lecture at Columbia University School of International and Public Affairs in New York Feb. 5.
 
 
India-US solar issue: WTO's dispute panel to meet next week
PTI Jan 30, 2015, 04.21PM IST
 
NEW DELHI: The WTO's dispute settlement panel, which is examining a complaint by the US against India's domestic content requirements under its solar power programme, would meet next week in Geneva.
 
"The first substantive meeting of India and the US officials with the panel would held in the first week of next month," an official said.
 
India and the US have already completed their bilateral consultations on the matter.
 
The consultations were followed after the US filed a complaint in the WTO in February last year alleging discrimination by India's national solar mission against American products.
 
As per the procedure of the World Trade Organisation, consultation is the first stage of a complaint filed with the global trade body.
 
According to the official, the US was satisfied with the bilateral deliberations, "that is why they have gone for setting up of a panel under the WTO's dispute settlement mechanism".
 
Consultations give the parties an opportunity to discuss the matter and to find a satisfactory solution without proceeding further with litigation. If consultations fail to resolve the dispute, the complainant may request adjudication by a panel.
 
The US had alleged that India's programme appears to discriminate against US solar equipment by requiring solar energy producers to use locally manufactured cells and by offering subsidies to those developers who use domestic equipment.
 
It is also alleged that forced localisation requirements restrict US exports to India markets.
 
On January 11, 2010, India launched its national solar policy -- the Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission.
 
India has an ambitious target of generating 20,000 megawatts of solar power by 2022.
 
US companies sees this target as a great business opportunity for them. Because of this, they want India to remove the clause of local content requirement.
 
 
India sugar mills seek govt help to dispose of supply surplus 
 
* Industry body hopes to see export incentives this week
* Intervention needed to raise competitiveness
* India has had five years of sugar production surplus

DUBAI, Feb 1 (Reuters) - Struggling sugar mills in India should benefit from a fixed-pricing mechanism for fuel ethanol but still need government support to export surplus sugar, the Director General of the Indian Sugar Mills Association said on Sunday.

Ethanol is produced in India from molasses, a byproduct of sugar production, and the government introduced the mechanism in December aiming to raise output to help curb fossil fuel imports.

"Fixed ethanol pricing is a positive development," Abinash Verma told the Kingsman Platts Dubai Sugar Conference.

Falling sugar prices in India linked to a supply glut have taken a heavy toll on sugar mills.

Last year one of India's largest sugar mills, Mawana Sugars Ltd, defaulted on 2.5 billion rupees ($40 million) in outstanding loans from a consortium of lenders, an official from the company said.

The surplus has depressed local prices, which could fall further unless the government provides incentives for raw sugar exports.

Verma said he expected the government to issue a decision on export subsidies this week.

"It is almost through so we expect and we pray it will happen this week," he told Reuters.

Subsidies helped Indian raw sugar exports last year and mills have been waiting for news of this year's subsidy since the start of the crushing season in October.

Verma said India's sugar production for the 2014-2015 season is expected at 26 million tonnes while consumption will be between 24.7 million tonnes and 24.8 million tonnes.

"From what we are hearing the government is proposing around 1.4 million tonnes of assistance for raw sugar. Without government support we would not be in a position to export so whatever government will announce that is the kind of upper ceiling of what we can export," Verma said.

Verma said government policies which impose high prices for the cane used to produce sugar had helped create the surplus and government assistance was therefore needed to get rid of it.

"There is a need for government support for the disposal of surplus sugar," he said.

India exported more than 1 million tonnes of raw sugar in 2014 and mills had hoped to export up to 2 million tonnes this year. (Reporting by Maha El Dahan and Rania El Gamal; editing by Jason Neely) 
 
 
Alberta Officials to Address COOL, Energy Issues During Washington, New York Trips
By Jeremy Hainsworth 
WTO Reporter, February 2, 2015
 
Jan. 30 — Alberta officials will push for changes to U.S. mandatory country-of-origin labeling (COOL) requirements for imported beef and pork and discuss oil and gas policy during upcoming visits to Washington and New York.
 
Provincial Minister of Agriculture and Rural Development Verlyn Olson will visit the U.S. capital Feb. 3–5 to advocate for changes to the U.S. COOL rules. Alberta Premier Jim Prentice will be in Washington and New York Jan. 31 to Feb. 6 to discuss oil and gas production.
 
The COOL rules, unveiled by the U.S. Department of Agriculture in May 2013, require meat producers to specify on retail packaging where an animal was born, raised and slaughtered. The rules also prohibit the mixing of muscle cuts from different countries under a general label. Several business groups have warned that Canada and Mexico could levy retaliatory tariffs on U.S. products if changes to the rules are not made (15 WTO, 1/23/15).
 
“It's time for the American government to do what is right and put an end to mandatory Country of Origin Labeling which is clearly a discriminatory trade barrier,” Olson told Bloomberg BNA in a Jan. 29 statement. “The World Trade Organization has ruled three times that the U.S. is failing to meet its trade obligations because of COOL and we fully support the federal government in implementing retaliatory trade measures on U.S. products if necessary.”
 
Olson said that the provincial government will continue to advocate on behalf of Alberta cattle and hog industries and will “oppose these onerous labeling requirements, which are imposing more than a billion dollars annually in unnecessary costs and harm businesses, workers and farmers on both sides of the border.”
 
WTO COOL Ruling on Appeal
 
While the World Trade Organization has ruled that COOL is a violation of U.S. trade obligations, the decision is currently under appeal (243 WTO, 12/18/14).
 
Olson will meet with representatives of agriculture producers, food processors and industry associations opposed to COOL, as well as with members of Congress.
 
Prentice will meet with legislators, administration officials and representatives from the banking, energy and environmental policy sectors and will address the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and the Foreign Policy Association.
 
Alison Redford, Prentice's predecessor, made frequent trips to Washington to lobby for the Keystone XL pipeline to move oil from Alberta's oil sands to the U.S. Gulf Coast.
 
 
Strong UAE economy a role model for world 
1 February 2015
Khaleej Times
 
Country a safe and attractive destination for businesses, trade, says Mohammed

Abu Dhabi — The UAE Cabinet on Sunday endorsed the requirements to implement the Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA) of the World Trade Organisation (WTO).

The TFA aims to facilitate cross-border trade by simplifying administrative and documentation requirements, as required by the government, on import and export and reducing costs as well as well following international criteria including electronic ones. The agreement also aims to cut the red tape at the border by coordinating the work of concerned entities, which will eventually achieve balance by boosting trade, streamline the work of the customs that regulate the trade flow in the UAE.

His Highness Shaikh Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum, Vice-President and Prime Minister of the UAE and Ruler of Dubai, who chaired the Cabinet meeting at the Presidential Palace, said under the leadership of the President, His Highness Shaikh Khalifa bin Zayed Al Nahyan, the UAE’s economy is by now one of the strongest and a model in the world. It is laying strong foundations for the country to assume its international economic leading position.

Shaikh Mohammed said that the UAE’s economy has become a safe and attractive destination to develop businesses and promote trade. Efforts will continue to foster an innovation-nurturing environment to realise the UAE Vision 2021 for a knowledge-based economy.

The Emirati economic model is a sustainable and responsible one ensuring a long-term prosperity for its citizens and residents alike. The economy is robust and can accommodate market changes, open new frontiers and diversity as we have strong infrastructure, technology and logistics,” Shaikh Mohammed said.

The UAE seeks to innovate new sustainable and competitive economic models as well as adopt more flexible approaches that boost cooperation between the government and private sector which suits its international position as a main economic player.”

The Trade Facilitation Agreement will contribute in increasing efficiency, flexibility and productivity in the labour market, given it is a priority for the federal government. It will help facilitate movement and develop businesses across the UAE.

Shaikh Mohammed and members of the UAE Cabinet expressed their sadness over the passing of the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, King Abdullah bin Abdulaziz of Saudi Arabia.

The Cabinet also discussed other topics on the agenda and approved the bylaws of the Etihad Rail through which the company will submit its contracts and agreements to an arbitration clause in case of any disputes. The Cabinet also approved the 2013 closing statement of the General Pension and Social Security Authority as well as the 2015 budget draft of Emirates Transport.

On the International level, the Cabinet endorsed a number of international agreements, such as mutual visa waiver agreement with Seychelles and another mutual visa waiver agreement for holders of diplomatic, official and special passports with Colombia. Another agreement with Brunei to establish a cooperation committee was also given the green light. Economic and technical cooperation agreements were also approved with Uruguay and Slovenia.
 
 
Taiwan makes donation to WTO for animal, plant health initiatives
CNA 2015-02-01 09:20 (GMT+8) 
 
The WTO has praised the donations Taiwan has made to programs helping emerging countries, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MOFA) said in a news released Friday.
 
In a statement issued on Jan. 21, WTO director-general Roberto Azevedo welcomed Taiwan's contributions and said they were playing a role in helping developing and least-developed countries strengthen their links with world markets, according to the ministry.
 
Azevedo was referring to a memorandum of understanding Taiwan signed with the WTO Secretariat to donate US$80,000 a year for three years from 2014 to 2016 to a plant and animal health initiative through the WTO's Standards and Trade Development Facility (STDF).
 
The agreement, which the ministry said underscores Taiwan's support of the development of a multilateral trade system, helps developing and -least-developed countries in building their capacity to implement international sanitary and phytosanitary measures.
 
Since Taiwan became a WTO member in 2002, it has continued to actively take part in various WTO activities and make donations to help developing countries better integrate themselves into the multilateral trading system, the ministry said.
 
According to WTO statistics, Taiwan is the third biggest donor to WTO programs among developing country members, fully demonstrating that it is a responsible member of the WTO and is actively trying to give back to the world community, the MOFA said.
 
 
FOCUS: U.S. gearing up for TPP conclusion, hopes for deal with Japan growing 
Kakumi Kobayash
Kyodo News
 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 1 -- The United States is stepping up efforts to conclude a Pacific free trade pact soon, a move that also boosts hopes for a deal with Japan that would be necessary for the goal.

Unlike the situation some months ago, there has been much talk by U.S. government leaders and lawmakers as well as agricultural groups on how to strike a deal over the Trans-Pacific Partnership initiative on such occasions as a chief negotiators' meeting ended Sunday in New York.

"Various movements have emerged in the United States" recently, Japanese Ambassador to the United States Kenichiro Sasae told reporters in late January.

"We welcome President (Barack) Obama leading a bid to strengthen the momentum," Sasae said, mentioning the U.S. president's annual policy speech at Congress last month in which he said his administration will seek "strong" trade deals including the U.S.-led TPP.

Obama in his State of the Union Address asked Congress to give him fast-track authority to conclude the negotiations over the deal that have already run nearly five years.

If the president is given the power, which is formally called trade promotion authority or TPA, the government will have only to ask Congress whether it backs a deal across the board without revisions.

Obama made a similar call in his address in 2014, but there was a clear difference this year as a majority of the audience consisted of Republicans, who are generally more positive about free trade than Democrats.

Days after Obama's speech, U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman showed his confidence in concluding a TPP within months during a session of the Senate's Finance Committee, which handles trade issues.

Orrin Hatch, the Republican chairman of the committee, expressed his willingness to work on a bill for TPA soon, telling the session, "I want to make one thing clear. The time for TPA is now."

The moves came as observers and officials from 12 countries negotiating for a TPP shared the view that the clock is ticking on their bid for a TPP signing before the American public's interest shifts to the 2016 presidential election.

A positive sign also emerged last month for a settlement of Japan-U.S. disputes over TPP-related issues such as exceptional tariffs on beef, pork and other agricultural produce.

Japan and the United States account for some 80 percent of the combined gross domestic product under the envisioned TPP.

The National Pork Producers Council, a U.S. agricultural group known for its hard-line stance on Japan over TPP negotiations, surprised people involved in the bilateral deal when the council said it is "all in" on TPA.

"Significant progress has been made with respect to Japan's market access offer on pork," Howard Hill, president of the council, said in a statement. Last year, the council proposed excluding Japan from the TPP negotiations unless there was progress on the exceptional tariff issue.

The council did not elaborate on why it changed its position but a Japanese government official presumed the group thought now is the best time to make a deal.

"The U.S. and Japan do not agree to a bilateral deal on market access. Until a few weeks ago, I would have shared the skepticism about that," Matthew Goodman, senior adviser for Asian economics at the Center for Strategic and International Studies think tank, told a recent event.

"I think things have moved substantially in the last few weeks," said Goodman, a former senior official of the White House under Obama.

But Goodman noted it is premature to talk about the time frame of a proposed TPA bill and the TPP talks, as it took several to 10 months before TPA was finally introduced in past cases.

Details of ongoing negotiations between Tokyo and Washington have not been made public, but people familiar with the talks said Japan has proposed some concessions such as sharp cuts in exceptional tariffs on beef and pork.

While the proposals are likely to draw strong reactions from Japanese farmers, who in general fear an influx of cheaper overseas products, William Brooks, a U.S. expert on relations with Japan, said Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe can get through the resistance.

Brooks, adjunct professor at Johns Hopkins University, said Abe's government is trying to restructure agriculture as a growth industry and its position on TPP until now has been accepted by the public.

"I don't think he has anything to worry about as long as he is popular," Brooks said.

 
U.S. News: Drug Patents Pose a Major Hurdle to Pacific Trade Deal 
By William Mauldin 
2 February 2015
The Wall Street Journal
 
Disagreement over the international reach of drug patents has emerged as a significant challenge as the Obama administration tries to hatch a Pacific trade deal acceptable to U.S. companies, political factions in Congress and trading partners.

The issue flared last week as half a dozen senators grilled U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman about his commitment to rules that would protect medicines called biologic drugs from imitation for up to 12 years.

U.S. trade negotiators met over the weekend with officials from 11 countries, including Japan, to work out rules for the drugs in a proposed trade bloc, the Trans-Pacific Partnership, or TPP.

Critics of President Barack Obama's trade policy say defending drug makers from competition for years makes medicine unaffordable in some poorer countries and could even cost lives. The issue is part of a broad debate on intellectual property that pits more innovative economies against developing ones.

"This is one of the most difficult outstanding issues in the negotiations," Mr. Froman told the Senate hearing.

Pharmaceuticals are a big part of the TPP talks, and an industry where U.S. officials see a clear advantage. For Japan, medicines are the largest import from the U.S. after aircraft, meat and medical equipment.

Biologic drugs -- made from living cells, blood components and tissue as opposed to chemicals -- are expected to generate up to $200 billion in sales by next year, according to IMS Health, a data provider.

This month, a U.S. Food and Drug Administration advisory panel recommended approving the first "biosimilar" drug in the U.S., a version of Amgen Inc.'s cancer drug Neupogen from Novartis AG's Sandoz unit.

The pharmaceutical industry wants makers of biologics to have 12 years to exclusively market their drugs before competitors can offer biosimilar drugs in TPP countries, the same rule enshrined in the 2010 Affordable Care Act. It also is significantly more than most TPP partners offer domestically but similar to Japan's level of protection.

"If you don't do that, your biologics companies won't be able to compete," Republican Sen. Orrin Hatch, chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, said Friday at the American Enterprise Institute.

It isn't clear whether U.S. officials will be able to clinch a deal that includes 12-year protection without compromises in other areas of the TPP, according to people following the talks.

The pharmaceutical industry says drug companies need the promise of a big payout to invest $1 billion or so on creating the next biologic blockbuster.
 
 
Statistical revisions add shine to India growth 
James Crabtree in Mumbai 
1 February 2015
Financial Times (FT.Com)
 
India's attempts to catch up with China's rate of economic expansion have received an unexpected boost from statistical revisions that dramatically raised estimates of the country's gross domestic product growth during the past two years.

Interest in the relative performance of Asia's two largest emerging economies has been stoked by forecasts suggesting India is on course to overtake its larger neighbour next year, with the International Monetary Fund projecting Indian growth at 6.5 per cent in 2016 while China slows to 6.3 per cent.

But the recent growth gap between the two nations now appears to have been smaller than previously estimated, after India's main statistical body released revised estimates on Friday showing the economy growing by 6.9 per cent during the 2014 financial year, up from the previous figure of 4.7 per cent.

The new data show India recovering rapidly following its economic slowdown, and bring the country's rate of expansion much closer to that of China, which grew by 7.4 per cent during the 2014 calendar year, according to IMF data.

Indian growth for the financial year ending in March 2013 was also revised from 4.7 per cent to 5.1 per cent in the changes announced by India's Central Statistical Organisation.

Economist Shilan Shah at consultants Capital Economics described the described the upward revisions as "astounding", but questioned the extent to which India had in fact performed "far better" than most economists had realised in the years prior to the election of Prime Minister Narendra Modi last May.

"If true, this implies there is much less room for a substantial pick-up in growth without stoking inflation," Mr Shah wrote in a note. "But this picture of health is hard to square with numerous other indicators that point to increasing slack in the economy."

The revisions followed changes in the way Indian statisticians gauge growth that were designed to bring the country into line with international norms, including a one-off updating of the base year used for GDP calculations and improvements in survey techniques.

Prior to the revisions, India had appeared to be making a gradual recovery from a prolonged slump under its previous government, during whose tenure growth rates almost halved having touched nearly 9 per cent in 2011.

India's economy expanded by 5.3 per cent during the third quarter of this financial year, although this figure is also now likely to be revised, alongside data for the first two quarters, when India publishes its latest GDP figures on February 9.

While one-off revisions to historical data are unlikely to have an effect on future growth rates, the changes could provide a boost to Mr Modi by helping his government meet a tough target of cutting India's fiscal deficit to 4.1 per cent of GDP by the end of March, analysts said.

"These revisions should not make much difference to what happens next year in terms of growth," said Surjit Bhalla, an economist at New Delhi-based Oxus Investments. "The biggest implication is that the fiscal deficit target should now be more easily met, because the GDP base for that 4.1 per cent target will have changed."

 
COMMENT
The perils of a strong US dollar 
By Edward Luce in America 
2 February 2015
Financial Times
 
First things first. We are not about to replay the 1930s. The world's big economies are not deliberately indulging in "beggar thy neighbour" devaluations and protectionism is not poised for an ugly revival. As they say in the US: situation normal, all fouled up - or words to that effect.

Yet there are undertows we ignore at our risk. The US dollar is surging and export growth is slowing. The same applies to the widely forecast stampede of reshoring to the country, which is not really happening. Most US competitors are cutting interest rates and watching their currencies fall against the dollar. If these trends persist, and they will, US politics will react. A rising dollar is not the picnic it is made it out to be.

Yet it is hard to see what will stop it. The gap between North America's growth, which is "solid", in the words of Janet Yellen, US Fed chairman, and that of most other big economies is real. So, too, is the growing monetary divergence. US 10-year bond yields are historically low at just 1.7 per cent. But these are juicy compared to Germany (0.3 per cent), Japan (0.25 per cent) and even the UK (1.3 per cent). Investors will keep buying the dollar.

This will become more pronounced as the Fed moves towards its first rate rise in almost a decade. Most others are cutting theirs. In the past three weeks, Canada, India, and Singapore have all reduced their lending rates. Australia and Turkey are expected to follow suit. The European Central Bank and Denmark are moving into negative nominal territory. It is probably a matter of time before the euro reaches parity with the dollar.

These are not Great Depression-style devaluations. The Europeans and others are stepping up quantitative easing to revive growth, not to undercut the US. But the effect is the same.

The dangers are two-fold. First, there is an increasingly strong effect on the corporate bottom line. Almost half of the revenues of US S&P 500 companies come from overseas, and an even higher share of net profits. The stronger the dollar, the weaker their earnings growth.

In the last quarter of 2014, many big companies reported declining profits. Caterpillar's fell by 25 per cent. Procter & Gamble forecasts zero growth in 2015 because of the strong dollar. Even Apple and Google warned of "strong currency headwinds". This helps explain why US equity markets dropped by 5 per cent in January, while the dollar rose.

Second, the political backlash is growing. Last week, Republicans and Democrats pressed Mike Froman, the US chief trade negotiator, to include a currency manipulation clause in the Transpacific Partnership trade deal - with Japan the focus. Though China is not part of the TPP, the remininbi was their real target. Mr Froman re-directed their questions to Jack Lew, the Treasury secretary, who insists a strong dollar is in America's interests.

Mr Lew's mantra is formulaic, and arguably misleading. But as my colleague Alan Beattie has pointed out, currency shenanigans are in the eye of the beholder. One person's devaluation is another's monetary policy. Rules against it are impossible to enforce. Insisting on them would wreck chances of a Pacific trade deal.

Yet, as exports stall and manufacturing jobs fail to return to the US, the political debate is likely to grow louder. Last month, Lawrence Summers, the former US Treasury secretary, and Ed Balls, the UK shadow chancellor, came out with a report on inclusive prosperity at the Center for American Progress. It offers a clear set of policies to reverse the declining incomes of the western middle class. These include broadening employee ownership, improving parental leave,raising the minimum wage and stepping up vocational training. Its findings are seen as a blueprint for Hillary Clinton's presidential campaign. Astonishingly, given that Mr Summers has long opposed such clauses, it also recommends "new trade agreements should explicitly include enforceable disciplines against currency manipulation". With such cover, it is little wonder both left and right are clamouring for their inclusion.

What, then, will become of the strong dollar? The upside is that Ms Yellen can afford to keep interest rates at zero for longer than expected. There is scant sign of wage growth and inflation is nowhere on the horizon. The stronger the dollar, the lower the cost of imports. Falling oil prices also help.

By Europe's standards, the US is grappling with a high-class problem. The bad news is that its recovery is based on the familiar model of rising consumption. In the last quarter of 2014, growth of 2.6 per cent was driven by household spending, rather than investment. American companies are actually cutting domestic outlays.

Since rising US consumer spending is driven by cheap borrowing costs rather than growing middle class earnings, it is vulnerable to a turn in the interest rate cycle. Most Americans are still cautious about the strength of the recovery. With 30-year mortgages available at less than 3 per cent, it is striking how few are buying homes. It is hard to believe more will do so when Ms Yellen finally acts.

In one respect, Mr Lew is right. The strong dollar reflects America's success. It may also be a case of being careful what you wish for.
END
 
 


  ________________________________  
Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.