Liberia Advances Accession to WTO
Effort to comply with WTO directive
Ryan Floats TPP Without Japan, Canada, As Both Withhold Sensitive Items
EEU member states reminded to share information about WTO talks
China calculators: Govt extends time to complete dumping probe
OECD Prepares to Close Tax Loophole -- Update
Lagarde tells G20 to boost growth and pace of reforms
Isolated Greece rejects bailout extension
World can't rely on U.S. to carry economy forever -Canada
TTIP talks - Africa remains left out

Liberia Advances Accession to WTO
6 February 2015
All Africa
Feb 06, 2015 (The Inquirer/All Africa Global Media via COMTEX) -- Liberia's Minister of Commerce and Industry Mr. Axel M. Addy led a delegation to the World Trade Organization (WTO) to hold bilateral trade negotiations on the negotiation inputs Goods and Services Offer, Legislative Action Plan, Action Plans on Sanitary and Phytosanitary(SPS) Measures and Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT), as well as the Responses to Members' Questions in advance of Liberia's Second Working Party Meeting in March 2015.
According to a dispatch from Geneva, Switzerland, the Mission was also an opportunity to get a feel from the first 2015 meeting of the Informal Group on Accessions (IGA) which was attended by Joachim Reiter, Liberia's Chairman of its Working Party Meeting.
The dispatch said the bilateral market access negotiations were held with the United States of America, European Union, Canada, Japan, and Chinese Taipei. Accordingly most of the substantive issues pertaining to the negotiations relate to clarity on Liberia's commitment to implement the ECOWAS Common External Tariff (CET) and the commitments made in Accounting, auditing, and bookkeeping services, along with approval requirements for private sector participation in engineering services, protection of intellectual property rights far plants varieties, and the lease regime far foreign investors.
The United States of America and Chinese Taipei, a customs territory within the W TO, have sent the signal for Liberia to sign the Information Technology Agreement (ITA) - an agreement which advocates zero duties on IT products.
The dispatch said these include computer hardware, subassemblies and peripherals, computer software, semiconductor manufacturing and testing equipment, telecommunications and electronic components among others The dispatch also said Canada requested Liberia to grant equal tariff treatment (parity at the bound level) to soya bean, canola. etc.
With the United States and European Union proffering different positions on the audio-visual text in the Services Offer, the dispatch said Liberia has proposed that the disagreement on audio-visual text between the EU and the US he upgraded to a trilateral forum among all parties.
With support from the WTO Secretariat, the mission also benefited from capacity building in SPS and TBT and currently an extended mission is being facilitated by the WTO Secretariat to ensure that all the Action Plans for the TBT and SPS are properly documented and aligned to the WTO Agreements on SPS and TBT.
The dispatch said the work on SPS and TBT Action Plan is being coordinated with the teams at the Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Commerce and Industry.
It can be recalled that Minister Addy and delegation did two Pulse Check Missions to Geneva in 2014 to engage with the WTO Secretariat and evaluate the preparedness and speed of Liberia's accession.
The dispatch noted that there is light at the end of the tunnel with the transmittal of a letter from President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf in May 20 I 4, couple with the the response from WTO Director-- Genera] Roberto Azevedo, and the submission of the key negotiation inputs to the WTO Secretariat, despite the Ebola Outbreak. The Commerce Ministry dispatch said these actions impressed on members the seriousness of Liberia's intention to become the 161th member of the WTO.
At the conclusion of the negotiations in mid-February, Liberia intends to cautiously fast track its accession and beginning drafting the Working Party Report to fulfill the early accession harvest at the Tenth Ministerial Conference of the WTO in Nairobi. Kenya in December 2015.
Lastly, while on the mission, Minister Addy paid courtesy calls on MukhisaKituyi UNCTAD Secretary General, Dr. RatnakarAdhikari, ElF Executive Director, Coordinator Simon Hess of the EIF and Arancha Gonzalez, Executive Director, International Trade Center (ITC).
It is important to stress that Liberia's would--be membership to the W'l'O is important for investment in non-traditional sectors, like tourism, fisheries, education, and health to spur economic growth and development. Cape Verde and Cambodia, along with Rwanda, have demonstrated that accession to the WTO arid a predictable business environment are important elements for economic growth.
The Liberian delegation, headed by Axel M Addy included Steve Marvie, Assistant Minister for Commerce and Trade, Mr. William Buku, Assistant Commissioner Operational Policy & International Relations of the Bureau of Customs & Excise, Liberia Revenue Authority, Atty. Roosevelt Gould, Legal Counsel at the Trade Ministry, Atty. Winston Tubman, Lawyer, Law Reform Commission as well as Mr. Paul Wolokollie Tate, Head of Mission, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Liberia to the UN 0ffice and other International Organization at Geneva.

Effort to comply with WTO directive
GOVERNMENT HAS OFFICIALLY informed the World Trade Organisation (WTO) that it is taking steps to end a number of subsidies which the WTO says is contravening its Subsidies and Countervailing Measures (SCM) Agreement.
Nation News (Barbados)
6 February 2015
And based on what Government has outlined, it will mean legislative changes and agreements with companies expected to be affected by the changes.
According to WTO documents made available last week, Government has been taking a number of “internal steps”, including finalisation of the preparation of a policy paper for discussion with the stakeholders, submission of the policy paper to the Cabinet for approval, issuance of instructions to the Chief Parliamentary Counsel to amend the legislation, submission of bills to Cabinet for approval, and submission to Parliament for debate and approval.
“The authorities indicated that processes would be completed in time for Barbados to honour its obligation to make these programmes WTO-compatible by December 2015,” the WTO said.
“In September 2013, Barbados informed WTO members that a position paper, detailing proposed recommendations on how to bring the offending programmes into line with the obligations of the SCM Agreement, had been circulated among the private and public sector stakeholders that would be affected by the removal of the prohibited programmes and that the ministry responsible for the coordination of the efforts towards the elimination of the prohibited subsidies had received their comments on the position paper.
“These comments and all proposed recommendations had been forwarded to the Office of the Solicitor General, with a view to determining any legal implications for the proposed recommendations. That ministry had also engaged with the Office of the Solicitor General to develop the most legally-appropriate way to formulate the proposed revisions.
“With respect to the Fiscal Incentives Act, as at late 2014 the Government has engaged in consultations with companies that have been granted benefits beyond December 31, 2015, to agree on some form of compensation,” the WTO added. (SC)

Ryan Floats TPP Without Japan, Canada, As Both Withhold Sensitive Items
Inside U.S. Trade - 02/06/2015 House Ways & Means Committee Chairman Paul Ryan (R-WI) this week suggested leaving Japan and Canada out of a final Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) agreement if they do not sufficiently lower import barriers on sensitive agriculture products.
"So for TPP, Japan and Canada just have to lower their agricultural tariffs," he said in a Feb. 5 prepared speech to the Washington International Trade Association, flagging high Japanese tariffs and Canadian restrictions on dairy, poultry, and egg products.
"Those have to go. And if any of the 12 countries currently in the talks think our standards are too high, well, I'd complete the agreement without them and invite them to join it later," Ryan said.
Ryan's comments come as Japan and Canada are continuing to hold off on making tariff offers to all TPP countries on their most sensitive products, although Japan in recent weeks has vastly improved the quality of its offers for a number of negotiating partners, sources said.
Canada's tariff offer is the lowest quality out of all TPP countries, and in some cases it is offering less market access than it has in its bilateral free trade agreements with TPP countries, these sources charged.
Japan, by contrast, is withholding making offers on a few of its most sensitive products that are still not settled in the U.S.-Japan bilateral market access negotiation, according to these sources. Some sources say Japan has indicated it will extend the treatment that it gives to the United States to all TPP countries, although other industry sources remain doubtful that this will be the case for such products as dairy.
But these products on which Japan is holding out are not of interest to all TPP countries. As a result, some countries consider their bilateral market access with Tokyo to be concluded, sources said. One industry source said that, in addition to the U.S., New Zealand and Canada have likely not concluded their bilateral talks with Japan.
Overall, TPP negotiators who met for an informal round in New York City last week did not resolve the most difficult outstanding issues in the talks, such intellectual property (IP) protection for medicines, state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and textiles, sources said.
Even the relatively less controversial issue of whether a TPP agreement would impose a blanket ban on agricultural export subsidies was not resolved in New York, sources said. The U.S. had indicated ahead of the round that it was willing to agree to an unconditional and complete ban on agricultural export subsidies if other negotiating partners dropped their demands for new disciplines for export credits (Inside U.S. Trade, Jan. 30).
One source said some negotiating groups -- SOEs likely among them -- will hold additional meetings prior to a TPP ministerial planned for the middle of March at which the U.S. is aiming to conclude the talks. Another source said there will also be additional bilateral engagements ahead of the ministerial, the location of which had not been finalized.
Officials close to the negotiations this week gave differing assessments of how long it would take to conclude a TPP agreement.
Australian Trade Minister Andrew Robb said in a Feb. 5 interview with the Australian Broadcasting Corporation that the timeframe negotiators are looking at for concluding the TPP is "mid-February to mid-March," according to a transcript posted on his website.
But Chilean Ambassador to the U.S. Juan Gabriel Valdes said at a Feb. 5 event at the Atlantic Council in Washington that, in his opinion, "months of work" remain to conclude a TPP deal.
Another source close to the negotiations estimated there is a 70 percent chance that the agreement will be concluded at the mid-March ministerial.
Robb acknowledged that TPP countries might not be able to close all outstanding issues prior to mid-March."Mid-February to mid-March. That will be I think the time frame," he said. "We might have to come back again to conclude some things but that's the intent. It really is a vital time."
"We have sort of concluded that that would be the best time if we can manage it. There are still some, not many, but the final issues as always are the most difficult, but everyone seems to be in a mood to find some common ground so that we can get this really major agreement off the ground," Robb added.
Two major U.S. dairy groups -- the National Milk Producers Federation (NMPF) and the U.S. Dairy Export Council (USDEC) -- welcomed Ryan's comments on Canada and Japan, even as USDEC President Tom Suber noted that significant progress had made in the U.S.-Japan market access talks.
"We appreciate the intense trade negotiations now under way between the United States and Japan and believe significant progress has been made in those talks," Suber said in a statement. "But there still is work to do. Japan's ongoing efforts to limit meaningful market access on key U.S. dairy products are not in keeping with a trade agreement designed to expand trade opportunities."
In the same statement, NMPF President and CEO Jim Mulhern said it "is time Canada provides significant market access on all dairy products, from cheese to butter to milk." He added that, too many times in the past, "Canada has gotten a pass on its impenetrable tariff wall on dairy imports."
Canada's ambassador to the United States this week implicitly rejected the notion that his country is holding up the TPP negotiations by failing to engage on agricultural market access (see related story). -- Matthew Schewel

EEU member states reminded to share information about WTO talks
6 February 2015
“Belarus wants to openly discuss the fulfillment by the partners of their obligations to provide information about their WTO talks. These obligations are part of the multilateral trading system and were documented in the Customs Union Treaty,” Andrei Kobyakov said.
He reminded that the partners agreed to reconcile their plans on the WTO accession back in 2002. “Russia’s tariff obligations were taken as a benchmark. The partners had no other agreements. Therefore, I would like to emphasize that if we have no idea how the WTO talks of our partners are proceeding, we will consider ourselves free from the obligation to harmonize and adopt additional commitments associated with the accession of our partners to the WTO,” Andrei Kobyakov noted.

China calculators: Govt extends time to complete dumping probe

New Delhi, Feb 6 (PTI) The government has extended the time till April for completing a probe into alleged dumping of electronic calculators by Chinese companies.
"It is informed that the central government has accorded permission for extension of time up to 17th April for completing ... anti-dumping investigation and notifying the final findings," the Commerce Ministry said.
On October 18 last year, the Directorate General of Anti-Dumping and Allied Duties (DGAD), an arm of the Commerce Ministry, had begun investigations into allegations of dumping of electronic calculators by Chinese firms.
Normally, the authority completes an investigation within 150 days of the date of initiation of the probe.
Ajanta Ltd, a leading producer of electronic calculators in the country, had filed the application for the probe on behalf of the domestic industry.
The DGAD had said that the authority has found sufficient prima facie evidence of dumping of calculators from China.
The period of investigation was from April 2012 to March 2013. However, for the purpose of analysing injury, the data of previous three years of 2009-2010, 2010-2011 and 2011-12 would also be considered.
After completion of the probe, the DGAD, if needed, would recommend the duty and the Finance Ministry would impose it.
Countries initiate an anti-dumping probe to determine whether their domestic industries have been hurt because of surge in cheap imports of any product. As a counter measure, they impose duties under the multilateral regime of the WTO.
The duty is aimed at ensuring fair trading practices and creating a level-playing field for domestic producers vis-a-vis foreign producers and exporters resorting to dumping.
India has initiated as many as 159 anti-dumping investigation cases since 1992 against China, with which it has a huge trade deficit of about USD 37 billion in 2013-14.
The bilateral trade between the countries stood at USD 65.85 billion in 2013-14.
Major items of Indian exports to China include raw cotton and yarn, iron ore, minerals, plastic, spices, machinery, petroleum. Import products include electric goods, machinery, chemicals, project goods, fertiliser, iron and steel, transport equipment and electric machinery. PTI RR MR

OECD Prepares to Close Tax Loophole -- Update
6 February 2015
Dow Jones Institutional News
Preparations for an overhaul of the international tax system to make it more difficult for companies to shift profits to low-tax countries advanced on Friday, with an agreement to launch talks on modifying more than 3,000 bilateral tax treaties, and on ways to ensure companies accurately measure the cost of goods and services transferred between the countries in which they operate.
Launched by the Group of 20 largest economies and members of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development in 2013, the planned overhaul is intended to close loopholes that allow companies to adopt legal structures and practices designed to shift their profits to the lowest tax jurisdictions, regardless of where those profits are generated.
"These are important steps forward, which demonstrate that progress is being made toward a fairer international tax system," OECD Secretary-General Angel Gurría said. "These decisions signal the unwavering commitment of the international community to put an end to base erosion and profit shifting, in line with the ambitious timeline endorsed by G-20 leaders."
In September 2014, the 44 countries involved in developing the new tax rules agreed on a template for country-by-country reporting by companies, which will require them to report the amount of revenue, profit and tax paid in each jurisdiction, as well as their total employment, capital and assets used in each location.
Critics of the new process feared the costs would be too high to bear for smaller companies, and guidelines for implementing the rules announced on Friday exempt companies with annual turnover of less than EUR750 million ($858 million).
But the regular sharing of such detailed operational information across a number of jurisdictions poses other potential problems for companies.

Lagarde tells G20 to boost growth and pace of reforms
6 February 2015
Financial Times (FT.Com)
Leading industrialised nations must do more to boost growth and step up the pace of structural reform and investment, the head of the International Monetary Fund said on Friday.
The global economy was at risk of being stuck in its post-crisis doldrums, Christine Lagarde wrote in a blog post. "Without action, we could see the global economic supertanker continuing to be stuck in the shallow waters of subpar growth and meagre job creation," said the IMF managing director.
The call for greater action comes ahead of a meeting of Group of 20 finance ministers due to begin on Monday in Istanbul. Concerns about slow global growth and the risk of a resumption of the euro crisis over Greece and its new government's insistence on debt relief will take centre stage at the talks.
G20 leaders committed in November to a "growth agenda" that Ms Lagarde said would add $2tn to the global economy if implemented.
But since that pledge the IMF has downgraded its growth forecasts for this year to 3.5 per cent and warned downside risks remained.
Ms Lagarde cautioned again of what she called the "asynchronous monetary policy" in the world with the US Federal Reserve "normalising" its policy while many others, including the European Central Bank, were increasing monetary stimulus.
"Even if this process is well managed, it may result in excessive volatility in financial markets as investors reassess their perception of risk," Ms Lagarde wrote.
The strengthening of the US dollar, based in part on the expectation that the Fed would move this year to increase interest rates for the first time since the 2008 global financial crisis, also posed a risk, she said. That applied particularly to emerging market economies, which were "especially vulnerable because, over the past five years, many of their banks and companies have increased their borrowing in dollars".
<>The former French finance minister also warned that the eurozone and Japan risked remaining trapped in a "twilight zone of low growth and low inflation for a prolonged period", something that increased the risk of recession and deflation.
"This all points to the need for a more powerful policy mix" and the need for increased structural reforms that would eventually encourage growth and more investment, particularly in infrastructure, Ms Lagarde said.
In a separate briefing note prepared for the G20 ministers, IMF economists said that while the fall in oil prices would boost the global economy it would be "more than offset" by a drag on investment caused by concerns about the world's medium-term growth prospects.
They also repeated a December warning that the fall in oil prices had heightened risks to global financial stability. This was particularly the case in many of the same emerging economies where the rise in the dollar already presented a risk because of the high levels of dollar-denominated debt mentioned by Ms Lagarde.
"If sustained, the decline in oil prices could have a material impact on banks with high dollar and energy sector exposures, particularly in emerging economies where [currency] depreciations have already been substantial," the economists wrote. "Given global financial linkages, these developments demand increased vigilance all around."

Isolated Greece rejects bailout extension

By Lefteris Papadimas and Jan Strupczewski ATHENS/BRUSSELS, Feb 6 (Reuters) - Greece's new leftist-led government, isolated in the euro zone and under pressure from the European Central Bank, vowed on Friday not to accept any deal in crunch talks next week that keeps its current international bailout programme in place.
Instead, a government official said Finance Minister Yanis Varoufakis would ask for a "bridge agreement" to keep state finances running until Athens can present a new debt and reform programme.
"We will not accept any deal which is not related to a new programme," said the official, who asked not to be named.
Varoufakis returned empty-handed from a tour of European capitals in which even left-leaning governments in France and Italy insisted Greece must stick to commitments made to the European Union and International Monetary Fund and rejected any debt write-off.
Euro zone finance ministers will discuss how to proceed with financial support for Athens at a special session next Wednesday ahead of the first summit of EU leaders with new Greek Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras the following day.
Participants said no progress was made at a preparatory meeting of senior finance ministry officials in Brussels on Thursday because Greece and its euro zone partners were so far apart.
"It was Greece against all others, basically one versus 18," one official said.
Athens' partners broadly lined up in support of a hardline German document rejecting any roll-back of reforms or commitments made by previous Greek governments.
Tsipras and his ministers promised in their first days in office to raise the minimum wage, re-hire some sacked government employees and stop some privatisations.
This clashed with conditions set by the International Monetary Fund and euro zone countries, which have lent Athens a total of 240 billion euros ($270 billion).
U.S. WEIGHS IN
Adding to pressure on Tsipras, the United States told Greece through its ambassador on Friday to work cooperatively with European partners and the IMF and "exercise fiscal prudence".
The new premier will need to tread a fine line when he delivers a policy speech to parliament on Sunday and seeks a vote of confidence on Tuesday.
The ECB raised the stakes this week by deciding to bar Greek banks from using Greek government bonds as collateral to borrow from the central bank as long as there is no prospect of an agreed bailout programme.
That makes lenders dependent on more costly emergency liquidity from the Greek central bank, which the ECB can stop at any time.
Greek bank shares fell further on Friday at the end of a week of wild trading swings, as brokers cut their forecasts on worries over dwindling deposits and brinkmanship between Athens and its creditors.
Portugal, which emerged from its own EU/IMF bailout last year, joined a chorus of countries insisting that Greece must stick to the austerity medicine as Lisbon had done and respect past agreements with EU partners.
Portuguese Economy Minister Antonio Pires de Lima rejected any kind of debt renegotiation for Greece, saying Athens must play by the rules established by euro members, especially considering his own country's sacrifices.
He told the Reuters Euro Zone Summit that Lisbon had chosen a route "which was not the easiest one" to recover credibility and return to growth, and "that is also our attitude to the situation in other countries".
The Portuguese minister said he was not concerned about any risk of contagion from Greece to his own country, pointing to Lisbon's bond yields which are now trading near record lows.
"The project of the single currency is not at risk," he said. "At the end of the day, Greece is master of its own destiny."
The Greek official said Varoufakis was expecting tough treatment from his partners at next Wednesday's meeting, including a demand to extend the existing bailout programme, which expires at the end of February.
This is anathema to the Greek government, led by Tsipras' left-wing Syriza party, that came to power on a wave of anti-austerity anger in elections last month.
Euro zone officials say Greece is free to design its own reforms in line with Syriza's campaign promises, as long as the result is in line with commitments to stronger public finances, debt repayment and reforms.
"The overall policy mix may reflect the priorities of Syriza. But it has to make sense financially," a second official said.
Time to reach a deal is short. Some analysts say Greece could run out of cash as early as March without further euro zone help.
"Greece's financing needs over the next five years may amount to 30-35 billion euros," Unicredit bank said in a research note.
"However, if we set the primary surplus at 1-1.5 percent of GDP and assume that privatisations will stop, as requested by the Greek government, overall financing needs would rise to 60 billion euros," Unicredit said.
Both Goldman Sachs and Deutsche Bank said their base case was that Greece would remain in the euro zone, but a rise in deposit outflows had raised risks of a crisis. (Additional reporting by Jeremy Gaunt and Costas Pitas in Athens and Lionel Laurent in London; Writing by Paul Taylor; Editing by Giles Elgood)

World can't rely on U.S. to carry economy forever -Canada
WHITBY, Ontario, Feb 6 (Reuters) - The United States is carrying the world economy at the moment but that is not sustainable, and other major nations must shoulder more of the load, Canadian Finance Minister Joe Oliver said on Friday.
Oliver said in a speech that the world economy is off to a rough start in 2015 and that "kick-starting global growth will be front and center" at a Group of 20 meeting of finance ministers and central bank chiefs in Turkey next week.
"Though America is carrying the world economy at the moment, that is simply not sustainable. We need key pillars of global growth to reassert themselves," Oliver told a meeting of mayors from the Toronto region.
The G20 came into its own during the 2007-09 financial crisis when it put together a global stimulus package, but it is now facing the more delicate challenge of arriving at joint action when economies are running at different speeds.
"The euro area is confronting flat growth and deflation. Beyond Europe, the growth rates of key emerging economies - China and India - are losing steam," Oliver said.
"Geopolitical crises - in Ukraine, Iraq, and Syria - pose serious risks, complicating the recovery." (Reporting by Solarina Ho, writing by David Ljunggren; Editing by Chizu Nomiyama and Peter Galloway)

TTIP talks - Africa remains left out
6 February 2015
Deutsche Welle
The EU and the US are negotiating their proposed free trade agreement behind closed doors. Third countries, for instance in Africa, have no say in these talks, although the deal could have a far-reaching impact on them.
It would be the largest free trade zone in the world - The Trans-Atlantic Trade and Investment Partnership between the EU and the US, which jointly account for a third of global commerce. The proposed pact is expected to raise per-capita income worldwide by some 3 percent, according to various estimates.
In Germany, for instance, the deal is projected to usher in an income rise of 3.5 percent. However, not all regions worldwide are believed to benefit from such a development, with per-capita income in many African nations estimated to decline by similar levels.
A crucial role is played in each country's costs-versus-benefits balance from TTIP by the composition of its goods and services exports, and the intensity of its trade ties with Europe and the US, said Gabriel Felbermayr, professor at the Munich-based Ifo Institute.
Felbermayr and his colleagues at the institute have conducted research on the likely impact of the trade deal on developing countries. Whether the deal will have a positive or a negative impact on African economies will be determined by the final wording of the agreement, Felbermayr said.
African value added under pressure
At a first glance, the pact doesn't appear to have an affect on exporters of unprocessed products and raw materials. In a country like Ivory Coast, for instance, exports to TTIP states make up around a quarter of the nation's gross domestic product. The African country's coffee and cocoa, in particular, find their way onto dining tables in the US and Europe. The trade deal may not change this, since neither the US nor Europe grow these products.
The so-called rules of origin, however, could make it hard for countries like Ivory Coast to export processed goods. These rules, for example, require that at least 50 percent of the value added of a product must be produced in a TTIP state, in order to benefit from tariff reductions.
If Ivory Coast processes cocoa beans to chocolate by itself, then it could find fewer customers due to the strict rules of origin. For German companies, it would be cheaper to process cocoa in Europe and then export to the US. "There is a danger that developing countries would either be forced out of Western supply chains, or TTIP would at least make their access to these value chains difficult," Felbermayr told DW.
The gradual industrialization of Africa, which is a way out of poverty for millions, could therefore be jeopardized. The impact spreads across sectors and countries ranging from Ivory Coast's chocolate industry to textiles from Kenya and Ethiopia, and automotive components from South Africa.
It would therefore be good for these countries if the negotiation parties were to agree to broaden the rules of origin as far as possible, said economist Felbermayr. It would also benefit many European companies, which have a large part of their production base in countries outside of the EU and the US, he noted.
Avoiding discriminatory standards
Furthermore, it is important that the product standards, which TTIP would harmonize between the US and the EU, should also apply to products from third countries, said Felbermayr, underlining that these standards should not be discriminatory.
"For instance, if Kenya exports green beans and other vegetables to Europe that are in accordance with EU standards – in terms of pesticide exposure, for example – then this compliance with EU standards should suffice for Kenya to export them also to the US," he suggested.
This is, however, not guaranteed, he said, since TTIP - under the current draft of the agreement - mainly looks at whether the product concerned is made in the EU or in the US. Feldmayr stressed that TTIP negotiators should be pressured to also take the interests of third countries into consideration.
WTO is being bypassed
Countries such as Kenya, which with its beaches and national parks lure thousands of Western tourists, could benefit from the deal. When the TTIP leads to increased prosperity in Europe and the US, then people would be more willing to holiday in these places and buy more products from them.
The pact would have both positive and negative effects for Africa, indicated Felbermayr. "There are some countries that are more at risk because of the mix of goods they produce. And other countries that rely more on sectors such as mining and tourism are more likely to benefit," he said.
Kenyan economist David Owiro of the Institute of Economic Affairs terms the proposed agreement as "unfair." The deal that the EU and the US are negotiating has a global impact, but the rest of the world has no say in these talks, Owiro said. "These talks should take place in a multilateral framework such as the World Trade Organization (WTO) where developing countries at least have a formal say," he said.
The TTIP can be interpreted as an attempt to circumvent the WTO. Still, it might be possible to influence the ongoing TTIP negotiations for the benefit of Africa, say experts.
"It would be entirely legitimate for developing countries to be involved in the discussions about the positive and negative consequences of the deal, and to be allowed to make recommendations," Owiro told DW.
This view is shared by economist Felbermayr. There should be a right to information for developing countries so that they know what the two sides across the Atlantic are negotiating about. "What is needed is a proper dose of good will on the part of the EU and the US," he suggested.
