India braces for fresh battle at WTO meet
Doha Round: Africa may join India to oppose premature closure of WTO talks
India, Africa discuss joint strategy for Nairobi ministerial meet of WTO
4th India-Africa trade ministers' meeting held
India Sees Africa as Natural Ally, Says Union Minister Nirmala Sithraman
India, Africa to boost cooperation in energy, agriculture: Minister
Free Trade Deals Could Marginalize WTO as Negotiating Forum
Pacific Trade Deal Needs to Harmonize With Sustainable Development Goals
The Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement: What's In It For Telecommunications, E-commerce And Intellectual Property?
TPP doesn't represent global interests
Sino-British co-operation to shape new international economic order
US announces joint plan for trade, investment
Ukraine Leader Submits Draft Agreement on Trade Facilitation With WTO to Parliament -Gov't
Reforms named crucial for Belarus' accession to WTO, success in Eurasian Economic Union
 
 
 
India braces for fresh battle at WTO meet
The Times of India
24 October 2015
 
With six weeks to go for the World Trade Organisation's (WTO) ministerial meeting, the government is bracing for a fresh battle amid indications that the developed countries may not be keen to keep the Doha Round alive at a time when they are on a spree to enter into plurilateral agreements such as the Trans Pacific Partnership and obituaries of the Geneva-based multilateral body are being discussed. 
 
While objective of the Doha Round, launched in 2001, was to address concerns related to exorbitantly high trade-distorting farm subsidies and ease the multilateral rules for services, besides addressing concerns related to cotton subsidies and access to medicines for the world's poorest, there has been little headway on the original mandate as the developed countries have blocked any issues requiring them to readjust their domestic policies. Instead, negotiators believe that some of them now want the "development round" to be put on the backburner, if not formally scrapped, and instead begin dialogue on the so-called 21st Century issues such as energy security, climate change and currency and their link with trade. 
 
Although China may not back the link between trade and currency, it is not seen to be averse to some of the other issues. China is expected to offer support to India in countering growing demand, including from some poor countries, to no longer treat the two Asian neighbours as "developing countries", a tag that allows New Delhi a longer period to implement decisions and undertake less onerous commitments.
 
 
 
 
Doha Round: Africa may join India to oppose premature closure of WTO talks
Mint 
23 October 2015
 
African nations may join India in thwarting attempts by developed countries to launch a new round of multilateral negotiations under the World Trade Organization (WTO), after prematurely concluding the stalled Doha development round at the Nairobi ministerial in December. 
 
Addressing a press conference with India’s commerce minister Nirmala Sitharaman after the fourth India-Africa trade ministers’ meeting in New Delhi, Mike Bimha, Zimbabwe’s trade minister, said both India and African countries believe that even after Nairobi, there will be continuous discussion and engagement on Doha round issues. 
 
“Both India and Africa share the general approach and thrust. We all believe in the multilateral trading system. Nairobi will not be the end of everything. We believe we will be able to come up with something after Nairobi,” said Bimha, chair of the African trade ministers.

On 21 October, WTO director general Roberto Azevedo, at a meeting of trade ministers from the African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States in Brussels, said there is a clear divergence among the members on the way forward for Doha round issues. 
 
“It seems to me that all members agree that DDA (Doha development agreement) core issues must remain on the negotiating agenda—such as agriculture, market access and services. I think, there is consensus on that. However, there is no agreement on how these negotiations should take place: whether under the present Doha framework or whether under some new architecture,” he said.

Bimha said African countries need India’s support at the Nairobi WTO ministerial. “There is an alignment in terms of the position that India has taken or is going to take with that of African countries. I think, together we will be able to effectively represent our regions as we go to Nairobi. After Nairobi, we should be talking about an outcome that is of interest to our two regions,” he added.

The India-Africa trade ministers’ meeting, which precedes the India-Africa Forum Summit of heads of African governments on 26-30 October, was?attended by 37 delegates. The India-Africa Business Council (IABC) meeting was attended by 37 chief executive officers (CEOs) from the African side and 31 from India.

However, the trade ministers’ meeting failed to result in a joint statement at the time of going to press. A spokesperson from the commerce ministry said the statement had not been issued as it is still being discussed. Another government official with knowledge of the discussions said Morocco had raised some objections to a paragraph in the joint statement.

Africa is considered the next growth frontier and is already an important trade partner for India. Trade with Africa increased from $39 billion in 2009-10 to $71.4 billion in 2014-15, with exports rising faster than imports.

India’s key export interests are processed petroleum products, drugs and pharmaceuticals and motor vehicles. Crude is the biggest import from Africa, followed by gold, coal and other mining products.

Sitharaman said the two sides have not set any targets for trade. “However, we have identified areas of common interest. It has emerged very clearly that infrastructure, expanding the scope of agriculture, energy, human resource development and healthcare seem to be the areas in which there is immediate possibility of cooperation with African countries,” she added.

Ali Haddad, the co-chair of IABC from Algeria, said African countries need technical knowhow more than money. “I can give the example of Algeria. Algeria does not need any financing as we have reserves worth $150 billion. What we need is technical knowhow,” he added.

India became the first developing country to extend a duty-free, quota-free facility to the world’s least developed countries (LDCs), which will benefit 21 such countries in Africa. It has also said it will provide preferential treatment in services trade to LDCs ahead of the Nairobi ministerial meeting, where the decision is expected to be notified.
 
 
 
 
India, Africa discuss joint strategy for Nairobi ministerial meet of WTO
24 October 2015
Business Line (The Hindu)
 
‘Talks must continue on Doha Round issues even after Nairobi summit’ 
 
Indian and African trade ministers discussed a joint strategy for the forthcoming World Trade Organisation (WTO) ministerial meeting in Nairobi with both favouring a continuation of negotiations on the Doha round after the meet.
 
“We all (India and African countries) believe in the multilateral trading system. Even after Nairobi, we want continuity of negotiations on issues that are there as part of the Doha round,” said Mike Bimha, Trade Minister of Zimbabwe, addressing a joint press conference following the India-Africa Trade Ministers’ Meeting on Friday.
 
A group of countries, that include developed nations such as the US, the EU and New Zealand, are in favour of getting an agreement on a handful of issues at Nairobi and then concluding the Doha round. India is opposing it because the Doha round, launched in 2001, is essentially a development round with greater liberalisation obligations on developed countries.
 
There is an alignment in positions that India and Africa have taken or will take at the WTO, Bimha said. “Together we will be able to represent our region better,” he added.
 
Food security
 
While the Zimbabwe minister was clear about most African nations supporting continuation of the Doha round beyond the Nairobi ministerial meeting in December, he did not clarify Africa’s position on the controversial issue of food security.
 
New Delhi is trying to garner support for its demand that the Nairobi ministerial should come up with a permanent solution that would ensure that subsidies given under public procurement programmes for food do not attract penalties. “India sees Africa as a natural partner and together, we can have a positive influence on the future global economic order,” Commerce & Industry Minister Nirmala Sitharaman said speaking at the meet.
 
 
 
 
4th India-Africa trade ministers' meeting held
India Blooms News Service   
23 October 2015
 
The fourth edition of India-Africa Trade Ministers' Meeting (IATMM) was held on Friday in New Delhi ahead of the 3rd India-Africa Forum Summit, which has been scheduled for Oct 29.
 
As many as 37 delegations, comprising of Trade Ministers and officials from few African countries including Algeria, Congo, Egypt, Ghana, Kenya, Namibia, Somalia, South Africa and Zimbabwe, took part in the meeting. To review the existing trade and business relations between India and Africa, the 4th IATMM was conducted here. 
 
Delegations from India and African counties discussed on the Duty Free Tariff Preference (DFTP) Scheme, Services Waiver for LDCs and Cotton Technical Assistance Programme (TAP). Commerce Industry minister Nirmala Sitharaman said that Africa was a natural partner of India. Together, we can have a positive influence on the future global economic order. India and Africa face similar challenges and concerns. The world economy offers tremendous opportunities to the two Fastest Growing Regions. 
 
Addressing the Trade Ministers here, Nirmala Sitharaman said that India had been one of the first countries to provide a services package for Least Developed Countries (LDCs) and had also waived visa fees for businessmen from LDC countries travelling to India. During the First India-Africa Forum Summit in 2008, India had announced to grant Duty Free Tariff Preference to Least Developed Countries (LDCs) in order to open the Indian market to greater exports from African countries. Since April 2014, the scheme has been further expanded and as of now India provides duty free market access on about 96% of Indias tariff lines, she said. 
 
Talking about the importance of India-Africa Summit, Nirmala Sitharaman said, The Summits have become a unique platform where the Government of India and African partners identify areas of cooperation through dialogue and strive to expanding and enhancing the partnership. Cooperation in Trade, Technology and Capacity Building form the basis of our relationship. India has made significant progress transforming itself from being an importer to a net exporter in many sectors since independence. India would endeavour to share its experience and expertise in partnering with African countries which have potential for value addition, creating jobs, enhancing livelihood and ultimately attaining a better quality of life, she further added. 
 
Meanwhile, a round table on the WTO issues was also held during the meeting here on Friday.
 
 
 
 
India Sees Africa as Natural Ally, Says Union Minister Nirmala Sithraman
NDTV
23 October 2015
 
Ahead of the Third India-Africa Forum Summit in New Delhi next week, Commerce and Industry Minister Nirmala Sitharaman today said India sees Africa as a natural partner and the two sides can together have a positive influence on the future global economic order.
 
Addressing the Fourth India-Africa Trade Ministers' Meeting in New Delhi, she said both India and Africa face similar challenges and concerns and the world economy offers tremendous opportunities to the two fastest growing regions, according to an official statement.
 
Noting that after the First India-Africa Forum Summit here in 2008, India announced duty free tariff preference to least developed countries (LDCs) in order to open its market to greater exports from African countries, she said: "Since April 2014, the scheme has been further expanded and as of now India provides duty free market access on about 96 per cent of India's tariff lines and another 2.2 per cent tariff lines to LDCs thus providing benefits on 98.2 per cent of all tariff lines."
 
"In addition, India has been one of the first countries to provide a services package for LDCs and has also waived visa fees for businessmen from LDC countries travelling to India."
 
Highlighting the importance of the summit, Ms Sitharaman said that they have "become a unique platform" where India and African partners "identify areas of cooperation through dialogue and strive to expanding and enhancing the partnership".
 
"Cooperation in trade, technology and capacity building form the basis of our relationship. Greater cooperation in agriculture and agro-processing, engineering, textiles, leather, pharmaceuticals to name a few would have a positive bearing on the food security, improvement in health situation and creation of additional jobs in both Africa and India," she said.
 
She also stressed value addition was the key to development and enhancing livelihood opportunities.
 
The meet saw participation of 37 delegations from Algeria, Angola, Benin, Comoros, Congo, Djibouti, Egypt, Gambia, Ghana, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Malawi, Mali, Morocco, Namibia, Mauritius, Niger, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Sudan, South Africa, Togo, Tanzania, Tunisia, Zambia, and Zimbabwe and eight regional economic communities.
 
It reviewed the progress in the implementation of commitments of earlier meetings as well as of existing trade and business relations. Addressing a press conference later, Ms Sitharaman said infrastructure, agriculture, energy, human resources and healthcare were areas in which India and Africa have a lot in common.
 
"Africa holds immense potential for export, infrastructure, building hospitals, and creating jobs," she said, adding it has "fantastic human resources and business outsourcing has tremendous scope".
 
About India's competitive advantage in Africa vis-a-vis other major economies, Ms Sitharaman said that "our historic connect with Africa is our biggest USP".
 
"The diaspora on both sides is also a big strength," she said.
 
Zimbabwe's Deputy Minister for Industry and Commerce, Mike Bimha, who chaired today's trade ministers' meeting, said: "India can be a handy partner of Africa in the area of industrialisation."
 
"African countries are laying more and more emphasis on infrastructure such as power and transport," he said.
 
He also said that the Africa needed India's support in the World Trade Organisation (WTO) ministerial meeting that will be held in Nairobi in December - the first time that the meeting is being held in Africa.
 
"India and Africa are on the same page on WTO issues. We believe we have a lot in common and can benefit each other," said Mr Bimha.

 
 
 
India, Africa to boost cooperation in energy, agriculture: Minister
Millennium Post
23 October 2015
 
India and Africa have identified areas such as infrastructure, agriculture, healthcare and energy for boosting bilateral cooperation, Commerce and Industry Minister Nirmala Sitharaman said on Friday. 
 
In a joint statement issued after the fourth India-Africa Trade Ministers' meeting here, Sitharaman said both India and Africa face similar challenges and concerns and the world economy offers tremendous opportunities to the two 'fastest growing regions'.
 
Addressing a press conference after the meeting, she said: "We have not set any targets (related to bilateral trade). However, we did identify areas of common interest and it has emerged very clearly that infrastructure, expanding the scope of agriculture, energy, human resource development and healthcare seem to be the areas in which there is immediate possibility of cooperation with African countries and Indian businesses".
 
Exhorting captains of industry from India and Africa to drive business, she said that the private sector should take the lead in promoting investment between India and Africa and assured that the governments of India and member African countries would facilitate the private sector by providing them with a conducive regulatory environment.
 
Pointing out that she had a "very useful" discussion with her African counterparts, Sitharaman said: "Africa holds immense potential not just as (India's) export destination but also because there is scope for infrastructure development, for a hospital administration to go build-operate and transfer hospitals, and also if you pick up some mines and extract minerals and bring them back to India". 
 
Sitharaman said that coming together of businesses to discuss various issues of commerce and trade would help in opening new doors of opportunities. She added that FDI inflows into Africa has been growing phenomenally and with enhanced joint ventures and partnerships the FDI is bound to reach the next level. Speaking on the issue of WTO, Sitharaman said India and Africa were aligned on the issues and both were in favour of multilateral trading system.
 
The Minister said that the food stockpiling issue was “briefly discussed”, keeping in mind that a WTO Ministerial Conference is being held in Nairobi in December.
 
Highlighting the importance of India-Africa Summit, Sitharaman said the Summits have become a unique platform where the Government of India and African partners identify areas of cooperation through dialogue and strive to expanding and enhancing the partnership. “Cooperation in Trade, Technology and Capacity Building form the basis of our relationship,” she said.
 
Elaborating on promotion of African tourism in India, Sitharaman said that issues of connectivity and visa need to be addressed to promote tourism and the Indian government was looking into the issue and would soon resolve them.
 
Asked about pro-investment African regulations, Rajan Bharti Mittal, Acting Co-Chair of IABC (India-Africa Business Council) said: “It really depends on sector to sector. Sure enough if there are infrastructure projects, with long gestation and huge investments any enterprise across the world would like to have majority.” 
 
 
 
 
Free Trade Deals Could Marginalize WTO as Negotiating Forum
24 October 2015
Sputnik News 
 
Free trade agreements like the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) could further undermine the World Trade Organization's function as a negotiating forum, former delegate to the UN Convention on International Trade Law Raj Bhala told Sputnik.
 
On Friday, the week-long eleventh round of the TTIP talks wrapped up in Miami, Florida. The United States has been a major supporter of the TTIP, in addition to the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) trade deal.
 
"The marginalization of the World Trade Organization [by TTIP, TPP], which is what observers and commentators like the Russian and the Chinese leaders have been saying — that criticism is particularly poignant with respect to… the negotiating forum," Bhala said on Friday.
 
The World Trade Organization, Bhala asserted, will remain a key mechanism for trade policy review and dispute settlement, but its third primary function as a negotiating forum for broad deals that include all countries is at risk.
 
"And there's a long list of such countries… basically most of the Middle East, if not all of it, sub-Saharan Africa and some of the Latin countries," Bhala explained.
 
TTIP, TPP and other free trade agreements, however, actually exacerbated a World Trade Organization that had already marginalized itself to a large degree, Bhala argued.
 
"The World Trade Organization marginalized itself because it got so bogged down in complicated details about various Doha round texts… since 2001," he observed.
 
The World Trade Organization's inability to produce effective agreements catalyzed countries to pursue free trade agreements, like the TPP and TTIP, on their own accord, Bhala claimed.
 
An effective trade policy operates on three levels, the former UN delegate elaborated, including multilaterally, regionally and bilaterally, which the United States has been doing.
 
The United States and other countries pursued bilateral and regional alternatives to the World Trade Organization because the Doha rounds have failed to produce text for a workable free trade agreement.
 
"By 2008, when the Doha texts were not approved and no one wanted to take them, is the year when the United States shifted its attention to TPP," he added.
 
The hotly-debated TTIP agreement seeks to deregulate trade between the United States and Europe and create the world's largest trade zone, encompassing more than 60 percent of global production.
 
The TPP deal comprises 12 nations of the Pacific Rim region, including the United States, Canada, Australia, Japan, New Zealand, Mexico, Taiwan, Peru, Brunei, Chile, Singapore and Malaysia.
 
Bhala is the author of "International Trade Law: An Interdisciplinary, Non-Western Textbook." His forthcoming book, "TPP Objectively: A Neutral Examination of History's Largest Free Trade Agreement," will be published in mid-2016 by Carolina Academic Press.
 
 
 
 
Pacific Trade Deal Needs to Harmonize With Sustainable Development Goals
Yale Global Online
23 October 2015
 
Major deals between developed and developing economies are not commonplace: On September 25, the 193 members of the United Nations announced a new global action plan for achieving Sustainable Development Goals including no poverty in any form by 2030. A week later, the Transpacific Trade Partnership, or TPP, concluded negotiations that form the largest regional trade agreement in history, one representing nearly 40 percent of global GDP.

It is pertinent to ask, to what extent will the TPP bolster or undercut the SDGs? The answer – it’s a mixed bag.

The Pacific trade deal presents four major strengths that contribute to implementation of the SDGs:

First, with more than 18,000 tariff lines reduced to zero, according to a fact sheet provided by the Office of US Trade Representative, 12 countries will merge into a more integrated market. This will significantly lower transaction costs for firms to trade among the TPP members, boosting economic growth and creating jobs. Liberalization of some critical sectors in difficult markets – such as Japan’s agricultural products, including rice, wheat and beef, or Canada’s dairy products – may pave the way for these countries to open these sectors in future negotiations with other countries.

Second, on environmental protection, the TPP agreement should be given credit for having a higher level of commitment than previous trade agreements. The parties promise to cut the most harmful fishery subsidies and prohibit illicit trade activities from illegal logging and wildlife trafficking – great steps toward supporting SDG 14, protecting life below the water, and SDG 15 protecting life on land.
 
Third, the TPP pact has one chapter dedicated to labor rights to prevent the race to the bottom. Its members make an explicit statement supporting international core labor standards, from the freedom to form unions and bargain collectively to prohibitions against child labor and forced labor, and protection against employment discrimination. Although these standards are only minimum requirements to all signatory countries under the International Labour Organization, this is the first time they will be incorporated in a large regional trade agreement with “teeth,” namely, possible trade sanctions against producers who violate core standards.

Fourth, this agreement will make some positive contributions to other sustainable development goals, by emphasizing good governance, anti-corruption measures and codes of conduct with high standards. TPP also has a chapter on development and capacity building. These are in line with the SDG 16 addressing justice and good governance and SDG 17 on effective partnership.

However, the TPP agreement will have negative impact on poor countries and people in vulnerable situations, while the SDGs obligate all countries to carry out an effective partnership to “work in a spirit of global solidarity, in particular solidarity with the poorest and with people in vulnerable situations.”

Citizens of a poor country outside the negotiations will have no say at all on how TPP will affect their interests. For example, US subsidies to cotton farmers have been the largest concern for cotton farmers in poor countries. According to a research by Oxfam, US cotton farmers receive three times more in subsidies than the entire USAID budget for Africa’s 500 million people. Trade-distorting cotton subsidies have pushed down the global price of cotton, costing Benin, Burkina Faso, Chad and Mali more than US $100 million a year.

Even for Vietnam, the poorest developing country within the TPP, its export potentials in labor-intensive sectors such as textile and clothing will be compromised by a restrictive “yarn forward” rule of origin insisted on by the US – if Vietnamese clothing exporters would like to enjoy the TPP market’s zero tariff, all components, from yarn to fabric to final item, must be produced by one of the members to the agreement. Note that the US is the most competitive producer of yarn, thread and fabric among the TPP countries.
 
In another area, the agreement risks going in an opposite direction against SDG 3, which explicitly calls for the provision of “access to affordable essential medicines and vaccines, in accordance with the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health, which affirms the right of developing countries to use to the full the provisions in the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights regarding flexibilities to protect public health, and, in particular, provide access to medicines for all.” Many professionals and civil society organizations argue that the agreement will endanger access to medicine for people needing lifesaving treatments, particularly in the poorest countries. Although there is not much information on what the final compromise between the US and Australia really means, the agreement obviously adds new obligations to some TPP members such as Peru, Vietnam, Malaysia and Mexico. According to Doctors Without Borders, the TPP deal will drive up costs for some of the most expensive drugs on the market in the poorest countries by delaying cheaper, generic versions. Investors’ rights should be protected to encourage innovation, but in the areas critical to the public interest, US negotiators should not have catered to the business lobby alone.

This acquiescence to the demands of business interests likewise led to US cherry-picking practices in the Doha Development Round negotiations of the World Trade Organization. The US negotiators have preliminarily secured the trade facilitation agreement, the expansion of information technology agreement and possible liberalization of environmental goods under the WTO frameworks, for which their business groups lobbied. However, the US leaves behind critical issues for developing countries, such as trade-distorting domestic farm subsidies, anti-dumping rules and tariff escalation of some products.
 
All of this is legal, even if detrimental.
 
The challenge is that in a new context of pursuing the Sustainable Development Goals over the next 15 years, the world needs leadership. As a nation promoting universal values of freedom, democracy and equality, the United States is in a good position to lead. US political leaders should not merely follow US business interests, but stand for these higher values.

In this TPP agreement, the US has made positive steps in promoting trade for growth, strengthening environmental and labor protections in international commerce, and advancing anti-corruption principles. However, the country fails to support sustainable development by refusing to discontinue subsidies harmful to poorest countries outside the TPP, by insisting on the yarn-forward rule of origin and pushing unbalanced intellectual property protections that will likely cost lives.

If President Barack Obama would like to be remembered as a great global leader rather than a follower of business interests, he may need a bigger legacy than TPP.

There is a chance at the upcoming December WTO Ministerial Meeting in Nairobi. The president should ask his trade officials to work more constructively with trading partners and deliver a more development-friendly package than the TPP. The United States should abide by the WTO’s Hong Kong Declaration in 2005 to provide duty- and quota-free market access on a lasting basis for all products originating from the least developed countries, including Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Cambodia, and Nepal, allowing them equal trading terms with TPP member Vietnam and providing them with a more flexible rule of origin.

The United States should also take the lead, urging the European Union and China to also act, to eliminate cotton subsidies and save the livelihoods of 10 million African farmers. Finally, the United States should adjust its position on data exclusivity protections of new pharmaceutical products by offering exceptions for developing countries so as to ensure poorest patients’ access to essential medicines. These high standards are genuine and moral.

Shuaihua Wallace Cheng, PhD, is the managing director for China at the International Centre for Trade and Sustainable Development, and a Yale World Fellow in 2015.
 
 
 
 
The Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement: What's In It For Telecommunications, E-commerce And Intellectual Property?
23 October 2015
Mondaq Business Briefing
 
On October 5, 2015, Canada and the following 11 Pacific Rim countries: Australia, Brunei Darussalam, Chile, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore, United States and Vietnam, have reached a deal on the content of new free-trade agreement covering the Pacific region, the Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement. Although the final treaty text has yet to be settled and released, some information about the agreement has been released by many of the participating governments, including Canada. The content of the TPP covers a wide variety of economic activities and sectors, including, among others, telecommunications, e-commerce and intellectual property.
 
Telecommunications
 
The provisions on telecommunications are all based on a general objective among the TPP countries that there should be more regulatory certainty for telecommunications service providers operating and investing in the TPP countries. As such, the TPP countries have agreed to ensure access to telecommunications facilities under fair and reasonable terms, to allocate scarce resources (such as frequencies) in a non-discriminatory manner, and to be transparent in their regulatory process.
 
It will be interesting to see what influence such rules may have on regulatory policies aimed at promoting competition in the telecommunication sector, such as mandatory wholesale access to wireline facilities and preferential spectrum allocations in the wireless sector, as well as on the cluster of policy issues which fall under the broad heading of network neutrality.
 
The TPP countries have also addressed the issue of international mobile roaming charges and have agreed to allow telecommunications service providers from TPP countries that do not regulate rates on wholesale international roaming services to benefit from lower rates offered in TPP countries which do not regulate such rates.
 
The TPP provisions on telecommunications do not contain rules on broadcasting services (other than to ensure access to telecommunications services by broadcasters). However, the Canadian government notes that it has included a "broad reservation" under the Services and Investment chapters to protect cultural sector programs and policies aimed at promoting the creation, development or accessibility of Canadian artistic expression. So the treaty may not have any direct impact on restrictions on foreign ownership in the broadcasting sector, or on Canadian content rules and subsidies.
 
E-Commerce
 
As for e-commerce, the TPP countries have agreed to facilitate the use of electronic commerce as a means of trade.
 
The TPP countries have agreed to not discriminate against or impose custom duties or other charges on online digital products, to promote the free flow of information across borders, to not require the use of local servers for data storage and to maintain measures to protect users from unauthorized disclosure of personal information and from spam.
 
It will certainly be interesting to see how these requirements will be implemented in British Columbia and Nova Scotia, which both have privacy legislation requiring public bodies to access and store their data in Canada, with limited exceptions.1
 
Intellectual Property
 
The TPP chapter on intellectual property covers patents, trademarks, copyrights, industrial designs, enforcement, geographical indications, pharmaceuticals, public health concerns as well as satellite and cable signals. The TPP also contains a general cooperation commitment between the TPP countries in the intellectual property sector.
 
The provisions on copyright include some of the key aspects of the Canadian copyright regime, such as the exceptions and limitations framework, the Notice-and-Notice regime on Internet service providers' role in online alleged infringement of copyright and the enforcement measures against circumvention of technological protection measures (commonly known as "digital locks").
 
The provisions on trademarks are described by the government as consistent with Canada's current regime and are in line with Canada's projected amendments to the Trade-marks Act2 in light of its intent to sign and ratify the Madrid Protocol and the Nice Agreement.
 
The provisions on patents are based on the World Trade Organization's Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property3 and are said to be consistent with Canada's current criteria regarding patentability exclusion. The TPP's provisions on patents also ensure patent protection for inventions in all fields of technology.
 
On the enforcement side, it is worth mentioning that the TPP contains strong civil and criminal enforcement provisions, notably as regards to copyright piracy and trademarks counterfeiting.
 
Finally, as the final text of the TPP has yet to be settled between the TPP countries and then be ratified and implemented by the 12 TPP countries before it takes effect, it remains to be seen how these provisions will be enforced in each country and interact with the local law.
 
 
 
 
TPP doesn't represent global interests
China.org.cn (China)
23 October 2015
 
The 21st century is one of economic globalization. No country's development can proceed without the support of economic globalization. With the dramatic expansion of regional economic agreements in recent years, the World Trade Organization is losing its central role in the international trade system. The RTAs, however, are inconsistent with the macro trend of globalized development and globalized interests.
 
With the US-dominated Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement (TPP) making substantial headway, a trading bloc comprising 12 countries on the rim of the Pacific is taking shape. The TPP derived from a trade agreement among four small- and medium-sized economic entities (or P4). None of them is among the world's fastest growing economies. Both the scales and impacts of their economies are limited. The TPP would not have grown from a little-known free-trade agreement into a so-called "high-quality 21st-century" FTA that attracts global attention had the United States not decided to participate. Rather than the aggregate volume of trade and size of the economies it commands, the TPP's real significance lies in the fact that it kick-starts a new round of adjusting, and upgrading of global trade rules.
 
The TPP will not only abolish or reduce tariffs on commodities, but also cover safety standards, barriers to trade in technologies, sanitary and phytosanitary measures, competition policies, intellectual property rights, government procurement, dispute resolution, as well as labor and environmental protection. Thus, the TPP has transcended the WTO in both the scope and depth of agreement. In addition, with more countries in the Asia-Pacific taking part, it will inevitably grow into a huge FTA that includes major global consumer markets and sources of supplies, which may constitute an unprecedented new challenge for the multilateral trade system as well as various bilateral and multilateral free trade agreements under the current framework of the WTO.
 
Nowadays the global trade order is undergoing unprecedented new adjustments. Competition over international trade rules is becoming the focus of a new round of wrangling regarding globalization. The trend of the evolution of a new generation of international trade rules is gradual formulation of new multilateral trade rules through the fusion of rules on goods trade, investment, and service trade, with the support of the development of plurilateral trade rules that regulate a specific field, and based on the establishment of regional trade rules. Global trade protectionism will become even more fierce and covert, turning from free trade to rule-based trade, from global free-trade platforms to regional free trade.
 
 
 
 
Sino-British co-operation to shape new international economic order
People's Daily 
23 October 2015
 
The world's deepest economic recession since the World War II appears to be nearing an end. Protectionism measures were implemented by many countries as a convenient tool to get out of the recession.

Accordingly, hopes for further liberalization of international trade and services, as promoted by the WTO, is doomed. The Doha Round of negotiations has suffered a set-back on account of further attempts to establish regional trading blocs.

On Oct. 5, 12 Pacific-Rim countries, led by the US, signed the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) Agreement that has led to an acceleration on EU-US negotiations for the Trans-Atlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP).

Despite regional trade agreements intended to promote the free movement of goods and services within the regions, they also enforce trade barriers for outsiders, such as China and other emerging markets.

There are concerns about the possible trade transfer from the countries outside of the blocs to the countries inside and the consequent transfer of investment, which could destabilize the existing word trade order.

The global trade system administered by WTO law is under the threat of fragmented regional trade arrangements. One by-product of the global economic crisis was the introduction of new WTO trade regulations.

With the international economic order getting re-structured, Chinese President Xi Jinping's visit to the United Kingdom - Oct. 19 -23 comes in a timely manner, while both countries must grapple with their national interest and global governance.

Beijing should expand its free trade zone across the Asia-Europe continent to hedge against the TPP and TTIP and to drive progress on Doha Round negotiations.

Despite the Chinese enthusiasm for negotiating with the EU on an investment protection agreement and a free trade agreement, many EU countries have shown reluctance on their part.

Facing an increase of competition from Asia in the manufacturing sectors, EU companies fear more transfer of production-lines and employment headed to China.

The EU opposes the elimination of existing protective measures such as tariffs. They call for stronger technical standards and transparency on trade policies.

Chinese companies market competitiveness will be increased anyways due to upgrades on its productivity. Mutual benefits can be gained from a free trade pact that favors EU exports to China.

China has over 100 million middle class consumers, who are attracted to high-quality goods and services from abroad.

A free trade agreement with China will give Europe an edge over Japanese and US companies. Given its unique position in international politics and the EU, the UK can play a vital role in reaching out to China.

Over the last three hundred years the UK has embraced and pioneered economic liberalism to fortify the UK's status as a key player for a free international trade order. The UK is a driving force for free trade and fair competition in Europe.

Facing calls for the UK's withdrawal from the EU, ongoing negotiations on its relations with the EU do reflect the UK’s long-history of a liberal political and economic tradition.

Co-operation with China can strengthen the UK’s position within the EU, and to shape the landscape for a new global economic order that would serve the UK’s national interest.

With the prospects of China overtaking the US as the world's biggest economy in less than ten years, a world economic order cannot be stable if China and other emerging countries are excluded.

An EU-China free trade agreement is an essential brick for this edifice. Xi's UK visit is expected to symbolize the start of this endeavor.
 
 
 
 
US announces joint plan for trade, investment
News International
23 October 2015,
 
In a landmark and rarely issued fact-sheet the White House has proclaimed comprehensive US-Pakistan augmented Joint Action Plan (JAP) for trade and investment. 
 
It has been issued soon after the visit of Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif to the official residence of the US President Barack Obama and his extensive meeting with him. While referring to World Trade Organisation (WTO) trade facilitation agreement, the fact sheet has assured that the United States will support Pakistan’s efforts to ratify and implement the WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA) and to provide technical assistance to Pakistan’s Federal Board of Revenue (FBR) and other governmental and industry representatives of the National Trade and Transport Facilitation Committee.
 
The fact-sheet expressed resolve that the United States and Pakistan had a mutual interest in expanding bilateral trade and investment. The United States is Pakistan’s largest export destination and one of the largest sources of investment in Pakistan. The augmented plan builds on the successful implementation of the Joint Action Plan on Trade and Investment and adds to the components of organising trade mission and business delegations. The Department of Commerce will facilitate private sector engagement through its International Buyer Programme and Special American Business Internship Programme and explore opportunities for high-level trade missions to the United States. Under the title of expanding utilisation of GSP (Generalised System of Preferences) the fact-sheet stated that the office of the US Trade Representative will enhance current outreach and training efforts to boost GSP utilisation. USTR is prepared to assist the government of Pakistan in identifying and petitioning for additional GSP tariff lines and to obtain eligibility for exports of goods under newly GSP-eligible travel goods tariff lines. 
 
The fact-sheet while dealing with strengthening the ready-made garments (RMG) sector reminded that the United States would help upgrade the capabilities of the ready-made garments (RMG) sector through support of vocational centres dedicated to RMG and improvements in industry labour conditions. US assistance will also help scale-up Pakistan’s International Labour Organisation (ILO)-International Labour Standards (ILS), textile programme and support the launch of an ILO “Better Work Program.” 
 
The United States will support an investment event in New York to highlight opportunities in Pakistan’s RMG industry and other sectors. The sheet said under the title of making the business opportunity conference regularly schedule event and stated that the business opportunities Conferences (BOCs) would become a regularly scheduled event overseen by a standing bi-national committee responsible for its organisation. 
 
The fact-sheet recalled that under the women economic empowerment through the Memorandum of Understanding on Women’s Empowerment; use the Trade and Investment Framework Agreement (TIFA) to integrate women entrepreneurs into all aspects of the bilateral trade and investment agenda including business-to-business events, agriculture, GSP outreach, labour, and entrepreneurship. The fact-sheet maintained that the United States would sponsor Pakistan’s admission as an Observer to the six-nation US-Central Asia (CA) TIFA, to be formalised during the CA TIFA Council meeting in November 2015 in Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan, if desired.
 
The fact-sheet proclaimed that WTO agreement on government procurement would also be made and to enhance Pakistan’s access to US and other government procurement markets, the United States would support Pakistan’s accession to the WTO Agreement on Government Procurement (AGP) through the provision of technical assistance, particularly with regard to bringing Pakistan’s government procurement laws and regulations in conformity with AGP eligibility standards.
 
Talking about future procurement opportunities, the fact-sheet announced that the Department of Commerce and Office of the US Trade Representative would assist Pakistan in building its capacity in sanitary, safety, and other standards required of US government procurements. Pakistani vendors will also be eligible to bid on select Department of Defence procurement opportunities that are in direct support of operations in Afghanistan.
 
 
 
 
Ukraine Leader Submits Draft Agreement on Trade Facilitation With WTO to Parliament -Gov't
23 October 2015
Sputnik News 
 
Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko has submitted an agreement on trade facilitation with the World Trade Organization (WTO) to the country’s parliament, the Verkhovna Rada, for ratification, the Ukrainian government said in a statement Friday.
 
"On October 20, 2015 [Tuesday], the Ukrainian president submitted to Ukraine's Verkhovna Rada a draft bill on a ratification protocol, developed by the Ministry of Economic Development and Trade of Ukraine, on amendments to the Marrakesh Agreement on the establishment of the World Trade Organization, that aims to implement Ukrainian intrastate procedures, needed to enforce the agreement on trade facilitation," the statement reads.
 
On Wednesday, the bill was ratified by the parliaments of 50 of the WTO's 161 member states, including the United States, Switzerland, Japan, China, Australia, Malaysia, News Zealand, and the 28 EU countries. The agreement will be implemented if approved by two thirds of the WTO members.
 
According to the statement, the agreement should be ratified and adopted to speed up customs control and reduce trading procedures, together with the removal of bureaucratic and regulatory barriers in Ukraine.
 
WTO was established in January 1995 as an organization with lower trade barriers among member states as well as ensuring that international trade rules are correctly applied and implemented.
 
Ukraine has been a member of the WTO since May 2008.
 
 
 
 
Reforms named crucial for Belarus' accession to WTO, success in Eurasian Economic Union
BelTA
23 October 2015, 
 
It is necessary to go ahead with economic reforms. Chairman of the Council of the Republic of the National Assembly of Belarus Mikhail Myasnikovich made the statement at the 16th international scientific conference held in Minsk on 23 October to discuss structural reforms and economic growth in the light of the problems involved in the predicting and state regulation of social and economic development, BelTA has learned.
 
Mikhail Myasnikovich said: “It is necessary to understand that reforms are crucial for Belarus' accession to the WTO and the country's successful work in the Eurasian Economic Union. If we don't go ahead with reforms but try to expedite the integration processes on the basis of what we have, the results can be even negative.”
 
The head of the upper chamber of the Belarus parliament endorsed the main directions of the structural reforms presented by First Deputy Economy Minister Alexander Zaborovsky during the conference. Mikhail Myasnikovich said he was in favor of evolutionary reforms, structural reforms, and reforms at the level of individual economic operators in addition to proper pricing policies, tariff and non-tariff regulatory measures. He said that all these instruments should be used rather vigorously for the sake of increasing the economic well-being of both the country and its citizens.
 
Mikhail Myasnikovich remarked that Belarus' accession to the WTO will result in structural changes of the economy. At the same time it will open up great prospects for selling Belarusian goods on foreign markets. In his words, accession to the WTO will not result in the automatic reduction of import customs duties across the board. “The World Trade Organization has precision instruments for protecting specific industries. Experts should take care of the matters as they prepare the relevant documents,” Mikhail Myasnikovich said.
