HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S. Bemoans Chinese Telecom Policies, Russian ‘Anti-Crisis Plan’
·         HYPERLINK \l "US, EU Concerned Over Russia's Import Substitution Program
·         HYPERLINK \l "EU questions India on local content clause in solar programme
·         HYPERLINK \l "G33 seeks protection for farmers from import surges, fall in prices
·         HYPERLINK \l "Source says India opposes S America's tariff cut proposal in WTO
·         HYPERLINK \l "Egypt supports sugar producers, may slap big tariff on imports
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO Appellate Body Grants US Victory in Vietnam Shrimp Duties Appeal
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S. Lawmakers Prepared to Fix COOL Rules if WTO Appeal Fails
·         HYPERLINK \l "Guatemala Lodges Appeal in Peru Agricultural Duties Case
·         HYPERLINK \l "China Files WTO Challenge Against EU on Poultry Imports
·         HYPERLINK \l "US lawmakers agree on wording of bill key to Pacific trade deal
·         HYPERLINK \l "Emerging countries blast US for not backing IMF reform
 
U.S. Bemoans Chinese Telecom Policies, Russian ‘Anti-Crisis Plan’
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, April 17, 2015
 
April 16 — U.S. trade officials reiterated their concerns about Chinese technology procurement requirements for its commercial banking sector at a World Trade Organization meeting on Trade-Related Investment Measures (TRIMS).
 
The U.S. criticized a recent Chinese Banking Regulatory Commission rule that urges Chinese financial institutions to seek out “indigenous innovation of information technology,” according to a recent U.S. filing.
 
The U.S. officials said they also were concerned that Russia's new “anti-crisis” economic restructuring plan urges state-owned enterprises to prioritize Russian-made products (60 WTO, 3/30/15).
 
They questioned whether the policies adhere to the TRIMS Agreement, which prohibits WTO members from applying any measure that discriminates against foreign products or that leads to quantitative restrictions.
 
China to Review Measures
 
Chinese trade officials said the financial procurement policy is important to protect the security of its banking sector.
 
The policy requires the Chinese banking industry to ensure all its new computer servers and desktop computers, as well as half of its tablets and smartphones, meet China's requirements for “security and controllability.”
 
Although WTO rules permit members to implement cybersecurity measures, the U.S. said such measures prevent foreign technology and telecommunications companies from selling their products to China's banking sector. Japan, Canada and the European Union echoed the U.S. concerns.
 
China said it would review the measure but did not commit to modifying its policies.
 
The U.S. has battled China for years to end trade measures that prevent foreign competitors to offer electronic payment services to Chinese companies and consumers (01 WTO, 1/2/15).
 
Russian ‘Anti-Crisis Plan.’
 
U.S. and European Union trade officials said the Russian government's $34 billion “anti-crisis” plan includes local content requirements for purchases made by state-owned enterprises.
 
Russia imposed the measures in January to help weather the economic pressures of Western sanctions and low oil prices.
 
The U.S. said the new rules prioritize import substitution strategies for certain high-tech products like medical devices. Russia said its medical device procurement policy applied to government procurements, which are not covered by the WTO's General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
 
The U.S., EU, Japan and Canada questioned Russia's local content requirements for agricultural equipment and automobiles. Ukraine said it is considering a countervailing investigation of the Russian automobile manufacturing industry. Russia countered that its WTO Protocol of Accession provides a transition period for its industrial assembly subsidies until 2018.
 
Indonesian 4G Devices
 
U.S. trade officials also questioned the legality of Indonesia's draft regulations that require all 4G LTE-compliant devices to meet local content requirements.
 
The U.S. said the rules would discriminate against foreign competitors in favor of locally manufactured Indonesian products.
 
Indonesia said the proposed regulations would meet WTO requirements and are aimed at requiring companies investing in Indonesia to develop a domestic manufacturing presence.
 
 
US, EU Concerned Over Russia's Import Substitution Program 
17 April 2015
Sputnik News Service
 
GENEVA (Sputnik) - The United States and the European Union expressed their concern over Russia's import substitution policies during a session of Investment Measures (TRIMS) Committee of the World Trade Organization (WTO), a source familiar with the negotiations told RIA Novosti.

According to the source, the United States and the European Union were concerned over Moscow requiring priority for Russian-made products for state purchases.

Russia has recently implemented the strategy of import substitution of medical equipment within the framework of its anti-crisis plan, the source said Thursday. The United States is concerned that Russia is preparing to extend those requirements for state-owned enterprises.

Japan, the European Union and Canada also voiced similar concerns, regarding state purchases of medical, industrial and agricultural equipment, as well as textiles and vehicles.

The United States, the European Union and their allies imposed several rounds of restrictions to weaken Russia's economy in 2014 over Moscow's alleged interference in the Ukraine conflict. Russia has repeatedly refused the accusations. Following the introduction of restrictions, Moscow initiated an import substitution program.

In February, Russian Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev signed a ban on importing foreign-made machinery for the needs of state and municipal entities as part of Russia's import substitution program. Rossiya Segodnya International Information Agency
 
 
EU questions India on local content clause in solar programme 
From Shreerupa Mitra Jha

Geneva, Apr 16 (PTI) The European Union today questioned India's local content requirement policy in two schemes approved by the Union Cabinet in the solar power generation sector.

At a Trade-Related Investment Measures (TRIMS) committee meeting at the World Trade Organisation, EU expressed its reservations about two schemes approved by Union Cabinet of India in December last year and February this year for setting up 1000 MW grid-connected solar PV projects over three years by CPSU and the setting up of 1500 MW of solar PV power projects through NTPC/NVVN.

Since both schemes had local content requirements in some form, they appeared to contravene India's G20 commitments on the non-imposition of protectionist measures, it said.

The EU asked India to provide information on both the schemes and their implementation at the Centre and state levels.

India, however, has maintained that the measures in question are consistent with the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and TRIMS Agreement.

The WTO TRIMS agreement categorises certain measures as trade-restrictive or trade-distorting and asks member-states to refrain from applying measures that would discriminate against foreign products or that would lead to quantitative restrictions.

New Delhi is already fighting a case in the WTO on issue of local content requirement in the solar sector.

India has always raised its serious concerns over increasing protectionist tendencies by the developed countries especially after the global financial meltdown.

The US had alleged that India's Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission (JNNSM) programme appears to discriminate against US solar equipment by requiring solar energy producers to use locally manufactured cells and by offering subsidies to those developers who use domestic equipment.

India has an ambitious target of generating 20,000 megawatts of solar power by 2022 under the programme.

US companies sees this target as a great business opportunity for them. Because of this, they want India to remove the clause of local content requirement. 
 
 
G33 seeks protection for farmers from import surges, fall in prices 
D. Ravi Kanth 
17 April 2015
Mint
 
Geneva, April 17 -- A group of developing countries led by India, China and Indonesia has demanded simple and effective measures to safeguard their small farmers from sudden surges in imports and fall in prices, reviving a contentious issue that led to the collapse of world trade talks in 2008.

The Group of 33, which has 46 members, made the demand at a closed-door meeting of trade envoys at the World Trade Organization (WTO) in Geneva on Wednesday.

They want special safeguards to insulate small and subsistence farmers from sudden and unforeseen import surges and price declines of farm produce resulting from exports by developed nations, where farming is heavily subsidized.

There is a need for such a mechanism, they say, before the long-pending Doha round of trade negotiations is concluded. These talks to lay down the rules of global trade collapsed in 2008 precisely over this issue, with the US on the one side and India and China on the other.

"A more simple, operable, and effective safeguard mechanism is needed by all developing countries," Iman Pambagyo of Indonesia told the meeting. The aim was "to better manage ourselves against world prices and supply which are becoming increasingly volatile due to increased climate change-induced disturbances and persistently high subsidization, and to respond to import surges and price declines that threatens small, subsistence farmers who overwhelmingly reside in the rural areas", he said.

Indonesia is the coordinator of the G33, which also includes India, China, Turkey, South Korea, Kenya, Bolivia and Venezuela. The coalition has been waging a battle to safeguard the interests of their small farmers since the Doha trade negotiations started in 2001.

India played a key role in the Doha negotiations in strengthening the special safeguards. The talks collapsed in 2008, when the then trade minister Kamal Nath walked out of the meeting saying New Delhi will never sacrifice the interests of its small farmers.

The underlying rationale of the mechanism is that when prices of imported farm products drop below a specified level and could cause serious problems for domestic farmers, developing countries must be in a position to raise import levies, imposing what are called safeguard duties.

At Wednesday's meeting of over two dozen envoys convened by the chair for agriculture negotiations, Indonesia explained why the safeguards are so crucial for the survival of subsistence farmers in the developing world, saying they could not compete with rich farmers in the developed world who receive tens of billions of dollars in subsidies from their governments, according to negotiators familiar with the discussion.

The chair, John Adank of New Zealand, sought to know "who should have access to agriculture safeguards in the future"; whether "access to safeguards be linked to commitments to reduce tariffs"; and whether "safeguards be available to all tariff lines or to a limited number of lines".

Although industrialized countries managed to secure a Special Safeguard (SSG) instrument in the previous Uruguay round negotiations that led to the establishment of the WTO in 1995, they remain strongly opposed to the idea of special safeguard mechanism (SSM) arguing it would dilute the principles of certainty and predictability in global agriculture trade.

Australia, which is the leader for the Cairns Group of 20 agricultural exporting countries that seek complete liberalization of trade in agricultural commodities without any subsidies, had strongly opposed the continuation of the SSG that is used by farm protectionist countries such as Switzerland, Norway, and Japan as well as the EU.

But Australia along with Canada, the EU, Japan, Paraguay and others also opposed the SSM for developing countries, suggesting that it would further undermine market access when the overall level of ambition for reducing farm tariffs is now being "recalibrated", said a trade envoy familiar with the discussion.

Nevertheless, Australia, Canada, and Chile among others signalled their willingness to discuss a modified SSG for industrialized countries.

Indonesia said the SSM "is a critical deliverable that can never be linked with any Doha tariff reduction disciplines or commitments".

India's trade envoy Anjali Prasad strongly defended the G33 proposal, maintaining that developing countries would need price-based triggers to invoke SSM as and when prices drop below certain specified levels. The G33 said price and volume triggers for invoking SSM-the crux of the dispute-must be based on the most recent or current market realities that are based on a three-year rolling average.

"The three-decade-old fixed reference price of 1986-88 is undoubtedly an outdated and flawed economic basis for triggering the price mechanism in today's realities," the G33 maintained. In his concluding remarks, Adank said there are still several gaps to be discussed in the market access pillar of the Doha agriculture negotiations, including the need for a modified SSG.

 
Source says India opposes S America's tariff cut proposal in WTO 
16 April 2015
Cogencis MoneyWire
 
Cogencis, Thursday, Mar 16 . By Kirtika Suneja NEW DELHI - India has opposed proposals floated by two South American countries in the World Trade Organization to reduce tariffs by all countries to increase market access, a senior commerce ministry official said 
    "There have been two different proposals by Argentina and Paraguay and both have simplified versions of cutting tariffs which is a way of getting market access. However, they are silent on food subsidies. India has disagreed with this," the official said.
    The two papers are the first to have been floated ahead of the WTO ministerial talks in December in Nairobi.
    "A lot of shadow boxing is happening now as countries have to agree on a work programme for the talks by Jul 31 to conclude the Doha round of negotiations. However, no one is coming out openly with what they have to offer," the official added.
    Last year, India was able to convince the WTO to find a permanent solution to the food subsidy issue in return of accepting a roadmap for trade facilitation, something that developed countries have been pressing for.
    G-33 countries, which include India, China and the Philippines, want public stockholding for food security purposes to come under 'Green Box' subsidies in the WTO.
    'Green Box' subsidies cause no or minimum trade distortion.
    Under the Agreement on Agriculture of the WTO, subsidies should not breach 10% of the value of production of those crops which are stockpiled. India can be taken through the WTO dispute settlement mechanism if the 10% price support cap is breached .
    In a notification to the WTO last year, India said it did not breach the permissible subsidy levels under WTO rules and gave $56.1 bln in agricultural subsidies in 2010-11, an over three-fold increase from $16.8 bln doled out in 2004-05.
    Of this, $24.5 bln was made in 'green box' subsidies (allowed without any cap and are least trade-distorting under WTO) and the rest $31.6 bln includes development programmes such as support for fertilisers, irrigation, electricity and seeds, among others in 2010-11.  End
 
 
Egypt supports sugar producers, may slap big tariff on imports 
 
CAIRO/GENEVA, April 16 (Reuters) - Egypt is considering a 20 percent tariff on white sugar imports as it bolsters its own sugar industry with a subsidised export push, a ministerial statement and a filing at the World Trade Organization said on Thursday.

"It is proposed to impose a provisional safeguard measure in the form of additional duty 20 percent of the CIF (cost, insurance and freight) value with a minimum 700 Egyptian Pounds ($92) per ton," Egypt said in its filing to the WTO.

Temporary safeguard tariffs are allowed under WTO rules if there is a sudden, unexpected and damaging surge of imports, and if the country that imposes the tariffs first seeks the views of interested parties.

But their use has been under increasing scrutiny by authorities concerned they could be a way for countries to skirt the usual trade rules that ban unfair discrimination against foreign goods.

In a separate statement, Supplies Minister Khaled Hanafi said Egypt was not using any imported sugar for its subsidy programme and was working to promote brown sugar exports to Kenya.

SIIC, which has a monopoly over cane sugar processing in Egypt and is the supplier of sugar for the country's subsidy programme, confirmed to Reuters it had not issued any international tenders to buy sugar globally since the summer of last year.

Hanafi said the ministry was supporting the local cane sugar industry which had suffered the effects of a global drop in sugar prices as a result of oversupply.

Prices for local cane sugar were increased from 360 Egyptian pounds ($47) a tonne to 400 pounds a tonne with the ministry of supply also subsidising SIIC by paying 100 pounds a tonne for every tonne of cane sugar the company purchased locally.

Hanafi also said Egypt was seeking to export some of SIIC's production to several countries in Africa and was in talks with Kenya for the export of brown sugar.

Egypt consumes around 3.2 million tonnes of sugar annually but produces just over 2 million tonnes leaving a gap of slightly over a million tonnes a year for imports.

The North African country, which depends on the Nile for almost all its water, is trying to expand sugar beet planting to fulfil its sugar needs as it consumes less water than cane.

Beet is mostly grown in the Nile Delta region while cane is grown in southern Egypt.

Several private sugar plants have set up shop to process beet sugar in the past years including Nile Sugar and Al Nouran sugar. ($1 = 7.6300 Egyptian pounds) (Reporting by Maha El Dahan via Cairo Newsroom and by Tom Miles in Geneva; Editing by Vincent Baby and Andrew Heavens) 
 
 
WTO Appellate Body Grants US Victory in Vietnam Shrimp Duties Appeal
Bridges
16 April 2015
 
The WTO’s highest court has rejected Vietnam’s claims in its appeal over how the US implements adverse rulings by the global trade body in the area of trade remedies. The issue had been raised in the context of a previous panel ruling concerning US anti-dumping measures on certain frozen warmwater shrimp from the Asian country.

The Appellate Body’s report was issued on 7 April, over three years after WTO dispute settlement proceedings first began in February 2012. In its original consultations request, Vietnam had challenged the determination and practices of the US Commerce Department in imposing these anti-dumping measures, which are meant to counter instances where goods are sold abroad at prices below their normal value.

Mixed panel ruling

The original case (DS429) had brought back to the fore the often controversial US practice of zeroing, which has been the subject of numerous WTO disputes that Washington has repeatedly lost. Zeroing is a method of calculating anti-dumping duties, which involves ignoring certain data when calculating them. Specifically, it “zeroes out,” or ignores, instances where the good in question is actually being sold at a higher price in the US than in its home market.

Along with challenging the use of zeroing in this case, another issue raised in Hanoi’s original 2012 complaint included Washington’s decision to assign a rate to an “NME-wide entity” comprised of producers/exporters that do not demonstrate sufficient independence from government control. NME refers to non-market economies.

The panel granted Vietnam a mixed victory in both of those aspects last November, which the country did not appeal.

However, Hanoi did challenge the panel’s finding regarding a specific element of US law, namely Section 129(c)(1) of the Uruguay Round Agreements Act (URAA), which establishes a mechanism regarding the implementation of adverse recommendations and rulings by the WTO’s Dispute Settlement Body (DSB) concerning trade remedies, such as anti-dumping duty actions.

The panel had found that this US law was not inconsistent with global trade rules, which Hanoi then asked the Appellate Body to reconsider.

WTO compliance

The provision of the US law at issue addresses the question of when revised trade remedy determinations – meant to comply with WTO dispute panel or Appellate Body findings – take effect. The law provides that Section 129 determinations apply to imports recorded on or after the date when the US Trade Representative (USTR) directs the Commerce Department to take compliance actions.

Vietnam had claimed before the panel that this law was inconsistent “as such” with the WTO’s Antidumping Agreement, since it precluded US authorities from implementing DSB recommendations with respect to “prior unliquidated entries” – in other words, those imports made prior to the revised determinations that remained unliquidated.

Washington operates a retrospective system for assessing anti-dumping duties. Following findings of dumping and domestic injury, importers are requested to put aside cash deposits at rates equal to the calculated dumping margins for future imports.

On an annual basis, interested parties may request US authorities to conduct an administrative review of their imports at the end of that particular year. In these reviews, the Commerce Department recalculates import dumping margins. These new margins are based on actual imports during the 12-month period reviewed and become the “final” duty rate for those imports.

At the time of the panel proceedings, the US agency had completed seven administrative reviews in which it had calculated the total amount of duties owed for imports during each review period. Vietnam argued that some of these entries remained unliquidated.

The US had argued that Section 129 is not the only way of implementing DSB recommendations and that Washington has in the past assessed and liquidated prior unliquidated entries in a manner consistent with WTO rules by using other mechanisms.

The panel found that Vietnam had failed to establish that Section 129(c)(1) precluded extending the benefits of implementation to prior unliquidated entries, and therefore Vietnam had not established that this law was inconsistent "as such" with WTO rules.

Objective assessment

The Appellate Body rejected Vietnam’s claim that the panel acted inconsistently with Article 11 of the DSU, which provides that a dispute panel should make an objective assessment of the matter at hand.

Hanoi had taken issue with the panel’s finding that Vietnam had failed to establish that Section 129(c)(1) precludes “extending the benefits of implementation” to prior unliquidated entries, and therefore deeming that Hanoi had not established the law’s inconsistency “as such” with WTO anti-dumping rules. 
 
According to Vietnam, the panel applied an "incorrect analytical framework" on this subject by requiring it to demonstrate that the above-mentioned problem is seen in all circumstances.

The Appellate Body said that the legal standard involves reviewing whether Vietnam had shown that this provision of US law necessarily operates, at least in certain circumstances, to preclude implementation of DSB recommendations and rulings.

Given the evidence examined by the panel, including alternative mechanisms available for “prior liquidated entries” raised by the US, the Appellate Body found that the panel should not be faulted over how it assessed the evidence in making its conclusions.

Vietnam also claimed, under the same DSU provision, that the panel failed to conduct a holistic assessment in ascertaining the meaning of Section 129(c)(1). However, the Appellate Body deemed that the panel had properly considered the relevant elements of the US domestic legal system presented by the parties.

Within the scope of Vietnam’s appeal, the Appellate Body did not find the US had acted inconsistently with its WTO obligations and therefore did not make any new recommendations to the DSB. Washington will, however, need to bring those measures that were found to be WTO-illegal by the panel last November into compliance with global trade rules. ICTSD reporting.
 
 
U.S. Lawmakers Prepared to Fix COOL Rules if WTO Appeal Fails
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, April 17, 2015
 
April 16 — Senate Agriculture Committee leaders said they stand ready to modify country-of-origin labeling (COOL) regulations—long opposed by Canada and Mexico—if the World Trade Organization releases a ruling, expected in May, that finds them inconsistent with international trade rules.
 
During an April 16 hearing, Committee Chairman Pat Roberts (R-Kan.) and Ranking Member Debbie Stabenow (D-Mich.) told U.S. Department of Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack they would make any required changes to avoid retaliatory trade measures from Canada and Mexico.
 
“COOL isn't nearly as cool as some people thought it would be and the WTO stove is hot,” Roberts said at a Senate Finance Committee hearing. “We stand ready to fix that with regards to a statutory change and we look forward to working with you,” Roberts told Vilsack.
 
“We are going to work through that and work that one out,” Stabenow said.
 
May WTO Decision
 
A WTO dispute panel is reviewing the legality of the amended U.S. COOL rules which require meat producers to specify on retail packaging where each animal was born, raised and slaughtered.
 
Mexico and Canada initiated the WTO dispute, saying U.S. COOL rules cost their pork and beef industries $1 billion per year by imposing undue burdens and costs in violation of WTO rules.
 
The WTO ruled against the U.S. in two previous decisions, declaring the rules do not adhere to the Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT) Agreement or the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) 1994.
 
U.S. lawmakers are awaiting the pending compliance panel report—which is expected no later than May 18—to determine whether the rules will need to be fixed in order to avoid retaliatory trade actions (44 WTO, 3/6/15).
 
Canadian officials have said they will target nearly 40 U.S. products—such as beef, pork, poultry, cherries, chocolate and frozen orange juice—if the U.S. fails to comply with the decision.
 
‘We Can't Fix It.’
 
Vilsack told lawmakers the USDA had done everything in its power to ensure COOL was compliant with WTO rules.
 
“Absent a winning of an appeal, we are in a situation where there is a conflict between the law and what the WTO says is inappropriate, which creates the opportunity for retaliation,” Vilsack told lawmakers at the hearing.
 
“We just can't fix it. We tried it twice. We can't fix it,” Vilsack said. “You all have to fix it by either repealing COOL or modifying COOL to create some kind of more generic label.”
 
 
Guatemala Lodges Appeal in Peru Agricultural Duties Case
Bridges
16 April 2015
 
Guatemala formally submitted a notice of appeal earlier this month in its WTO case against Peru’s additional duties on certain agricultural imports (DS457), raising questions over a series of legal findings in last December’s dispute panel ruling. The move came within days of Lima’s submission of its own appeal on the subject.

At issue in the dispute is Peru’s Price Range System, or PRS, which determines duties based on a series of factors. These include a reference price that reflects international market prices for a good, as well as a range involving a price ceiling and floor, which is established by international prices over the last 60 months. The duties primarily affect rice, sugar, maize, milk, and certain dairy products.

The panel had largely ruled in Guatemala’s favour late last year by finding that those duties constituted “variable import levies” in violation of global trade rules, particularly those outlined under Article 4.2 of the Agreement of Agriculture. (See Bridges Weekly, 4 December 2014) 
 
The panel had also ruled against Peru’s claims regarding Guatemala’s alleged violation of its “good faith” obligations by launching a WTO dispute. While the two trading partners had negotiated an FTA that permitted the system of duties used by Peru, that deal is not currently in force.

The case has thus drawn wide attention in the trade community, given the growing questions over how obligations taken by WTO members under free trade deals interact with their existing commitments at the global trade body. While these issues were raised in Peru’s appeal notice, the FTA dimension of the dispute is not discussed in Guatemala’s submission. (See Bridges Weekly, 2 April 2015)

Minimum import price

Despite disagreeing with Lima on the above-mentioned points, the panel had also denied Guatemala City’s claim that the additional duties under the PRS constituted a “minimum import price” or a border measure “similar to a minimum import price” within the meaning of the same legal provision – a finding which Guatemala is now challenging in its appeal.  
 
First, Guatemala has challenged the legal standard that the panel applied in defining measures that constitute a “minimum import price,” deeming this standard “excessively narrow” as it only includes measures applied with respect to the actual transaction value of each shipment of imports.

Furthermore, Guatemala says, the panel did not consider that the PRS’ design, structure, and operation entail an implicit minimum threshold that affords a specific type of protection, one that is not provided by ordinary specific duties.

Guatemala also argues that the panel erred in its analysis of whether the measure at issue was “similar to a “minimum import price,” given that the panel applied the same legal standard for both concepts.

Based on that interpretation, the panel had found that the measure at issue was not “similar” to a minimum import price, given that the duties system did not prevent imports from entering the Peruvian market at prices under a certain threshold.

However, Guatemala holds that the PRS’ setup and operation demonstrates the existence of an “explicit threshold,” namely the floor price itself, as well as an “implicit threshold,” which consists of the lowest transaction of the previous fortnight plus the additional duties generated by the PRS.

Under WTO rules, the Appellate Body now has 90 days from the date of appeal to issue its report. While it can review aspects of law – such as legal interpretation – it generally will not interfere with factual findings. ICTSD reporting.
 
 
China Files WTO Challenge Against EU on Poultry Imports
Bridges
16 April 2015
 
China filed a formal WTO complaint against the EU last week, challenging the measures that resulted from the 28-nation bloc’s move in 2006 and again in 2009 to negotiate changes to the tariff concessions listed in its goods schedule involving certain poultry products.

Under WTO rules, members are allowed to negotiate modifications to their existing goods schedules, subject to certain requirements that are outlined in Article XXVIII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT).

For instance, these talks must be conducted with any other WTO member that was involved in negotiating the initial concession, along with any other member determined to have “a principal supplying interest,” and be subject to consultation with any member deemed to have a “substantial interest.”

The EU ultimately negotiated and reached deals with Brazil and Thailand on both occasions, with the first agreements reached with the countries involved in 2006 and the second time in 2012. The latter changes took effect in March 2013.

Brasilia and Bangkok had both been considered to have “a principal or substantial supplying interest” in the products that would be affected by the changes in Brussels’ schedule.

As Beijing was not deemed to have a “principal or substantial supplying interest” in the goods under negotiation – given that the “reference period” involved covered the time in which the EU restricted imports of poultry from China due to concerns over avian flu – it was not involved in the negotiation or consultation process, which is among the several criticisms listed in the Asian country’s request for consultations.

China also says that the resulting deals the EU reached in both 2006 and 2012 did not maintain a “general level of reciprocal and mutually advantageous concessions no less favourable to trade” than those existing prior to the changes, as required by Article XXVIII, according to a copy of the consultations request seen by Bridges.

Resulting quotas discriminatory, China says

Along with criticising the negotiating and consultation procedure itself, China has also challenged the outcome of the EU’s talks with Brazil and Thailand, which it claims led to Brussels assigning tariff-rate quotas that are “almost entirely or even entirely reserved” for Brasilia and Bangkok, as well as out-of-quota rates “significantly” above the bound rates prior to the changes.

Specifically, Beijing has cited a serious of provisions under the GATT’s Article XIII, which deals with the non-discriminatory administration of quantitative restrictions. For example, China says that the country-specific tariff-rate quotas that the EU agreed with Brazil and Thailand give the latter two countries an advantage in market access that discriminates against fellow WTO members.

Furthermore, China claims, the level of quota given to Brazil and Thailand violates the WTO provision that requires aiming for a “distribution of trade in such product approaching as closely as possible the shares which the various contracting parties might be expected to obtain in the absence of such restrictions.”

Chen Fuli, Deputy Director of the Department of Treaty and Law in China’s Ministry of Commerce (MOFCOM), told CCTV that the Asian country’s products “make up over 25 percent of the EU’s imports,” arguing that it is “unfair” that China is allocated only four percent of the quota.

Under WTO rules, the two sides must now hold consultations for a minimum period of 60 days in an effort to reach a mutually agreed solution. Should these talks fail to produce such an outcome, China can then ask the global trade body to establish a panel to hear the complaint. ICTSD reporting
 
 
US lawmakers agree on wording of bill key to Pacific trade deal 
By Krista Hughes 
 
WASHINGTON, April 16 (Reuters) - Senior U.S. lawmakers reached agreement on Thursday on the wording of a bill aimed at giving the White House "fast track" authority to negotiate a Pacific trade pact that is central to President Barack Obama's strategic shift toward Asia. 
 
The agreement, over six months in the making, sets the stage for a bruising legislative battle over Obama's proposed Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) and similar trade deals, with many Democrats opposed to the legislation along with a small but vocal contingent of Republicans. 
 
The TPP, a potential legacy-defining achievement for Obama, would connect a dozen economies by cutting trade barriers and harmonizing standards covering two-fifths of the world economy and a third of global trade. 
 
The bill gives lawmakers the right to set negotiating objectives, but would restrict them to a yes-or-no vote on trade deals such as the TPP. 
 
The Obama administration announced in late 2009 that it was entering TPP negotiations with Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore and Vietnam. 
 
Japan, Washington's key partner in the trade pact, was cautiously optimistic after the agreement. 
 
"You can say that we have just cleared one obstacle to TPP negotiations," Japanese Economics Minister Akira Amari said in Tokyo on Friday. "Japan is holding working-level talks with the United States today. Depending on how that goes, I want to decide today whether or not we can proceed to more formal minister-level talks." 
 
The U.S. Trade Representative has called TPP the "cornerstone" of Obama's Asia-Pacific economic policy. It also is important to U.S. manufacturers and farmers eager to expand already significant sales to the region by winning lower tariffs and other breaks. 
 
"This is a smart, bipartisan compromise that will help move America forward," Republican Senate Finance Committee Chairman Orrin Hatch said after leaders of Congress's tax-writing committees reached agreement on the legislation, which will be introduced in the Senate and House of Representatives. 
 
U.S. labor unions that are active supporters of Democratic politicians fear the deal will favor big U.S. corporations at the expense of American jobs and tougher foreign safety and environmental standards. 
 
While trade associations and companies such as Intel Corp , Emerson Electric Co and Microsoft Corp welcomed the move, unions immediately announced a new advertising campaign to pressure lawmakers. 
 
Similar arguments raged in the run-up to the 1993 congressional approval of the North American Free Trade Agreement between the United States, Canada and Mexico. Twenty-two years later there is still a debate over that deal, which badly split the Democratic Party and was passed in the House of Representatives by a narrow 234-200 vote. 
 
AGREEMENT 
 
The Obama administration has faced pressure to make progress on the bill ahead of a meeting between Obama and Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe on April 28 in Washington. 
 
The United States and Japan are the two biggest economies among the TPP countries and an agreement between them is central to the pact. 
 
Japanese officials have said success in the TPP negotiations depends on whether the U.S. Congress approves fast-track measures to ease passage of trade deals, or trade promotion authority (TPA). 
 
Japan and other TPP countries have said fast-track authority would give trading partners certainty that agreements will not be picked apart. 
 
TPP must pass Congress this year to avoid being bogged down in the run-up to the 2016 U.S. elections where it could put Hillary Clinton, who is seeking the Democratic nomination for president, in a difficult spot. 
 
As a former member of the Obama administration, she needs to walk a tightrope between supporting her former boss and warning of the need for tougher trade deals. Her husband, former President Bill Clinton, oversaw passage of the NAFTA deal that many unions loathe. 
 
The deal between Hatch and the panel's top Democrat, Ron Wyden, to move Trade Promotion Authority ahead in tandem with a bill to extend support for workers hurt by trade is no guarantee the legislation will pass Congress. 
 
Opponents are lobbying hard to defeat it and many Democrats are still undecided. The bill also faces opposition from some conservative Republicans opposed to delegating power to the White House. 
 
"You bring up TPA in the House today, the best you would have is a handful of Democrats," Sander Levin, the top Democrat on the House of Representatives committee responsible for trade, said at a Bloomberg conference. 
 
Still, 11 members of the New Democrat Coalition, seen as the most likely source of potential Democratic support, said the package included several of their priorities and they would work with colleagues to make the bill as strong as possible. 
 
Chuck Schumer, tipped to become the Senate's Democratic leader after the 2016 elections, told a committee hearing he opposes TPA. He and other Senate Finance Committee Democrats said it is not fair to rush such an important issue. 
 
 
Emerging countries blast US for not backing IMF reform 
17 April 2015
Agence France Presse
 
The emerging economies of the G-24 group sharply criticized the United States on Thursday for holding up what they see as critical reforms of the International Monetary Fund.

Speaking at the spring meetings of the IMF and World Bank, the group said the failure after five years of the US Congress to ratify the reforms was undermining the effectiveness and legitimacy of the global crisis lender.

"We reiterate our deep disappointment with the lack of progress in implementing the IMF quota and governance reforms agreed to in 2010 and strongly urge the US to complete ratification," they said.

"This remains an impediment to IMF credibility, legitimacy and effectiveness and has considerably delayed forward-looking commitments," they added, pointing to a second set of reforms that had been expected this year.

The 2010 reforms, a doubling of IMF funding and a reallocation of voting power to boost China and other up-and-coming economic powers, were originally propelled by Washington, and the President Barack Obama's White House has repeatedly endorsed them.

But the US Congress has refused to sign off on the deal, with some legislators not wanting to contribute more money to the IMF and others concerned about any erosion to the dominant US role at the fund.

Criticisms of Washington have steadily grown, and IMF Managing Director Christine Lagarde said Thursday that she understood why other IMF members "are frustrated and impatient to see that reform actually implemented."

"I am also calling on the United States to actually obtain ratification of that reform so that the institution can continue to be representative of the entire community as it evolves."

The G-24 endorsed the "Plan B" put forward in recent weeks to split the the two facets of the 2010 reforms and put through the quota revision without the need for ratification by the US Congress.

The net effect of that reform would be to reduce the voting power of European countries while increasing that of China, India and others.
END