A setback for Japan and satisfaction for China after trade bills falter in U.S.
Doubts over EU's proposals for saving U.S. trade deal 
Hank Paulson says China risks 'real damage' to economy 
BSE case puts Irish export beef at risk 
House votes to repeal country-of-origin labeling on meat 
Airbus seeks taxpayer loan 
Protectionism will not help our nation's ports 


A setback for Japan and satisfaction for China after trade bills falter in U.S. 
By Anna Fifield Simon Denyer, 

The Washington Post 

14 June 2015, 

TOKYO - The failure of a package of trade-related measures Friday in the House was a blow to President Obama, but it was also a blow to his ally, Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, half a world away. 

Abe has made reviving Japan's stubbornly anemic economy one of his top priorities, and forging a wide-ranging trade pact with the United States, through the Trans- Pacific Partnership (TPP), was a key part of that goal. 

For both countries, the TPP has been viewed as a way to counter a rising China. For the United States, it was a way to project influence in Asia; for Japan, it was a way to regain some of the economic might it has lost as China has gained. 

For China, that means Friday's actions in the House counted as something of a victory. "The outcome won't affect China that much, but China would be happy to see it and chuckle underneath," said Shi Yinhong, director of the U.S. Study Center at Renmin University in Beijing. 

The House voted down a package of trade-related bills as Democrats rebuffed Obama's personal pleas for their support for his free-trade initiative. 

[New questions arise about House Democrats' loyalty to Obama] 

The package included a measure to give the administration "fast-track" negotiating authority considered crucial to conclude the Pacific Rim trade deal. This would allow the administration to agree to a deal that Congress would approve or reject, without the ability to make amendments. 

Japan, the second-biggest party to the deal after the United States, has been counting on it to boost trade and to help the government usher in much-needed restructuringreforms - particularly in agriculture and automobiles - that would be difficult to institute without the excuse of outside impetus. 

[In speech to Congress, Abe lays out more assertive role for Japan] 

Akira Amari, Japan's trade minister and lead negotiator in the TPP talks, said that the result in the House made the situation "extremely delicate." 

"It's now very tough [to hold minister-level consultations] at the earliest possible time," he told reporters Saturday, according to the Nikkei business newspaper. But he said there was also no need to be downcast yet. 

"We don't need to be pessimistic. We will closely monitor the efforts at the House of Representatives," he said. 

But Mainichi Shimbun, a left-leaning newspaper that has been skeptical of the deal, said that Friday's failure showed Obama's weakness. "Obama couldn't convince the Democrats," the paper wrote. "That showed the deep sense of vigilance against TPP within the Democratic Party and Obama's declining force. A sense of uncertainty spreads before the second voting." 

Meanwhile, anti-TPP campaigners were jubilant. "Happy news," tweeted Uchida Shoko, secretary general of PARC, a social justice group. "The U.S. House of Representatives rejected TPP-related bills! Let's kill TPP!" 

The delay could also be good news for South Korea, which has been seeking to join the talks, only to be rebuffed by the United States, which does not want an additional negotiating partner at what it thinks is a late stage in the discussions. 

Seoul has been told to join the second round but is hoping that any delay will provide it with an opening to join the talks. South Korea already has a bilateral trade deal with the United States, although the implementation has sometimes been rocky. 

In Beijing, there was no immediate official reaction to the measure's failure, but experts said there would be quiet satisfaction at the problems the United States was encountering in its attempts to project influence in Asia. 

China has not been included in TPP negotiations, and U.S. officials have often tried to promote the pact at home as an attempt to counter China's influence. As a result, many officials in Beijing had viewed the TPP with suspicion, as part of an American "pivot" to Asia designed to contain China. 

Some moderates within the government, however, had expressed interest in joining it in the future, as a way to encourage pro-market reforms within China and deepen Asian economic integration. 

In recent months, those feelings had increasingly given way to indifference, as China launched its own initiatives to project its leadership in Asia, including the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, President Xi Jinping's Silk Road plans and its own proposed Free Trade Area of the Asia-Pacific. 

"The failure of TPP is a setback for Obama's diplomatic strategy, because negotiating nations might start to question the reliability of the United States," said Shi, of Renmin University, adding that Asian nations would now start to shift their attention away from the TPP and toward the Chinese initiatives. 

But Shen Guobing, a professor at the Institute of World Economy at Fudan University in Shanghai, said the TPP and the Chinese initiatives were not direct rivals. 

"China's influence in the Pacific cannot compete with the United States right now," he said. "So it's hard to say if the failure of TPP will help China to win more trust for its initiatives because countries in the Pacific know the systems of the two big states are fundamentally different." 

Denyer reported from Beijing. Yuki Oda in Tokyo and Xu Jing in Beijing contributed to this report. 

 
Doubts over EU's proposals for saving U.S. trade deal 

Tom Bergin 

Reuters News 

14 June 2015 08:28, 

LONDON (Reuters) - The European Union has more work to do, experts say, if it hopes to seal a transatlantic trade deal that has been criticized for leaving governments open to international legal action from companies affected by changes to tax and regulation. 

The European Commission, the EU's executive arm, is right now negotiating a trade and investment treaty with the United States - the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) - that it says could add 119 billion euros annually to Europe's economy and 95 billion euros to the U.S. economy. 

However the treaty faces growing opposition in Europe from politicians, labor unions and campaign groups who fear it may prevent governments from being able to ban unsafe products or tax businesses because of a provision protecting investors' rights. 

The provision referring to "fair and equitable treatment", was introduced to treaties decades ago to allow investors to seek redress if their assets were expropriated by governments. 

It allows businesses to sue via international courts that do not defer to national interests and has increasingly been used to sanction governments over everything from banning chemicals, withdrawing tax breaks or writing new environmental regulations. 

Matthias Fekl, French minister for trade, is especially critical of the EU's plan to include this right to sue in tribunals in the TTIP. 

He said in a recent interview that France would "never allow private tribunals in the pay of multinational companies to dictate the policies of sovereign states." 

But businesses and their lobby groups have told the European Commission they object to any scaling back in their ability to sue governments or any requirement they do so in national courts. 

In response, the EC has redrafted parts of the trade treaty to limit the circumstances under which a claim can be made. 

It has also proposed a new appeals process for governments and suggested new rules for selecting arbitrators – currently mainly corporate lawyers who campaigners say are biased towards corporations. 

It's not a watertight solution, some say. 

"There are definitely some improvements but it's not a dramatic reform," said Lise Johnson, Head of Investment Law and Policy at Columbia University's Center on Sustainable Investment. 

"I don't think there is enough clarity on fair and equitable treatment to reduce the scope for arbitrators to interpret it creatively," she added. 

Matthew Weiniger, a partner at law firm Herbert Smith Freehills in London said he expected any tightening of the key clauses to be outweighed by the expansion of the number of European countries which will now be subject to lawsuits. 

"There's no question about it. There will be claims," he said, noting Eastern European countries in particular face claims over regulations which change the business environment unexpectedly. 

RED HERRING? 

Jakob Ragnwaldh, partner at law firm Mannheimer Swartling in Stockholm, said the fact governments have been successfully sued in tribunals only a few times shows the risks of lawsuits is being exaggerated by people who would oppose any treaty. 

"It's a red herring that has been placed there on purpose by individuals and organizations who do not believe in free trade," he said. 

But the number of cases being filed is increasing and the threat of action can deter governments from introducing regulations they think may benefit their citizens 

In 1998 Canada abandoned a planned ban on a fuel additive after its manufacturer launched a case. In 2013 New Zealand paused plans to introduce plain packaging for tobacco pending the outcome of lawsuits against Australia over the same issue. 

The fact that many of these cases have set investor-friendly precedents could make governments more likely to lose future ones, warned Gus Van Harten, Associate Professor at Osgoode Hall Law School in Toronto. 

A particular problem, he said, was the tendency of international tribunals to rule that governments should respect companies' "legitimate expectations" that regulations or tax breaks will remain stable. 

National courts usually see that entitlement as subservient to the decisions of their parliament, something international courts do not. 

The U.S. excludes any respect for legitimate expectations in its treaties. 

The EU hopes to counter the increase in investor-friendly tribunal rulings by establishing a new code of conduct for arbitrators and a roster of lawyers and judges from whom arbitrators could be selected. 

But NGOs question whether that would really change the profile of arbitrators, and lawyers say any restriction in the number of trade lawyers being appointed could mean there were not enough qualified people available to sit on panels. 

Some European politicians and NGOs have said it would be best to leave this kind of investor redress out of the treaty all together. The United States and European Union, along with business groups, oppose this on the grounds that protecting investors encourages businesses to invest overseas. 

However NGOs and academics say there is little evidence that including this protective clause has so far swayed companies to make investments they would otherwise not: Bergan noted that Brazil, one of the world's largest recipients of inward investment, has refused to sign up for such clauses. 

An EU spokesman was unable to identify any investment which a company had approved or abandoned because of the existence or absence of an investor clause. 

(Reporting by Tom Bergin; Editing by Sophie Walker) 

 

Hank Paulson says China risks 'real damage' to economy 

By Tom Mitchell in Beijing, 

Financial Times (FT.Com) 

14 June 2015 07:36, 

The Chinese government risks "real damage" to the economy if it does not hasten reform of China's state-owned enterprises and overhaul a debt-fuelled growth model, Hank Paulson warns. 

For more than two decades the former US treasury secretary and Goldman Sachs chief has worked closely with pivotal Chinese political figures such as Wang Qishan, currently head of the Chinese Communist party's anti-graft bureau, and visits Beijing frequently. 

"Until the state-owned enterprises are put on a level and competitive playing field, it's going to be difficult to have the marketplace work efficiently in some key sectors of the economy," Mr Paulson told the Financial Times during a visit to the Chinese capital. "Reform of the SOEs has been moving too slowly." 

At a party conclave in 2013, President Xi Jinping pledged that market forces would play a "decisive role" in the Chinese economy, presaging what appeared to be a renewed drive to reform the state companies that still dominate critical sectors such as energy, finance and telecommunications. 

But two years later there has been little progress on state-sector reform even as economic growth slows to its lowest level in a quarter-century and overall debt levels, now at 250 per cent of gross domestic product, continue to climb. 

As a banker in the mid-1990s, Mr Paulson was involved in the initial public offerings of state giants such as China Mobile, now the world's largest mobile network operator, on the Hong Kong stock exchange. 

But the Chinese government typically retained more than three-quarters of their equity and is reluctant to allow private competition in so-called "strategic sectors", let alone sell down its stakes in the companies that occupy the commanding heights of the economy. 

"[Jobs and growth] have to come from the private sector," Mr Paulson said. "You have to free up sectors like finance and energy and telecommunications and really open up the services market. There will be real magic when they do that." 

In its effort to contain the country's dangerous debt bubble, Beijing has recently authorised local governments to issue bonds for the first time in order to refinance an estimated Rmb22tn ($3.5tn) worth of off-balance sheet debts run up by local government finance vehicles. In the wake of the global financial crisis, the central government looked the other way as such vehicles borrowed heavily to invest in infrastructure and prop up overall economic growth. 

"The leverage at municipal level is not sustainable," Mr Paulson said. "There are obviously some real losses there. Today they are manageable, but the longer you prolong this there's a much greater danger that this will spill over and do real damage to the economy." 

The former US treasury secretary pointed to a Bilateral Investment Treaty currently being negotiated by Beijing and Washington as an important potential "lever" for further reform, similar to how then-Chinese premier Zhu Rongji used accession to the World Trade Organisation to force painful reforms on reluctant state firms and bureaucrats in the late 1990s. 

According to people close to the BIT discussions, the two sides have recently exchanged "negative lists" that would clearly define which areas in each country are off-limits to foreign investment. 

The US is pushing for "ambitious" or short negative lists that could rekindle enthusiasm among multinationals frustrated by Chinese market access restrictions and a much tougher regulatory environment. 

"Because it's become more challenging to do business in China, [US companies] are no longer such vocal advocates for the importance of the US-China economic relationship," Mr Paulson said. "Congress is hearing about the problems rather than the opportunities." 

Additional reporting by Shawn Donnan in Washington 

 

BSE case puts Irish export beef at risk 

John Mooney 

The Sunday Times 

14 June 2015, 

THE Louth farm on which a suspected case of Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy (BSE) was found last week had a previous outbreak of the disease in 2002. 

The Irish Department of Agriculture is trying to establish if the farm, near Louth village, was properly decontaminated after the first outbreak, which required the destruction of its entire herd. 

BSE, commonly known as mad cow disease, has a long incubation period, of about two to eight years, and can survive in cattle feed silos and bins if they are not decontaminated properly. It is highly resistant to normal cleansing techniques. 

While officials are trying to establish if the cow ate contaminated feed, they stress Joseph McArdle, the animal's owner, is not suspected of any wrongdoing or negligence. McArdle owns a herd of 120 Rotbunt cows, a pedigree dairy breed from Germany. 

Last week's case was discovered after a five-year-old cow was taken ill on Monday. The animal had shown signs of aggression before it became unable to walk, one symptom of the disease. The case is considered particularly unusual in that BSE usually develops in older cattle. 

The affected cow was tested for BSE on Monday after it was slaughtered, in accordance with regulations which require tests be conducted on all cattle aged over four years when they die. The Irish agriculture department opened a full investigation when routine tests showed a likely positive on Tuesday morning. Investigators are awaiting the results of further tests, but believe the animal was BSE positive. 

Three calves to the cow have been slaughtered as a precaution. It had been the practice to destroy the entire herd in which a case of BSE is found, but this no longer deemed necessary. 

Any animals born around the same time that might have eaten contaminated feed will also be culled. Once the cow is confirmed as having BSE, it may have an impact on Ireland's accreditation of "negligible risk status" afforded only last week by the World Organisation for Animal Health. 

A confirmed BSE case would require Ireland to enforce controls for a number of years more and almost certainly result in being re-designated as a "controlled risk status" country. The Co Louth case represents a setback for the Irish beef industry. Last February, Ireland became the only EU state permitted to export beef to America, following a 17-year ban. 

Irish farmers were jubilant when the trade ban was lifted, hoping to export 20,000 tonnes of beef worth €100m this year alone. China had also opened up its markets to Irish beef. 

At the height of the epidemic in the early 1990s, BSE affected thousands of cows across Europe. It has been controlled in Ireland since the disease was first discovered in 1989. There were 333 BSE cases reported in Ireland in 2002, but none last year. A cattle movement monitoring system tracks every animal in the national herd. 

Ireland was among the first European countries to introduce controls to detect and eliminate the disease. 

These measures were increased following the identification of variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (vCJD), the human form of mad cow disease, which is fatal. It is still not known how this disease is transmitted to humans. 

Simon Coveney, the Irish agriculture minister, has said the Co Louth case appeared to be an isolated one and emphasised there was no food safety risk. 

The agriculture department said that it was carrying out a detailed examination into all relevant factors in this case, including a full epidemiological investigation. "It is important to note that there is no food-safety risk here and it is our rigorous control systems which identified this case," it said. 

 

House votes to repeal country-of-origin labeling on meat 

Mary Clare Jalonick 

Pekin Daily Times 

13 June 2015, 

Under threat of trade retaliation from Canada and Mexico, the House has voted to repeal a law requiring country-of-origin labels on packages of beef, pork and poultry. 

The World Trade Organization rejected a U. S. appeal last month, ruling that the labels that say where animals were born, raised and slaughtered are discriminatory against the two U. S. border countries. Both have said they plan to ask the WTO for permission to impose billions of dollars in tariffs on American goods. 

The House voted 300-131 late Wednesday to repeal labels that tell consumers what countries the meat is from - for example, "born in Canada, raised and slaughtered in the United States" or "born, raised and slaughtered in the United States." The Senate has yet to act. The WTO ruled against the labels last year, prompting the appeal that was again rejected in May. The Obama administration has already revised the labels once to try to comply with previous WTO rulings, and Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack has said it's now up to Congress to change the law to avoid retaliation from the two countries. 

The law was included in the 2002 and 2008 farm bills at the behest of northern U. S. ranchers who compete with the Canadian cattle industry. It also was backed by consumer advocates who say it helps shoppers know where their food comes from. Supporters have called on the U. S. government to negotiate with Canada and Mexico to find labels acceptable to all countries. 

In a statement Thursday, a spokesman for U. S. Trade Representative Michael Froman said the Obama administration "has long taken the position that one way to end this dispute is by repeal, but we do not consider that this is the only way Congress could bring the United States into compliance with its obligations." Canada and Mexico have opposed the labeling because it causes their animals to be segregated from those of U. S. origin - a costly process that has led some U. S.companies to stop buying exports. 

Meat processors who buy animals from abroad as well as many others in the U. S. meat industry have called for a repeal of the law they have fought for years, including unsuccessfully in federal court. They say it's burdensome and costly for producers and retailers. 

House Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio, said after the vote that the last thing American farmers need "is for Congress to sit idly by as international bureaucrats seek to punish them through retaliatory trade policies that could devastate agriculture as well as other industries." The bill would go beyond just the muscle cuts of red meat that were covered under the WTO case, repealing country-of-origin labeling for poultry, ground beef and ground pork. The chicken industry has said the labeling doesn't make much sense for poultry farmers because the majority of chicken consumed in the United States is hatched, raised and processed domestically. 

The legislation would leave in place country-of-origin labeling requirements for several other commodities, including lamb, venison, seafood, fruits and vegetables and some nuts. 

Canada and Mexico have said that if they are allowed by the WTO, they may impose retaliatory measures such as tariffs against a variety of U. S. imports. Their list includes food items like beef, pork, cheese, corn, cherries, maple syrup, chocolate and pasta, plus non-agricultural goods such as mattresses, wooden furniture and jewelry. The retaliatory measures could total more than $3 billion, the countries said. 

According to USTR spokesman Andrew Bates, the WTO is expected to consider Canada and Mexico's requests later this month. The United States will then object, sending the matter to WTO arbitration. 

"We will closely consult with Congress and interested stakeholders about possible next steps," Bates said. 

The Canadian government said the vote was a positive move. 

"The only way for the United States to avoid billions in retaliation by late summer is to ensure legislation repealing (country of origin labeling) passes the Senate and is signed by the president," said Canadian Minister of Agriculture and Agri-Food Gerry Ritz.

 

Airbus seeks taxpayer loan 

John Collingridge 

sundaytimes.co.uk 

14 June 2015 02:01, 

AIRBUS has asked for a multimillion-pound injection of British taxpayer funds to support a new version of its A380 double-decker aircraft. 

The Toulouse-based aerospace giant is understood to have approached the business department for a fresh round of repayable launch investment (RLI) to equip the huge plane with new engines. However, the business secretary Sajid Javid is believed to have demanded a firm business case before committing funds. 

The A380, which began commercial flights in 2007, was funded with about €3bn (£1.9bn) of support from France, Germany, Spain and Britain. The UK's £530m of RLI is due to be repaid through royalties when the programme makes a profit. 

However, poor orders mean that this has yet to happen. Airbus relies heavily on just a handful of customers, notably the Gulf airline Emirates. The payments are at the heart of a dispute with US rival Boeing over state subsidies, which has preoccupied the World Trade Organisation for a decade. 

The A380 programme employs thousands of workers in Britain. The wings are built in Broughton, Flintshire, and shipped to Toulouse. 

Rolls-Royce supplies Trent 900 engines for the aircraft, and is widely expected to supply new, more fuel-efficient engines should Airbus commit to the A380neo. Rolls has received as much as £450m of RLI for its Trent engines. 

The move is part of a drive by Airbus to garner support from its four home nations for a new version of the 550-seat aircraft. Ministers will meet Airbus tomorrow at the Paris air show, where they are likely to discuss the programme. 

Airbus said any talks with government were confidential. The business department declined to comment. 

 

 

Protectionism will not help our nation's ports 

Dhaka Tribune 

14 June 2015, 

Its recent statement that allowing India to use Chittagong and Mongla ports goes against the country's interest, is more of the same from the National Committee to Protect Oil, Gas, Mineral Resources, Power and Port. 

This organisation and others like it perform an important public-interest service by advocating environmental risks and objections on important issues, such as the Rampal power plant. 

However, such work is harmed by the making of arbitrary, unsubstantiated statements that defy common-sense and logic. 

It is self-evident that the purpose and goal of ports is to facilitate and grow trade and help the national economy. The success of the world's leading ports in Rotterdam and Singapore directly depends on encouraging as many different countries as possible to use their facilities. 

Encouraging Indian companies and ships to use Bangladesh's ports is a policy to be welcomed, not resisted. 

It is in the national economic interest of Bangladesh to encourage and expand our nation's ports. As India is our largest neighbour and a key partner, it makes sense to encourage it to be a major customer. 

It will be better for our future economic growth and national interest that Bangladesh invests in and encourages the growth of our own ports. Failing to do so will only lead to such trade and activity going to ports in competitor nations. 

The government should not only push ahead with plans to expand Chittagong and Mongla ports, but actively pursue the interest shown by companies from China, Netherlands and UAE in building a major new deep sea port in Bangladesh. 
