China: Iron and steel association rejects global blame for glut
Steel groups say trade pacts fail to protect US
Global clothing and footwear trade to drop by 1.5%.
Xi to give no new ground at Paris talks
Official sees no settlement of Russia–EU cases in WTO in 2015
Coal power plants: OECD agreement could dent Japan's exports
TPP to negatively impact Brazil agriculture: official
Macri will make a difference beyond Argentina; OPINION
 
China: Iron and steel association rejects global blame for glut
Zhong Nan
26 November 2015
China Daily-US Edition
The China Iron and Steel Industry Association has rejected international industry claims that a global glut in supplies is the direct result of robust growth in Chinese steel exports.
Wang Liqun, the CISA's vice-chairman, said it strongly disagreed with a joint statement by nine foreign counterparts that claimed the Chinese steel industry "is the predominant global contributor" to the world's steel industry suffering "a crisis of overcapacity".
The rival associations - from countries including the United States, Canada and Brazil - released the statement earlier this month, expressing opposition to China's ongoing trade practices and claiming they had contravened World Trade Organization rules.
In a statement on Wednesday, Wang said China's steel industry has become a victim of trade protectionism.
He said the international industry's collective behavior amounted to unnecessary steel industry conflict, and that the statement was actually beyond the normal remits of such associations, regardless of the fact the sector had entered what must be considered one of the most competitive periods in its history.
"To simply attribute the difficulties in one country or region to Chinese enterprises is irresponsible," said Wang.
"It does not solve the difficulties facing the industry and does little to promote the healthy development of the global steel market."
He said the nine associations also published what he described as a perfunctory statement without any prior communication with China.
The CISA's stance, he said, was that while overcapacity remains a common issue globally, solutions require concerted efforts by all parties working together.
Over the past decade, the Chinese government and the country's steel enterprises have attempted various measures to resolve its own industry overcapacity.
Obsolete facilities have been shut down, which at the same time has helped tackle ongoing environmental protection issues.
Industry figures showed that 77.8 million metric tons of crude steel capacity has been cut nationally since 2011, with more expected.
China exported 93.87 million tons of steel last year, a 46 percent rise, and the CISA has predicted the figure will exceed 110 million tons this year.
But based on market demand, the Chinese steel mills cut output by 2.23 percent on a year-on-year basis from January to October, which represented a reduction of more than 15 million tons.
CISA's Secretary-General Liu Zhenjiang accepted that rising Chinese steel exports this year have affected certain markets, but said output adjustments had been made.
"It cannot be denied the country's increased exports have driven market forces," said Liu.
"But Chinese steel products have continued to be popular in export destinations because they are competitively priced."
China Daily Information Company
Steel groups say trade pacts fail to protect US
Emilia David
26 November 2015
American Metal Market
Free-trade agreements have largely failed to shield U.S. steelmakers from the effects of other countries’ trade policies that have led to overcapacity, steel industry groups said.
NEW YORK — Free-trade agreements have largely failed to shield U.S. steelmakers from the effects of other countries’ trade policies that have led to overcapacity, steel industry groups said.
The industry is suffering from government intervention in steel production, particularly in China, executives from the American Iron and Steel Institute and the Steel Manufacturers Association(SMA) said in separate testimony to the U.S. International Trade Commission (ITC).
“None of these trade agreements have addressed the most critical policy issues in global steel trade, namely foreign government interventionist policies that have fueled massive and growing global overcapacity in steel, particularly in China, and the resulting surges in steel imports into the U.S. market,” said AISI senior vice president for public policy and general counsel Kevin M. Dempsey.
SMA president Philip K. Bell said China is at the center of the overcapacity crisis as “explosive growth was directly encouraged and made possible by the Chinese government’s provisions of billions of dollars of subsidies to its steel industry.”
While free-trade agreements have largely failed to curb overcapacity and prevent dumping, there have been some benefits to U.S. steelmakers, Dempsey said. “Nafta (North American Free Trade Agreement) has been the most successful for the North American steel industry, providing increased access to our two closest and most significant markets. It has resulted in strengthened North American supply chains, especially with key customer groups such as the automotive industry.”
But he said the Uruguay Round agreements, which led to the creation of the World Trade Organization, have been less positive for U.S. producers since the WTO dispute settlement system “has limited the ability of domestic industry to obtain relief from unfairly traded imports.”
The SMA was cooler toward most recent agreements, although Bell noted that the United States at least does not have a large steel trade deficit with the Nafta region.
“We believe the U.S. trade agreements have resulted in lower U.S. import tariffs on most steel products and greater restrictions on the application of U.S. trade laws, but they have done nothing to prevent foreign government interventions which have created massive amounts of global steelmaking overcapacity,” Bell said. "Ultimately, we believe that the effectiveness and economic impact of trade agreements should be evaluated based on their ability to promote domestic jobs, competitiveness and net exports."
The ITC was directed by Trade Promotion Authority legislation to investigate the impact of bilateral and multilateral trade agreements on the U.S. economy. It is scheduled to present a report to the House Ways and Means Committee and the Senate Finance Committee by June 29 next year.
Emilia David 
Metal Bulletin Limited
Global clothing and footwear trade to drop by 1.5%.
Leonie Barrie
25 November 2015
Just-Style
Global expenditure on clothing and footwear is expected to decline by 1.5% inUS dollar terms in 2015 to its lowest level since 2011, according to a new report, with the decline largely due to depreciations of the currencies in a number of major supplying countries.
Depreciations against the US dollar have made exports from these countries cheaper in US dollar terms, and this has enabled suppliers in these countries to remain competitive as sourcing locations.
In China, for instance, the value of the renminbi fell against the US dollar by 4% between October 2014 and October 2015 after a sustained appreciation between July 2005 and October 2014.
As a result, buyers who source from China hope to be able to negotiate reduced prices. Chinese producers may also have to reduce their prices in order to remain competitive with their counterparts in Vietnam, given that the latter are set to gain from preferential access to the US market under the impending Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) agreement.
In India, the rupee depreciated by 13% against the US dollar between 2012 and2014. And during the first nine months of 2015, it was down by 4% compared with the corresponding period a year earlier to its weakest level on record.
The depreciation of the rupee has made Indian products cheaper in US dollar terms and therefore more attractive to foreign buyers.
In Turkey, the lira depreciated against the US dollar by 13% in 2014. And during the first nine months of 2015, it plunged by 19% compared with the corresponding period a year earlier to its weakest level on record.
However, Turkey exports most of its clothing to the EU and most of this trade is conducted in euros rather than in US dollars. In 2014 the lira depreciated against the euro at much the same rate as it did against the US dollar. But in the first nine months of 2015 it was down against the euro by only 1% compared with the corresponding period of the previous year.
Consequently, with little movement in the value of the lira against the euro, there was little improvement in Turkey's competitiveness in European markets during this nine-month period.
Also, most of Turkey's imports of fabric for clothing production are sourced from Asia – and most of this trade is conducted in US dollars. As a result, the cost of Turkish fabric imports has risen considerably in US dollar terms as the lira has depreciated against the US dollar and this has affected the profitability of Turkish clothing manufacturers.
On a more positive note, the euro depreciated against the US dollar by a sharp18% in the first nine months of 2015. Consequently, Turkish exporters believe that this will lead to an improvement in their sales to the EU in 2016 as European buyers look to see if they can make savings by purchasing their goods from Turkey in euros rather than from Asia in US dollars.
Exchange rate fluctuations represent one of a number of factors which have weighed on the global economy in the first half of 2015. Other factors include: a slowdown in demand for imports in China and a number of other emerging markets; and low prices of oil and a number of other commodities, including cotton.
Furthermore, growth in merchandise trade in the coming months could be hampered by a sharper than expected slowdown in economic growth in developing economies, the possibility of an interest rate rise in the US, and unanticipated costs associated with the migration crisis in Europe.
Nevertheless, consumer expenditure on clothing and footwear is forecast to grow again in 2016 and accelerate during 2017-19. This should lead to a pick-up in global clothing trade.
Also expected to contribute to a pick-up in trade are the low oil and raw material prices seen throughout much of 2015. By 2016, low raw material prices will have filtered through the supply chain and this could lead to a drop in unit prices.
The full report on "Trade and trade policy: the world's leading clothing exporters and key markets" is published in the latest issue of Global Apparel Markets from Textiles Intelligence.
Aroq Limited
Xi to give no new ground at Paris talks
Li Jing jing.li@scmp.com
26 November 2015
South China Morning Post
The president will be among world leaders adding political weight to the climate change conference, vice foreign minister says
President Xi Jinping will bring no new concessions to the negotiating table when he attends key UN climate change talks in Paris next week, a senior Chinese diplomat said yesterday.
World leaders were going to France “to lend political impetus” to the meeting but were “not there for negotiations”, said Vice Foreign Minister Liu Zhenmin .
“The Paris conference is not about tabling new proposals – it’s about narrowing differences and reaching agreement on the basis of existing proposals,” he said.
Liu also called for countries to be “realistic” about the different capabilities and responsibilities of rich and poor nations.
His remarks came as a White House official said US President Barack Obama would meet Xi and India’s Prime Minister Narendra Modi on the first day of the Paris talks on November 30.
Obama’s meetings with Xi and Modi at the start of the two-week summit would “send a strong message to the world about their strong commitment to climate change”, White House Deputy National Security Adviser Ben Rhodes said.
The French ambassador to China, Maurice Gourdault-Montagne, said the talks would use a 51-page text prepared by negotiators as their basis, and numerous options would be debated. France, as chair of the summit, wanted any agreement to be legally binding.
He said a review mechanism requiring countries to increase emission cuts every five years needed to be a key element in the new climate agreement, dealing with the post-2020 period.
France also wants countries to agree on transparency of emission reporting, climate financing, carbon markets and long-term commitments to cut emissions.
“If by December 12, we don’t have the major elements in the agreement – especially the review mechanism – it will be a huge problem,” the ambassador said in Beijing yesterday.
China would play a “pivotal” role, bridging developing and developed countries on these issues, and a successful summit would be in China’s interest, he said.
Most of the key elements were included in a joint statement between France and China, which set the bar high for their ambitions, he said.
China pledged last year to peak carbon output by around 2030, reduce dependence on fossil fuels, and offer help to poor countries adapting to the impact of global warming.
Xi is to have a private dinner with French President Francois Hollande on November 29. They would discuss issues including counterterrorism and global governance ahead of China’s hosting of the G20 meeting in Hangzhou next year, the French ambassador said.
Additional reporting by Agence France-Presse and Reuters
President Xi Jinping will meet his US counterpart Barack Obama on the first day of the Paris talks, the White House says.
South China Morning Post Publishers Limited
Coal power plants: OECD agreement could dent Japan's exports
25 November 2015
Nikkei Report
The partial ban on official financing for coal-fired power plant exports that OECD members agreed to on Nov. 17 was a long time in the making. And it just might end up pushing more business to China.
After the agreement was reached, U.S. President Barack Obama thanked Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe for Japan's leadership in clean energy and environmental issues. The two were in Manila for meetings of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum.
It is believed that the U.S. and Japan compromised on the financing issue before members of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development reached their agreement. Member countries had struggled to find common ground on the issue.
In March 2014, the U.S. proposed that the OECD impose restrictions on countries that export coal-fired power plants and provide financial support to the buyer.
Coal emissions are a major contributor to global warming.
Washington had called for broadly eliminating loans for coal power plants, but the Japanese government did not want the country's exports to suffer. The Japanese government is counting on infrastructure exports for the country's own economic growth.
In the end, Japan got almost all of what it wanted, according to a high-ranking official of the country's Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry.
The ban on loans for coal-fired power plants does not extend to what are known as ultra-supercritical pressure systems. Japan has taken a leading role in this technology.
The ban also does not cover loans to poorer, developing countries buying small supercritical and subcritical power plants, which are less efficient than the ultra-supercritical systems.
The Japan Bank for International Cooperation from 2003 through 2014 provided financial support for 23 deals in which Japanese coal power technology was exported. Most of the loans went for projects using the supercritical and subcritical technology. One of the export deals was for ultra-supercritical technology.
Japan is planning to export more ultra-supercritical systems and other highly efficient facilities during the current fiscal year and beyond.
The trade ministry official is confident the new restrictions will have little negative impact on Japan. "We will focus on exporting the advanced power facilities," he said.
South Korea, another big infrastructure exporter and OECD member, meanwhile, specializes in low-efficiency power plants. Based on the new restrictions, it will also have to focus on exporting high-efficiency coal stations.
Asia has another big infrastructure exporter, however, and China is neither an OECD member nor a provider of highly efficient coal plants; it will be able to continue exporting and financing high-emission facilities.
The reality in developing Asia -- where low-cost, low-efficiency power plants are preferred -- is likely to favor China. The country has received more than twice as many orders as Japan has, according to a source. And if China more aggressively promotes its lower-cost power generation technologies, it may threaten Japan's export strategy.
Nikkei Inc.
Official sees no settlement of Russia–EU cases in WTO in 2015
25 November 2015
Prime News
HANOI, Nov 25 (PRIME) -- A pretrial settlement of the mutual claims of Russia and the E.U. considered by the World Trade Organization (WTO) is unlikely to take place in 2015, First Deputy Economic Development Minister Alexei Likhachyov told PRIME on Wednesday.
Russia and the E.U. have seven claims under consideration of the WTO. The E.U. disputes Russia’s protectionist measure called a “car recycling fee” on imported cars, pork import ban, anti-dumping fees on light commercial vehicles (LCVs) and tariffs on agricultural goods imports. Russia contests the E.U. third energy package, ammonia nitrate and welded pipe import duties.
Economic Development Minister Alexei Ulyukayev earlier arranged discussion of some of these disputes with E.U. Commissioner for Trade Cecilia Malmstrom on December 1.
“I think that no definite decision will be made until December 1. We have many times demonstrated our readiness to follow the track of a pretrial settlement to the E.U., I mean, their addressing us regarding the duties, firstly, and our third energy questions to them. But we have seen no active advances from their side,” Likhachyov said.
He said that the negotiations will continue in 2016.
ZAO PRIME
No Reason to Fear Trans-Pacific Pact, Japan Govt Tells Farmers -- Market Talk
25 November 2015
Dow Jones Institutional News
The government of Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe on Wednesday unveiled a policy package designed to ready the country for eventual market opening under the Trans-Pacific Partnership free trade pact. The primary purpose of the policy package is to reassure farmers, especially rice growers, that there's nothing to fear about TPP. The policy package says that any increases in rice imports from the U.S. will be offset by matching increases in government purchases of domestic rice, thereby minimizing any impact on the domestic market. Abe's government hopes to have the agreement ratified by the parliament as early as next year.
Dow Jones Newswires
TPP to negatively impact Brazil agriculture: official
Gaoxing
26 November 2015
Xinhua News Agency
RIO DE JANEIRO, Nov. 25 (Xinhua) -- The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) could have a negative impact on Brazil's agricultural sector, according to Brazilian Foreign Affairs Minister Mauro Vieira.
The shift in commercial flows caused by the TPP would not have a "very large" impact on Brazilian industry, Vieira told the Senate's foreign relations committee on Tuesday.
He said the wide-reaching free-trade agreement could lead to "damage in the agricultural sector" for Brazil and many developing countries.
To counter such negative effects, the foreign minister said developing countries should push for the conclusion of the Doha Round of talks and rely on the multilateralism inherent in the World Trade Organization (WTO), which will discuss the future of the Doha talks at a conference in Nairobi next month.
"Brazil maintains its belief in multilateralism and the WTO," Vieira told the Senate.
According to Vieira, "there are countries that are seeking the end of the Doha Round," while others, like Brazil, "want it to continue as it is important to consider the interests of developing countries" in international trade.
The TPP, agreed in October 2015, groups the U.S., Japan, Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore and Vietnam, representing 40 percent of global GDP.
Xinhua News Agency
Macri will make a difference beyond Argentina; OPINION
By Daniel Lansberg-Rodriguez
26 November 2015
Financial Times
This is how socialism ends, not with a bang but with a squeaker. After a commanding lead during the run-up to Sunday's presidential run-off election, in the end conservative challenger Mauricio Macri 's victory came down to only 200,000 votes in a nation of more than 40m. The defeat of Cristina Fernández's political machine has prompted euphoria in much of Buenos Aires. Once it dies down, the president-elect will have his work cut out .
In democratic Argentina, nonpersons presidents are the rarest of birds; none has finished a term in office. Mr Macri does not command a majority of Senate seats (although he can block hostile legislation). He has relatively little support among Argentina's powerful provincial governors.
Meanwhile, much like Juan Domingo Perón, whose style shifted from militant nationalism to populist socialism, Peronism is amorphous, more patronage than ideology. It will recover.
Mr Macri may need time to transform the economic wasteland he inherits from predecessors who were happy to default on their country's debt and shield inefficient industries from competition. But the effects of his victory may be sooner felt outside Argentina.
As the socialist tide in Latin America has receded, dragged back by the death or retirement of its charismatic leaders and the turning of the commodity cycle, it has left many a bloated government high and dry - in Brazil, Venezuela and Chile as well as Argentina. Still, Kirchnerism is the first to expire.
As the largest Hispanic country in South America, Argentina casts a sizeable shadow, and Mr Macri has promised to re-engage with the US and strengthen ties with the EU.
Just as the rise of Hugo Chávez in Venezuela helped bring populist movements to power across the continent, Argentina's choice of a market-friendly pragmatism may galvanise opposition movements elsewhere.
In Venezuela's legislative elections next month, Mr Macri's victory has shown a nervous electorate that real change is possible through the ballot box. There is even a remote chance it might strengthen the resolve of Brazilians seeking to impeach Dilma Rousseff, or persuade Bolivians that there can be workable alternatives, ahead of February's referendum on scrapping term limits for Evo Morales.
Beyond what he represents, the importance of Mr Macri lies in what he can do. The past two decades has seen the proliferation of supranational organisations in South America, which has weakened US influence over the sovereign affairs of their members. This, though, has led to an erosion of values. A code of silence has prevailed as like-minded nations refused to call out one another on the chipping away of democratic protections, free media and human rights.
Nowhere is this as visible as in Venezuela, now governed by Nicolás Maduro, a gaffe-prone Pierrot who succeeded Mr Chávez and displays a penchant for collecting political prisoners. Mr Maduro is the most visible symptom of the region's troubling slide towards authoritarianism.
Mr Macri invited Lilian Tintori, the wife of jailed Venezuelan opposition leader Leopoldo López , to his victory speech. He has promised to invoke a "democracy clause" and suspend Venezuela from the Mercosur trade bloc during a summit in Paraguay , days after he takes office. The odds are stacked against success. All but one of Mercosur's other voting members are allied with Mr Maduro, and Brazil has already made its opposition to suspension clear. Still, standing up to Mr Maduro would be worth it. It is the one promise that Mr Macri can deliver unilaterally. Forcing the conversation would signal to the US and the EU that Mr Macri is the future, and that the future is bright.
The writer teaches Latin American business at the Kellogg School of Management
The Financial Times Limited (AAIW/EIW) 