WTO mini-Ministerial at Davos on Jan 24
World Bank sees slower track for global trade engine
China's rare earths quotas go, possible new moves stoke supply doubts
Commerce Says It May Slash AD Rates Under First China Solar Case, Following Review
Chinese solar sector under renewed scrutiny
Industry opposes anti-dumping duty levied on pen drives
Clearly free trade agenda for Latvian Presidency
U.S. free trade critics, supporters kick off battle for public opinion
China pushes for bigger Latin America, Caribbean role
EU pushes back against TTIP trade agreement secrecy claims
The U.S.-led global economic order is dying
 
WTO mini-Ministerial at Davos on Jan 24 
 
New Delhi, Jan 8 (PTI) Trade Ministers of India, US and Australia, among other countries, will meet on January 24 on the sidelines of the World Economic Forum Summit at Davos to discuss the road-ahead for the WTO, including the post-Bali programme.

"It will be a kind of WTO mini-Ministerial meeting. About 20-22 trade ministers may attend the meeting. Commerce and Industry Minister Nirmala Sitharaman would participate besides WTO Director General Roberto Azevedo and others," an official said.

The meeting assumes significance as the 160-member body has adopted the much-delayed Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA) and agreed to find a permanent solution on the issues arising out of the implementation of food security programmes of developing countries including India.

In February, India secured a major victory at Geneva with the WTO accommodating its food security demands, leading to conclusion of an historic trade reform deal.

The official said that the ministers are expected to discuss the post-Bali work programme like implementation of the TFA and pending matters of the Doha Round during the meeting.

WEF's high-profile annual congregation of the world's rich and powerful at the Swiss ski resort town of Davos will this year is expected to host over 300 heads of state and government along with 1,500 business leaders, including more than 100 members of India Inc.

Besides Sitharaman, Coal and Power Minister Piyush Goyal would also attend the WEF event scheduled from January 20-24.

Senior government officials and top business leaders from the country are also expected to attend.

The theme of this year's annual meeting is 'The new global context' and will have Indian industrialist and Jubilant Group head Hari S Bhartia as one of the six co-chairs. PTI RR BJ TVS

 
World Bank sees slower track for global trade engine 
 
WASHINGTON, Jan 7 (Reuters) - Global trade should expand more slowly over the next decade than it did in the 30 years before the financial crisis, the World Bank said on Wednesday, citing forecasts for slower economic growth and longer-term shifts in trade patterns.

For the three decades leading up to the global financial crisis of 2007-2009, trade had expanded at a steady clip of about 7 percent a year.

But trade growth levels have fallen to about half that for the past two years, and should only rise to about 5 percent over the medium-term, four World Bank economists said in an essay.

International trade helped the global economy tide over rough spots in the two decades before the financial crisis, when it grew nearly twice as fast as economic output. But recent data shows the trade engine is running out of steam.

The authors point to the lackluster recovery from the financial crisis, which the World Bank expects to persist. And data shows import demand levels may be a fifth lower than they would be otherwise even five years after an economic crisis.

Weak spending on investment since the crisis, especially in the euro zone, has also sapped trade growth. Investment is especially reliant on imports compared to other economic drivers like consumption and government spending.

But deeper factors have also tamped down trade expansion. China's reduction of trade barriers and the fragmentation of production into global supply chains boosted trade at the end of the last century, factors that would be hard to replicate now.

Countries like the United States and China are also making more inputs for final products closer to home, the economists write.

"Global trade is growing more slowly not only because world income growth is lower, but also because trade has become less responsive to income growth," according to the essay.

Policymakers are hoping far-reaching regional and global trade pacts could help trade growth regain some lost momentum.

The World Bank said more integration of South Asia, sub-Saharan Africa and South America into global supply chains would also help.

"Drawing these parts of the world into a finer division of labor could lend renewed dynamism to trade," the bank said. (Reporting by Anna Yukhananov; Editing by David Gregorio) 
 
 
China's rare earths quotas go, possible new moves stoke supply doubts 
By Sonali Paul 
 
MELBOURNE, Jan 7 (Reuters) - China's move to scrap export quotas on rare earths, crucial in most modern technology, may not mean an end to the uncertainty over supplies because the top producer can still find ways to control shipments and influence prices, industry players said.

China, which supplies about 90 percent of the world's rare earths needs, imposed export restrictions and raised tariffs in 2010 as it sought higher prices to help cover the huge environmental costs of production and tried to encourage the growth of domestic industries that use rare earths.

Prices shot up as buyers scrambled to secure supplies, leading Japan, Europe and the United States to file a trade complaint. The World Trade Organization ruled last year that China's restrictions were discriminatory and told it to scrap the quotas and export tariffs.

In response, Beijing announced in late December it was ending the quotas.

However, that is not expected to affect supply or prices, as China has not filled its export quotas over the past three years anyway, analysts and the world's only non-Chinese producers of rare earths, Australia's Lynas Corp and U.S. firm Molycorp, said on Wednesday.

"We don't think it'll affect our volume significantly. It's not like there's going to suddenly be a flood of product coming on to the market," Lynas CEO Amanda Lacaze told Reuters.

"What is more of an issue is the sort of uncertainty overhang in the market that has been there since the WTO ruling.

We saw this in the last quarter, where we had customers drawing down inventories rather than buy fresh product."

That sent prices for various rare earths elements down by as much as 20 percent in the December quarter, Lacaze said.

Beijing is expected to unveil new regulations for rare earth mining, processing and exports, perhaps including a value-added tax to replace the export tariff, which could have some impact, Lacaze and a Molycorp spokesman said.

"There's a very, very strong market view that there will be a production or environment tax of some sort introduced in China," Lacaze told Reuters in a phone interview from Kuantan in Malaysia, where Lynas runs its rare earths separation plant.

Rare earth elements include lanthanum used in oil refineries; neodymium and praseodymium used in magnets for motors; dyprosium used in hybrid vehicles, wind turbines and stealth helicopters; and yttrium in military jet engines.

STILL IN CONTROL

American Elements, a U.S. buyer of rare earths that depends on supply from China, said Beijing had been sophisticated in coming up with policies to drive growth of domestic industries that use rare earths by controlling exports and consolidating production and processing among six state-owned entities.

American Elements CEO Michael Silver said China's plan to introduce export licences would ensure Beijing controlled supplies.

"Control through Baotou (Inner Mongolia Baotou Steel Rare-Earth Hi-Tech Co Ltd ) and the government deciding who gets the export licences should help support rare earths export prices," Silver told Reuters by phone from Colorado.

But if China decided it wanted to flood the market with rare earths, it could, he added.

That fear led investors to knock Molycorp shares down 10 percent on Tuesday after media reported China had scrapped the export quotas. Lynas's shares fell 9 percent on Tuesday but inched up on Wednesday.

Both stocks are just above record lows hit in December.

The two companies are saddled with debt and have struggled to bring their plants up to full capacity, but Lacaze said she remained confident her company would achieve a cash breakeven position in the December or March quarter. (Additional reporting by Yuka Obayashi in Tokyo; Editing by Alan Raybould) 
 
 
Commerce Says It May Slash AD Rates Under First China Solar Case, Following Review 
World Trade Online
Posted: January 7, 2015 
 
The U.S. Department of Commerce has said it may significantly lower the antidumping (AD) duties currently facing Chinese exporters of solar cells, after concluding a preliminary review of the first trade solar trade remedy order against China that was imposed in 2012.
 
Commerce said in a Jan. 2 filing that it has preliminarily found dumping margins of 1.82 percent for most exporters through its administrative review of the AD order, which examined the period of May 2012 through November 2013. The only exporters not receiving the 1.82 percent duty rate were those Commerce said had not shown they were independent from the Chinese government, which will face a heavy duty of 238.56 percent.
 
The current range of AD duties facing exporters is between 18.32 and 31.73 percent, with a weighted average of 25.96 percent assigned to companies not individually investigated who qualified for a separate rate. The original China-wide dumping margin is 249.96 percent. Commerce's preliminary findings will not have any effect until it finalizes its review, a step that is due by May but could be extended until July.
 
Commerce is weighing dropping the duties so low for the bulk of the non-government controlled solar cell exporters because of a quirk in the review's proceedings. Specifically, it found mandatory respondent Yingli had a dumping margin during the period of review of just 1.82 percent, while the other respondent that Commerce decided to individually investigate, Wuxi Suntech, was ultimately unable to prove it was not government controlled.
 
Normally, Commerce would use the weighted average dumping margin of the two privately controlled companies it selected to individually investigate in setting the rate for other firms that had proved they were not government entities. But because Yingli was the only mandatory respondent in the review found to be independent from the Chinese government, Commerce simply assigned the other private companies the same margin as Yingli.
 
Meanwhile, Commerce in its review of a parallel countervailing duty (CVD) order did not find wildly different subsidy margins than it initially had. In the final 2012 determination, the department found margins of 14.78 and 15.97 percent for two individual exporters, respectively, and assigned an average of 15.24 percent. After its preliminary administrative review, it found margins of 8.63 and 22.73 percent for the two exporters it selected -- leaving the average roughly the same at 15.68 percent.
 
The announcement comes just weeks after Commerce on Dec. 16 announced its final determination in a second set of AD and CVD cases against solar energy products from China and Taiwan, leveling high duties against both. The scope of that case against China is different than the 2012 case, covering solar panels from China regardless of where the cells originate.
 
But the lowering of the duties in the older case -- even if finalized -- may not have a major commercial impact. The petitioner in both cases, SolarWorld Americas, has complained that the original case did little to slow imports of solar energy products from China because Chinese firms reconfigured the sourcing of their cells -- specifically by importing from Taiwan -- in order to avoid being hit by the duties.
 
Still, one respondent lawyer signaled that the lowering of the duties may give Chinese exporters more flexibility in their supply chains because it would be more feasible cost-wise to use cells produced in China even though the goods would be subject to the 2012 trade remedy order.
 
Commerce's announcement was welcomed by the Coalition for Affordable Solar Energy (CASE), which represents solar array installers and other parts of the industry's supply chain in the U.S. and has opposed the trade investigations on the basis that they increase the cost of solar energy.
 
"Lowering the tariff import tax means more American consumers will be able to afford solar power and more American solar companies will be able to expand their hiring," Jigar Shah, CASE president and founder of SunEdison, in a Jan. 5 statement.
 
"While this is positive news, it does not solve the underlying problem. The U.S. solar industry remains unfairly penalized by a trade policy that inflates the cost of solar power and has already expanded to include imports from Taiwan," Shah added. "We continue to urge the governments of the United States and China to negotiate an end to the trade war for the benefit of all countries involved."
 
In a related development, Commerce has turned down a request by SolarWorld to evaluate how the alleged cyber theft of its confidential financial and strategic business information -- including with regard to the trade case -- may have impacted the AD/CVD proceedings in the 2012 investigation.
 
In a Dec. 29 letter to Timothy Brightbill, a partner at Wiley Rein and lawyer for SolarWorld, Commerce Enforcement and Compliance Director Edward Yang wrote that the allegations, while serious, did not fall within the scope of reasons that the department could use as a basis to conduct a "changed circumstances review" of the case.
 
"While these allegations raise serious concerns standing alone, the claims do not suggest that information submitted to the Department by the Government of the [People's Republic of China] or the company respondents during the course of the underlying investigations was inaccurate as a result of the alleged cyber espionage or that the alleged cyber espionage otherwise led to the AD and CVD determinations and orders being based on inaccurate information," Yang wrote.
 
Earlier last month, Commerce also said it had rejected SolarWorld's request to investigate the hacking investigations as part of the newer AD/CVD case. Specifically, SolarWorld had asked for Commerce to query the government of China in context of the CVD case -- to which Beijing is a respondent, in contrast to the AD case, which involves only the companies -- about the information it had obtained, and make an adverse inference if it failed to adequately respond. That would have potentially driven up CVD duties, but the strategy was seen as a long shot at best by lawyers close to Chinese respondents.
 
SolarWorld's claims were based on an indictment of five members of the Chinese military who allegedly hacked into the computers of six U.S. entities, including SolarWorld, during a period from 2006 to 2014.
 
The SolarWorld theft occurred in 2012 and included files with information about the company's cash flow, manufacturing metrics, production line information, costs, and privileged attorney-client communications relating to the trade litigation, according to the summary of the indictment from the Department of Justice.
 
 
Chinese solar sector under renewed scrutiny 
Nicholas Hirst; N.Hirst@europeanvoice.com 
8 January 2015
European Voice
 
Fresh probe into Chinese solar glass industry will raise questions about how the Commission dealt with China's dumping of solar panels into the EU market and the country's suitability to gain market economy status at the WTO.

The European Commission has reopened a trade investigation into the Chinese solar power sector in the face of evidence that tariffs imposed in May 2014 were too low to prevent products from being dumped onto the European market, putting more local rivals out of business.

Stakeholders have until the end of this week to submit comments on whether tariffs of up to 36% on Chinese imports of solar glass are too low, as claimed by EU Pro Sun Glass, a body representing European manufacturers of photovoltaic glass.

The 2013-14 investigation into Chinese solar glass imports was overshadowed by a parallel investigation into Chinese solar panel exporters. Like Europe’s solar glass manufacturers, solar panel makers in 2012 complained that Chinese competitors enjoyed fat subsidies allowing them to sell their products at a loss on the European market, undercutting European rivals. The danger, warned the Europeans, was that once all European competition was eliminated, the Chinese firms could dictate their price.

With an EU market worth €20 billion, the solar panel case was the largest trade case ever conducted by the Commission. Karel De Gucht, the European commissioner for trade from 2010-14, initially concluded that Chinese firms enjoyed subsidies and loans allowing them to sell at a discount of 88%. But he buckled under the pressure of lobbying by China and member states such as Germany, who were wary of hurting commercial relations with the emerging economy. A settlement was agreed with the Chinese and De Gucht also dropped an investigation into Chinese telecom imports.

The solar panel settlement, which set a minimum price for a limited volume of imports after which duties would apply, is now the subject of several legal challenges by European Union solar panel producers. They argue that the EU should have followed the United States in imposing tariffs of more than 50%.

In a double blow, EU solar panel manufacturers were further hurt by the Commission’s eventual decision to impose tariffs on imports of solar glass, an important input for EU solar panel manufacturers. With a market value of around €200 million, that investigation was far less sensitive than the solar panel case. The Commission is now reviewing whether that tariff is too low.

Such a conclusion would give further ammunition to EU firms opposed to China gaining market economy status at the World Trade Organisation. AEGIS, a coalition of 20 EU industry associations, warned in December that granting China market economy status threatened EU jobs and growth. Milan Nitzschke, spokesman of the EU solar photovoltaic manufacturers and a member of AEGIS, said: “China is as far from being a market economy as Pluto is from Earth.”

The group welcomed comments by Cecilia Malmström, the commissioner for trade, who in December suggested that China would not ‘automatically’ gain market economy status in 2016, as argued by some.
 
 
Industry opposes anti-dumping duty levied on pen drives 
Rajesh Kurup & Rahul Wadke 
8 January 2015
Business Line (The Hindu)
 
Lack of domestic capacity will impactthe demand-supply equation The government’s proposal to impose anti-dumping duties on Chinese and Taiwanese pen drives is being opposed by the industry, fearing a rise in prices that would result in grey market spread.

The sector is also confused over the provenance of the devices, while domestic companies’ lacking of the ability to manufacture these would impact the demand-supply equation.

The Directorate General of Anti-Dumping & Allied Duties (DGAD) has proposed to levy duties of $3.12 (Rs 199) per unit imported from China and $3.06 ( Rs. 195) for those from Taiwan.

DGAD will now send its findings, which were finalised after an investigation for calendar year 2012, to the finance ministry for a final decision.

‘No rationale’

“This will put a huge burden on the consumers. Also there is no rationale of imposing duty on high capacities such as 32 GB, 64 GB and 128 GB or USB 3.0 technology products where domestic players have no demonstrated presence or capability,” said Ashok Chandak, Chairman of India Electronics and Semiconductor Association.

Flash memories, manufactured in Japan and Korea, are the major costs of USB products and these devices mainly are assembled and tested in China and Taiwan, he added.

Anti-dumping duties are imposed to protect the domestic industry from unfair competition, especially on suspiciously low-priced imports or goods below cost prices.

“The bigger worry is that this will result in emergence of grey market in the country, not to mention the direct impact it would have on prices,” said Anwar Shirpurwala, Executive Director at Manufacturers’ Association of Information Technology (MAIT).

According to industry data, the present demand for USB sticks in India is at about 25-30 million units per year, of which nearly 99 per cent is imports.

Global firms

“We are confused as to what is Chinese or Taiwanese. These are all global manufacturers – Japanese, South Korean and US firms – and these companies are assembling these devices,” said Vishnu Bhandari, CEO of IT distributor Supertron Electronics. According to the industry, flash drives are IT products covered under WTO Information Technology Agreement List and no custom duty is levied, even though 6 per cent countervailing duty is levied on the MRP.

At present, domestic prices of these drives are at par with global prices, while there are about 20,000 channel partners selling these in the country, according to Suresh Pansari, director at distributor Rashi Peripherals.

 
Clearly free trade agenda for Latvian Presidency 
7 January 2015
Bulletin Quotidien Europe
 
Brussels, 06/01/2015 (Agence Europe) - The Latvian Presidency, which took over the reins of the EU Council of Ministers for six months on 1 January, is placing progress in the free trade negotiations with the US (TTIP), Japan and Vietnam at the heart of its trade policy.

“Greater market openness, as well as increasing trade and investment flows, are all essential for promoting growth and economic recovery across the whole of the EU, in line with the needs of industrial and other EU policies”, the Latvian Presidency stated in its work programme published on its website on Tuesday 6 January.

On the bilateral level, the Presidency also wants to move forwards with implementation of the free trade agreements with Georgia, Moldova and Ukraine, and to support the necessary procedures for approving the free trade agreements with Canada (CETA) and Singapore.

On the multilateral level, the Presidency wants to progress the WTO Doha agenda, following on from the Bali mini-agreement that was concluded at the end of 2013, and from the breakthrough that came at the end of 2014 for implementing the agreement on trade facilitation. As well as the Doha negotiations, the Presidency will encourage the negotiations for an international trade in services agreement (TiSA), the negotiations for the green goods initiative, and finalisation of the review of the WTO information technology agreement (ITA).

Also on the multilateral level, the Presidency will encourage the ongoing WTO accession negotiations with Algeria, Azerbaijan, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Kazakhstan and Serbia. It will also support the preparations for the 10th WTO ministerial conference in Nairobi (Kenya) in December.

In addition, the Latvian Presidency will monitor implementation of the new generalised system of preferences (GSP) scheme set up at the beginning of 2014 - particularly as regards the GSP+.

Lastly, the Presidency promises to ensure that EU trade policy continues to guarantee enforcement of the EU's rights under existing rules and to promote enhanced access to world markets, working - on the legislative level - for the benefit of all EU stakeholders.

The meeting of European trade ministers is scheduled for 7 May. (EH)

 
U.S. free trade critics, supporters kick off battle for public opinion 
 
WASHINGTON, Jan 8 (Reuters) - Supporters and critics of free trade are readying for a bitter battle this year over major free trade deals and legislation to fast-track trade agreements through the U.S. Congress.

A bill to give the White House fast-track power, allowing Congress a yes-or-no vote on trade deals in exchange for setting negotiating goals, did not advance in the last Congress but new legislation will be introduced in 2015.

Unions, progressive lawmakers, consumer advocates, environmentalists and social justice and human rights lobbyists will kick off a campaign on Thursday to oppose fast-track.

"It's the start of the new Congress and we are up, up and away," said Democrat Rosa DeLauro, citing plans for speeches, letters and meetings, "the whole nine yards of activity."

But the administration and business groups, who see the Republican-controlled Congress as the best chance in years for a trade agenda encompassing deals worth nearly $500 billion a year to the global economy, are pushing the opposite view.

In a speech next Wednesday, U.S. Chamber of Commerce President Thomas Donohue will name fast-track, or trade promotion authority, as a top priority for the group, which represents more than 3 million American companies. The Business Roundtable and National Association of Manufacturers are lobbying too.

"We are going to be putting a major push, a major campaign, behind getting trade promotion done as soon as possible," said the Chamber's senior international policy director, Christopher Wenk. "It's going to be around the clock."

Senior officials are reaching out to Democrats on trade, preparing a snapshot for each state spelling out how each will gain under the 12-nation Trans-Pacific Partnership, with a particular focus on labor and environmental protections, a key concern for many Democrats.

"TPP will be the most progressive trade agreement in history," a U.S. Trade Representative spokesman said.

Social media, newspaper advertisements and opinion pieces, pamphlets, face-to-face meetings and rallies will be used by both sides as the United States moves to complete the TPP and make progress on the proposed Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership with Europe.

Trade experts say fast-track is key to closing those deals, as it gives trading partners confidence Congress will not pick apart agreements.

Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell said on Wednesday Republicans planned to move quickly with fast-track legislation and called on President Barack Obama to stand up to opponents.

For their part, unions plan to mobilize members to write letters and telephone their members of Congress to tell them they think free trade is bad for jobs.

"We want to engage our members in the fast-track fight back in their districts," said Barbara Coufal, senior official at the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, which has more than 1.6 million members. (Reporting by Krista Hughes; Editing by Steve Orlofsky) 
 
 
China pushes for bigger Latin America, Caribbean role 
8 January 2015
Agence France Presse
 
Chinese President Xi Jinping pledged to increase cooperation with Latin America and the Caribbean Thursday as he opened a forum in Beijing with leaders from 30 countries in the region.

The China-CELAC (Community of Latin American and Caribbean States) gathering comes as China pushes for more influence in what has traditionally been Washington's backyard, and with many in the area looking to the Asian nation to offset US dominance.

"China will focus on overall cooperation with Latin American countries and this forum will build a deepening discussion," Xi said in a speech televised live from the Great Hall of the People.

"Expanding cooperation discussions at this forum will determine deepening integration with Latin America in the next five years in fields including security, trade, finance, technology, energy, resources, industry and agriculture," he said.

Xi also reiterated a plan first mentioned during a tour of Latin America last year to raise annual trade to $500 billion within a decade and to increase direct Chinese investment in the area to $250 billion.

But in a sign that the meeting was not entirely about trade, China's official Xinhua news agency made it clear the country wants to increase its regional influence.

The forum will "offer another chance for China to promote its vision and contribute to international affairs," Xinhua said in a commentary.

"China is seeking a greater say in promoting a harmonious international order."

The People's Daily, the ruling Communist Party's official mouthpiece, said cooperation between Latin America and China had entered a "new era".

China's trade with Latin America rose to nearly $242 billion in the first eleven months of last year.

Beijing is constantly on the look-out for resources to power its economy, the world's second-largest, and earlier pledged to invest $20 billion in oil-rich Venezuela, that country's official AVN news agency said citing President Nicolas Maduro.

Oil has lost more than half its value since June 2014 owing to a glut in global supply and slowing growth in major world economies that has hurt demand.

Analysts have warned that socialist Venezuela -- which supplies China, its second-biggest customer, with 640,000 barrels a day -- is on the brink of a debt default, struggling to pay its bills while maintaining its lavish subsidies, oil discounts to allies and rigid system of foreign exchange controls.

"We scooped up more than $20 billion in investment," AVN quoted Maduro as saying after talks with Xi on Wednesday, their third meeting in 16 months.

The sweeping investment deal covers a wide range of areas including technology, housing and urban planning, AVN added.

The president of Venezuela's neighbour Ecuador, Rafael Correa, whose economy has also been hammered by falling oil prices, is also in Beijing for the forum and secured a deal to borrow $7.5 billion from China, his finance minister said.
 
 
EU pushes back against TTIP trade agreement secrecy claims
By Christian Oliver in Brussels
Financial Times 
January 7, 2015 5:34 pm
 
The EU has launched a fresh attempt to punch back against accusations that it is trying to conclude a landmark trade deal with the US in secret, publishing eight of its negotiating proposals in key sectors. 
 
The documents — which cover topics ranging from food safety to customs issues — are not a comprehensive reflection of what the deal will include but the move is significant because Brussels has never before published specific legal proposals while an agreement is being negotiated. 
 
The publication is an attempt to counter a growing swell of opposition from non-governmental organisations, which argue that the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership only serves the interests of big multinational companies and would lower European standards on food, health and the environment. If concluded, TTIP would represent the world’s biggest trade deal. 
 
“It is important that everyone can see and understand what we are proposing in TTIP and — just as importantly — what we are not,” said Cecilia Malmström, the EU trade commissioner. 
 
Bernd Lange, the socialist lawmaker who heads the European Parliament’s trade committee, welcomed the step but pushed for still greater transparency. “The road ahead is still long,” he said. 
 
Brussels faces a greater public relations battle in the spring, when it will have to decide how to handle the most politically contentious element of the trade deal — clauses that map out the rights of foreign investors to sue governments. 
 
This part of the trade accord faces particularly stern resistance in Germany, Europe’s most powerful country, where fears run deep that US companies could bypass national courts and use international arbitrators instead. To the trade negotiators, the so-called Investor State Dispute Settlement clauses are a vital part of the deal that will protect foreign investors. 
 
EU leaders said last month that they wanted to conclude TTIP by the end of the year but Ms Malmström cautioned that it was probably realistic to expect only a “skeleton” of a deal by then if all were to go well. 
 
One of the main obstacles facing the EU is that the US is closer to finalising another multilateral trade accord with Pacific Rim countries. 
 
The fear is that if a deal is not struck in 2015, the looming 2016 US presidential elections mean it would have to wait for a new administration, with negotiations dragging on into 2017 and possibly beyond. 
 
In an interview with the Financial Times late last year, Carlo Calenda, Rome’s trade envoy, said that a long delay would put Brussels on the back foot in negotiations as the US economy would be in a far more robust state than Europe’s.
 
The U.S.-led global economic order is dying 
By Henry Farrell 
7 January 2015
Washington Post.com
 
Jonathan Kirshner is Stephen and Barbara Friedman Professor of International Political Economy in the Department of Government at Cornell. I interviewed him about his new book, American Power after the Financial Crisis.

HF: Some people argue that international institutions dealt quite successfully with the crisis. You evidently disagree. What do you see as the fundamental problems that manifested in the crisis, and why have they not been addressed?

JK: First, let me ask: What institutions? The IMF did not see the crisis coming, favored the ideas and policies that made the crisis more likely, and was not a key player in containing it. The G20 and the Financial Stability Board? I don't see the crucial role they performed. It was probably a good thing that the WTO existed — its presence was probably one of the many reasons we saw much less self-defeating protectionism during this crisis then we did during the Great Depression. But that's about it.

The only "institution" that really mattered in dealing with the crisis was the U.S. Federal Reserve System, which not only flooded the American economy with liquidity, but also provided emergency currency swaps to European partners. But this latter contribution, although crucial, was an ad-hoc improvisation by the agency of a great power, not the functioning of international institutions. As for the core problem: the crisis was caused by too-large, too-interconnected financial institutions engaging in reckless behavior that generated "systemic risk."

Systemic risk is a crucial part of this story, because even if individual actors are engaging in behaviors that are not reckless (which was not the case here), in finance, individually rational behaviors can produce extremely dangerous risks to the system as a whole. Finance is different, and requires public oversight, regulation, and supervision to a much greater extent than any other sector of the economy. But, in the United States at least, Washington and Wall Street, buttressed by academic economists, fell in love with ideologies such as the "efficient market hypothesis" which suggested that unfettered financial markets would lead to optimal outcomes and could best govern themselves. This is wrong. And these fundamental problems have not been addressed. The American economy is still characterized by a financial system that is too large, too concentrated, too interconnected, and dysfunctionally regulated. These problems persist because of the enormous political power of the financial services sector. Additionally, because adequate public policy stopped the financial crisis from causing a second Great Depression, opponents of fundamental reform were able to argue that real changes to the financial system were not necessary.

HF: Your argument suggests that the global economic order that the United States made rests on monetary hegemony, ideological homogeneity, and shared security concerns and that all three are being eroded. Are the twin threats of Putin's Russia and a more assertive China helping to some extent to bring U.S. allies back on board, or are they secondary to the forces that you identify?

JK: These behaviors matter, but yes, at the moment, they are secondary. The foundations of any economic order — especially with regard to international money and finance, areas where cooperation is especially difficult to establish and maintain — rest on the distribution of power, common ideological commitments and beliefs about how to best organize international economic affairs, and shared, salient security concerns. This latter factor can be crucial, because if countries agree that they face a common, serious, security threat — such as the Soviet threat to western Europe during the cold war — they can be motivated to overcome even bitter disagreements over economic policies. So to the extent that Russia or China look more threatening, economic cooperation between the United States and those countries who view themselves as urgently dependent on an American security guarantee becomes more likely. Will this hold together a U.S.-led international economic order? My view is that what I call the "second postwar American economic order," which was forged in the early 1990s, came to an end with the Global Financial Crisis, and what we are seeing now is the emergence of a less coherent, more heterogeneous, more contested international economic order.

HF: You suggest that the United States is in for a tough time, as it is forced to recognize international economic constraints on its domestic policy for many decades. Why has the United States gotten away with internationalizing its problems for so long, and what has changed now?

JK: The extraordinarily exceptional position of the United States in the world economy rested on a number of factors, including the overwhelming dominance of the American economy, its role as the world's "safe heaven" (the idea that although financial crises happened all over the world, the Unite States was invulnerable to them), and a shared belief that its economic ideology (especially as pertaining to unfettered finance) was correct, and one to which all countries aspired. These factors have all now changed. The U.S. economy remains enormous, robust, powerful, and essential — this cannot be emphasized enough — but as a general trend, it dominates the international economy somewhat less now than it did in the past, and most plausible scenarios suggest that this general trend will continue. Also, it is now clear that the U.S. economy is not exceptionally exempt from debilitating financial crises, and many countries and other actors now view its financial model with greater wariness. Thus, although the U.S. economy will likely remain more privileged than any other, it will nevertheless look more and more like a "normal" economy — that is, one that is subject to external pressures generated by the international economy, and less able to easily force burdens of economic adjustment abroad.

HF: You see the seeds of a new order as having been sown in the Asian financial crisis. How are the disagreements that started to emerge back then shaping international economic politics today?

JK: The United States, and its ally, the International Monetary Fund (which failed to see the Asian Financial Crisis coming and whose subsequent prescriptions made a bad situation worse), attributed that crisis to poor public policy (and "crony capitalism") within the affected Asian economies; many if not most actors in Asia (and elsewhere) recognized the crisis for what it was — a standard, garden variety international financial crisis — common throughout history, especially during periods of capital deregulation. (Both China and Japan, for example, interpreted the crisis in that way.) There was also, throughout East Asia, bitter resentment at the way the United States and the IMF exploited the crisis to extract concessions from vulnerable economies in exchange for emergency assistance.

But this resentment was muttered through gritted teeth — in the late 1990s, there was little alternative to American power: American hegemony at that time was simply unprecedented and irresistible. There was also, then, a grudging sense that there was no alternative to the American model of ungoverned, uninhibited finance. The Global Financial Crisis matters, therefore, because for most of the world (not just Asia, but in Latin America and elsewhere), it was the second crisis of unregulated capital within ten years. Outside the United States, therefore, the wheels of resistance to unfettered finance had been greased by the memory of recent upheavals . Moreover, the fact that the U.S. financial system stood at the epicenter of the crisis fundamentally delegitimized the idea that the U.S. financial model was singularly correct and the one towards which all economies must converge.

HF: You suggest provocatively that the euro, despite its current problems, may well emerge as a major competitor to the dollar. How might this happen, and do the internal politics of the European Union seem likely to lead to it in the foreseeable future?

JK: Again, to be very clear (and similar to my expectations regarding the U.S. economy more generally), my expectations are for the relative diminution of the international role of the dollar — not its eclipse. That is, even as someone considered a "dollar pessimist," I nevertheless see the dollar remaining predominant, and eventually settling into a role that can be described as "first among equals" status among a number of international currencies. (My argument is that even such relative diminution will have political consequences and affect American power.) So my expectation is that the euro will come to serve as one of those currencies.

I think it is obvious that the Global Financial Crisis revealed that the limitations of the Euro as constituted were even greater, and more profound, than most people thought — although the basic structural flaws and contradictions of the euro were long and well understood. And, from an outsider's perspective, the internal politics of the European Union simply do not seem up to the task of solving these profound problems. But the current system seems unsustainable, and in the longer run, the euro system will need to either move forward (becoming more capacious) or take a step back (devolving to a smaller group of core members). In either case the euro will, eventually, likely play a role as an important international currency. But that is not to say that the euro's problems have not helped sustain the reach of the dollar's international role.

Let me put it this way: the extraordinary extent of dollar's international dominance used to rest on four pillars: the hegemony of the American economy, a belief in its invulnerability to financial crisis, the fact that all the world's major monetary players were political allies and military dependencies of the United States, and the lack of plausible alternatives. Three of those pillars have been shaken — the lack of alternatives is the only one left standing. And many important players in the world are now keen to find such alternatives, and prefer that the global economy not be so overwhelmingly dollar-centric. These preferences will matter.
