Headlines:

·         WTO downgrades its forecast for global trade in 2015

·         Global trade slows as Bric nations cut back on imports

·         WTO May Address Trade Relations With Sanctions-Hit Russia

·         WTO Welcomes Iran Accession Bid - Director-General

·         Russia's Push to Displace Imports Will Damage Economy: Former WTO Chief

·         Pacific trade talks step closer to clearing auto parts hurdle

·         Ministerial TPP talks begin with little progress on sticking issues

·         Push grows to target tobacco, health in Pacific trade rules

·         Global oil demand growing at fastest pace for five years

·         Argentina loses WTO dispute over service suppliers

·         OMC dice Argentina incumplió ciertas normas con medidas transparencia fiscal; 

·         ARGENTINA DEBERA AJUSTAR SUS CRITERIOS PARA DEFINIR PARAISOS FISCALES

 

Details:

WTO downgrades its forecast for global trade in 2015

By Shawn Donnan, World Trade Editor

1 October 2015

Financial Times

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organisation has downgraded its forecast for global trade growth this year.

A steeper than expected slowdown in China and other emerging economies is dragging on world trade with exports and imports expected to increase at a slower pace than the global economy as a whole this year, say new HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO forecasts.

Yesterday, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO economists estimated growth this year of 2.8 per cent, from 3.3 per cent previously, and warned that their prediction remained vulnerable to a cloudy outlook for the world economy. They also warned that even that pessimistic view of the global economy may be subject to further downgrades.

"If the slowdown in emerging markets worsens, the revised forecasts . . . could still prove to be overly optimistic," they said. "In particular, a slower rebound from recent declines in developing economies' imports could shave half a percentage point off global trade growth in 2015."

The dim view of global commerce came ahead of the release next week of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"International Monetary Fund's latest forecasts, which are expected to see a downgrade in its 3.3 per cent growth prediction for the global economy this year. It also reinforced what some have seen as a grim shift in the world economy since the 2008 global financial crisis.

For decades before the crisis global trade reliably grew at twice the rate of the global economy as part of what some have called an era of "hyperglobalisation", fed by the rise of China and other emerging markets.

But by some measures it contracted in the first half of this year and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO economists said they expected 2015 to be the fourth year in a row that the volume of global trade grew at, or below, the rate of the broader economy. Some economists have pointed to that trend as evidence that globalisation has peaked, particularly as technological advances such as 3D printing and higher labour costs in places like China cause corporations to shorten global supply chains and bring production closer to home.

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO said it expected a rebound in trade next year, forecasting trade growth of 3.9 per cent in 2016. It also said it expected stronger exports from developed economies this year than developing ones. Exports from developed economies should rise 3 per cent this year while those of developing economies would grow more slowly, by 2.4 per cent.

According to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO, the biggest cause of the slowdown in global trade remains the world's slow recovery from the 2008 financial crisis and the shifting patters of that recovery.

If in the recent past it was the slowing economies in Europe or the US that dragged most on global trade, that role appears to be played by China.

The biggest shift in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO's forecasts came in Asia where, thanks largely to China's slowing imports and exports, the predicted growth in exports was lowered to 3.1 per cent from the 5 per cent HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO economists predicted in April. On the import side, the forecast was almost halved to 2.6 per cent from 5.1 per cent previously because of the impact of Chinese imports which were down 2.2 per cent year on year in the second quarter of 2015.

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO economists said the composition of China's trade also illustrated the impact its rebalancing from an export-led to a more consumption-led growth model was having on its neighbours and the global economy.

The customs statistics for August pointed to large year-on-year falls for items like iron and steel and imported machinery. At the same time China had record big increases in demand for agricultural products with its imports of cereal grains growing 130 per cent.

The Financial Times Limited (AAIW/EIW) 

Global trade slows as Bric nations cut back on imports

By Ben Chu ECONOMICS EDITOR

The Independent

1 October 2015

Growth in global commerce is slowing down, compounding fears in financial markets about declining momentum in the world economy.

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organisation slashed its 2015 merchandise trade growth to 2.8 per cent yesterday from the 3.3 per cent forecast in April. It added that commerce volumes actually contracted in the first two quarters of the year by an average of 0.7 per cent as import demand from China, Brazil and other struggling emerging market economies slipped.

The downgrade comes after a summer of turmoil in global stock markets triggered by concerns about the health of the Chinese economy in particular. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO said that risks to the world economy are "increasingly on the downside", singling out the possibility of financial ructions from a rate increase by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"US Federal Reserve and unanticipated costs from the European migration crisis.

World merchandise trade has been weak since the global financial crisis. If the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO forecast is accurate, 2015 will be the fourth year running when growth has been less than 3 per cent. In the 1990s and early 2000s trade volumes were twice the rate of GDP.

Earlier this year the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"International Monetary Fund forecast global GDP growth of 3.3 per cent. The updated forecasts due next week are also likely to show a downgrade.

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Christine Lagarde, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"IMF's managing director, speaking in Washington yesterday, said she was "concerned about the state of global affairs" and said "global growth will likely be weaker this year than last".

The slowdown in global trade has hit UK manufacturing. Yesterday's GDP estimate from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Office for National Statistics confirmed that the sector has entered a technical recession with output falling by 0.5 per cent in the second quarter.

The latest Quarterly Economic Survey from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"British Chambers of Commerce today reinforces that gloomy picture for manufacturing. The survey shows that expectation balances for exports, investment, confidence, employment and cashflow all declined in the third quarter. The BCC's measure of export growth in manufacturing hit a six-year low.

"Global uncertainty, weakened demand from China and the strength of the pound are some of the factors likely hindering performance," said HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"John Longworth, the directorgeneral of the BCC.

"If the manufacturing sector has entered a prolonged period of slow growth, then closing the trade deficit and improving the current account deficit will become more difficult."

The UK's overall GDP growth in the third quarter was unchanged at 0.7 per cent. But there was a downgrade in the annual rate of growth to 2.4 per cent, from 2.6 per cent.

Independent Print Ltd. 

WTO May Address Trade Relations With Sanctions-Hit Russia

30 September 2015

Sputnik News Service

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"World Trade Organization (WTO) headquarter in Geneva (Switzerland)

GENEVA (Sputnik), Anastasia Levchenko — Trade relations with Russia in the context of western sanctions can be addressed within the framework of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO), the group's Director-General HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Roberto Azevedo told Sputnik on Wednesday.

"The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO is a good forum for dialogue. The issue of trade relations [with Russia] in the context of sanctions is always something that we can address here. We have channels for dialogue, we talk to each other here, in general the conversation here in HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO has been very productive," Azevedo said.

Russia joined the 161-nation trade bloc in 2012, following almost two decades of intense negotiation. Economic sanctions imposed on Russia over an alleged role in the 2014 Ukraine crisis strained its trade relations with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union and several other economies.

Despite this, Russian President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Vladimir Putin said in a recent interview that whereas HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO regulations had prevented Moscow from protecting its producers, trade restrictions evicted western companies from the local market and created favorable conditions for domestic business. Rossiya Segodnya International Information Agency

WTO Welcomes Iran Accession Bid - Director-General

30 September 2015

Sputnik News Service

GENEVA, September 30 (Sputnik), Anastasia Levchenko - The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO) is ready to accept Iran as long as all HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO member states support its accession, the organization’s Director-General HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Roberto Azevedotold Sputnik on Wednesday.

Iran first submitted its membership application to the global trade organization in 1996, but US objections prevent it from joining.

"The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO is an open forum. Any country that wants to join the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO is welcome to do that and then we have the negotiations with the other members," Azevedo said, adding he had not received any recent communications from Tehran.

Iran could join the 161-nation trade organization after Tehran agreed with Russia, the United States, France, Britain, China and Germany in July that it would modify its nuclear activities in exchange for sanctions relief, including removing trade restrictions implemented by the United States. Rossiya Segodnya International Information Agency

Russia's Push to Displace Imports Will Damage Economy: Former WTO Chief

1 October 2015

The Moscow Times

Russia's push to boost sales of homegrown products while imports are hit by sanctions will be economically damaging if past experience is any guide, the former head of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Pascal Lamy, said Wednesday.

Lamy, speaking at the Reuters Russia Investment Summit, said that in the short term domestic producers could benefit but in the long run consumers are likely to lose out because prices for products will be higher.

Trade between Russia and Western countries is restricted by sanctions imposed by both sides over the conflict in Ukraine, which has dragged relations to their lowest level since the Cold War.

Russia's government has made a big push for "import substitution" - encouraging domestic firms to switch focus to replacing imports that, because of sanctions, are no longer available on the Russian market.

"In most of the cases I have known import substitution policies have failed," said Lamy, who was director general of the WTO for two terms from 2005 until 2013. "They degrade the efficiency of their economy."

"It'll work in terms of increasing local production. But that is not the fundamental point. The fundamental point is whether the consumer has value for his or her money," he said at the Summit, held at the Reuters office in Moscow.

Prices Vs. Patriotism

A surge in patriotism in Russia triggered by the conflict in Ukraine might go some way to mitigating consumers' dissatisfaction over higher prices, Lamy said, but he questioned how long that would last.

Russia has challenged the Western sanctions imposed on it over Ukraine, while questions have also been raised about whether Russian counter-sanctions, banning imports of many Western foodstuffs, are in accordance with HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTOrules.

Lamy declined to comment on what would be the outcome of the different sets of litigation over sanctions.

But he said that Western sanctions, which focused on travel bans, financial services and weapons, had been carefully calibrated so as not to breach international disciplines on trade.

Russia's counter-measures, meanwhile, were trade sanctions. He said HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO rules say such sanctions are not allowed, except on grounds of national security.

"The Russian sanctions are import bans. They are selective, they target some countries and not others, which in HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO terms is discrimination," he said.

Lamy was head of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO when Russia entered the organization in 2012 after years of negotiations.

Since joining, Russia has been embroiled in multiple trade disputes with fellow members. The EU accuses Russia of restrictive practices to protect its carmakers, and of putting what it calls excessive import duties on paper and palm oil.

Lamy though said that such disputes were a normal part of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO membership and Russia was no more problematic than some other new members had been.

"I think it was the right thing to do," he said on the decision to admit Russia to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO. "It's good for Russia, good for the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO."

United Press LLC

Pacific trade talks step closer to clearing auto parts hurdle

By Ana Isabel Martinez and Kevin Krolicki

1 October 2015

Reuters News

ATLANTA, Sept 30 (Reuters) - Negotiators trying to clinch a Pacific Rim free trade deal made headway on Wednesday over how to remove a stumbling block and give automakers a freer hand to sell cars in the United States with more parts purchased in Asia.

People briefed on the closed-door talks said Canada and Mexico signaled a willingness to open the North American auto market to more parts made in Asia, one of the key hurdles to sealing a broader deal on the Trans-Pacific Partnership.

The TPP seeks to cut trade barriers and set common standards among a dozen nations reaching from Japan to Chile, but talks have become snared over a small set of issues, including dairy trade and patent periods for biologic drugs.

Japan has pushed hard during talks in Atalanta for a deal on auto parts, a crucial issue for Japananese carmakers, led by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Toyota Motor Corp, who depend on sales to the U.S. market and want flexibility in how and where they source parts.

"We have to head into this with the expectation that we can wrap things up," Japanese Economy Minister Akira Amari was quoted by Japanese media as saying.

Australian Trade Minister Andrew Robb said ministers meeting on Wednesday had detailed remaining issues.

"There's an intent there. We are now swapping different versions of possible outcomes, but we have got a lot to do," Robb told Reuters after the plenary session on the TPP.

An earlier round of talks in July had failed after Mexican officials objected to a proposal by Japan and the United States on autos concerning the "rules of origin" that determine whether a vehicle can be exported without tariffs.

In Atlanta, officials from Mexico and Canada were aiming for a 45-percent threshold for local content on vehicles, two people briefed on the talks said.

If it becomes part of the final trade deal, it would mean more than half of a vehicle could be sourced from outside the 12 countries participating in the TPP and still be sold in the United States - the bloc's largest market - without tariffs.

Separately, Japan was pushing for a local sourcing threshold of 32.5 percent for individual auto parts, the people briefed on the talks said.

Those thresholds would be below the two-decade old HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"North American Free Trade Agreement rules which have been credited with driving the auto industry boom in Mexico.

Ministers will meet again on Thursday but no deal is seen likely before Friday.

Monopoly periods for next-generation biologics drugs remain an unresolved issue.

Protestors gathered outside the talks on Tuesday to protest trade rules which could mean longer delays in bringing generic versions of such drugs to market for some TPP countries.

"Even one year's delay in affordable treatment can be a death sentence," said breast cancer patient Zahara Heckscher. Heckscher was later taken away in handcuffs by local police when she refused to leave the venue in downtown Atlanta without seeing a draft of the TPP text.

New Zealand Prime Minister John Key said the pact could be scuppered if negotiations were to drag on.

Speaking at the Asia Society in New York City, Key said New Zealand, home to the world's largest dairy exporter Fonterra , was still not happy with dairy market access.

With presidential elections in the United States set for November 2016 and some opposition in Congress to the deal, time is of the essence to complete the agreement, which become part of President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Barack Obama's legacy.

"The window of opportunity to complete TPP is closing so you wouldn't say it's impossible to complete the deal if it doesn't take place in Atlanta, but it does become more difficult," Key said.

TPP leaders are scheduled to meet at an HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit in the Philippines in mid-November, which Key said was "probably the last opportunity for 2015" to close the trade deal. (Additional reporting by David Brunnstrom in New York; Writing by Krista Hughes; Editing by Toni Reinhold and Simon Cameron-Moore)

Thomson Reuters (Markets) LLC

Ministerial TPP talks begin with little progress on sticking issues

Kakumi Kobayashi Kakumi Kobayashi

1 October 2015

Kyodo News

ATLANTA, Sept. 30 -- Ministers from the United States, Japan and 10 other Pacific Rim countries began their make-or-break talks Wednesday on concluding a sweeping free trade deal that would cover some 40 percent of the global economy.

But the high-level talks on the envisioned U.S.-led Trans-Pacific Partnership were adjourned after only about an hour, with Japanese TPP minister Akira Amari and many other participants involved in a series of bilateral sessions.

Amari and other Japanese delegates indicated there was little progress on the thorny issues of new drug patents, tariffs on automobiles and market access for dairy products at the end of the first day.

Amari expressed discontent with U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman's steering of the fractious meeting. "I want (the United States) to do its utmost," he said, after being asked about Froman's leadership in the multilateral round.

The ministers provisionally plan to resume their plenary meeting at 4 p.m. Thursday, Amari told reporters. The Office of the U.S. Trade Representative said the Atlanta meeting will wrap up Thursday.

With the United States increasingly preoccupied with next year's presidential election, Japanese officials warn a failure this round could stall the negotiation for years. Canada will hold general elections next month.

The United States backs a plan to protect drug patents for 12 years to help major pharmaceutical firms, with Australia and some other countries seeking a five- or eight-year period, according to negotiation sources.

Outside a hotel in downtown Atlanta where the ministerial talks were being held, more than 10 people rallied to protest the TPP negotiations on drug patents, saying the extended protection of new drug data prevented development of cheaper generic medicine.

"I am here to remind Ambassador Froman and the USTR team that the policies they promote are supposed to represent the interests of the people of the United States, not just the short-term greed of the giant pharmaceutical companies," said Zahara Heckscher, a breast cancer patient.

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Peter Maybarduk, a member of the Washington-based group HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Public Citizen, said, "It's unacceptable that it's being negotiated in secret right now as we speak here on the street and we cannot be a part of the conversation."

On automobiles, differences remain among the United States, Japan, Canada and Mexico over the ratio of local components made in the TPP zone that would be necessary to avoid or lower duties.

The United States started the TPP negotiations in 2010 with Australia, Brunei, Chile, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore and Vietnam. Canada, Japan, Mexico and Malaysia later joined the talks.

The ministers from the 12 countries failed to conclude their talks when they met in Hawaii in late July due to huge gaps over the contentious issues.

Kyodo News

Push grows to target tobacco, health in Pacific trade rules

1 October 2015

Reuters News

By Krista Hughes

ATLANTA, Sept 30 (Reuters) - Pressure is mounting on Pacific trading partners over potential steps to block foreign investors from suing governments over anti-smoking measures, under a free trade pact that is nearing completion.

Trade ministers from 12 countries are discussing possible exemptions from rules letting foreign companies sue governments over damage to investments as they try to wrap up talks on the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP).

No final consensus has been reached on whether any exclusion would target only tobacco companies or shield a wider range of government regulations from legal action, but Australia's Andrew Robb is optimistic about his country's push for a broad carve-out for both health and environmental regulations.

"I think we're on track, but there's not a final decision yet," he told Reuters on the sidelines of the Atlanta meetings.

Similar rules in a separate trade treaty allowed Marlboro maker HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Philip Morris to sue Australia over tobacco plain-packaging laws banning branded cigarette packs.

Excluding an industry such as tobacco from protections for foreign investors would cheer anti-smoking groups and many of the U.S. Democratic lawmakers who have bucked union pressure to support President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Barack Obama's trade agenda.

A group of 11 pro-trade Democrats, who helped pass key trade legislation earlier this year, wrote to U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman on Wednesday, urging him to make sure tobacco disputes are excluded from TPP rules.

"It is essential that effective safeguards are put into place to explicitly protect the ability of countries to implement public health measures," said the letter, organized by congressmen Ami Bera of California and Jared Polis of Colorado.

But the prospect of such a move is ringing alarm bells in the U.S. business community, otherwise a strong supporter of the deal to cut tariffs and set common standards for 40 percent of the global economy.

U.S. business groups, including the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"American Farm Bureau Federation, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"U.S. Chamber of Commerce and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"National Association of Manufacturers, also wrote to TPP officials this week, warning against singling out specific sectors or industries.

"Such exclusions are unnecessary and would be highly damaging to the international rules based trading system and the prospects for the TPP," said the letter,

Targeting tobacco could erode support in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"U.S. Congress from Republicans from tobacco-producing states such as Kentucky and North Carolina. Congress must approve the trade deal before it can come into effect, and every vote will count.

U.S. negotiators must balance local sensitivities against the need to get trading partners to back a deal which will impose higher, and potentially unpopular, standards in areas like copyright and pharmaceutical patents for some.

"There seems to be broad support for inserting language to ensure that tobacco companies cannot continue to abuse the trading system," HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Matthew Myers said.

Malaysia, where domestic support for the TPP is shaky, wants to completely exclude tobacco from the TPP. Excluding tobacco would allow countries to keep tariffs on U.S. tobacco products. (Reporting by Krista Hughes; Editing by Lisa Von Ahn and Ken Wills)

Thomson Reuters (Markets) LLC

Global oil demand growing at fastest pace for five years

30 September 2015

Business and Finance Daily News Service

World oil demand surged in the first six months of 2015 compared with the same period in 2014, according to national estimates submitted to the Joint Oil Data Initiative (JODI).

Petroleum demand is responding in the expected manner to a halving in the price of crude and significant declines in the price of most fuels in most consuming countries, as well as continued economic expansion in much of the world.

Fifty-nine countries, accounting for 75-80 percent of global oil consumption, have submitted demand estimates for both the first half of 2014 and 2015 to JODI.

Submitters include all the world's major consumers, with the notable exceptions of Russia, Iran, Indonesia, Venezuela, Malaysia, South Africa and United Arab Emirates. Submitters reported consumption averaged 71.4 million barrels per day (bpd) in the first six months of 2015, up from 69.1 million bpd in the prior-year period, an increase of 2.3 million bpd or 3.3 percent. China accounted for slightly over half the total increase, with reported consumption of petroleum products up by 1.3 million bpd, more than 13 percent. Other countries reporting substantial increases in demand included the United States (+470,000 bpd), India (+205,000 bpd), Turkey (+180,000 bpd), Saudi Arabia (+115,000 bpd) and Korea (+100,000 bpd). Smaller increases in demand were reported by Germany (+20,000 bpd), France (+18,000 bpd), Britain (+29,000 bpd), Italy (+74,000 bpd), Spain (+26,000 bpd), Argentina (+40,000 bpd) and Poland (+40,000 bpd). The increase in demand was broadly based, with 46 out of 59 countries in the data set reporting increased consumption in 2015 compared with 2014. JODI is a partnership between the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"International EnergyForum, based in Riyadh, and six international and regional statistical agencies (IEA, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OPEC, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Eurostat, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"APEC, OLADE and UNSD). The limitations of JODI data are well known and acknowledged by the partner organizations, but for many countries, especially the top 30 producers and consumers, "timeliness, coverage and reliability are at reasonable levels," according to the secretariat. There are several obvious caveats with the increase in petroleum demand reported by JODI. The first and most obvious is the enormous increase in reported fuel consumption in China, where the quality of the data is less reliable than in many other countries. Without China, the reported increase in consumption is a little over 1 million barrels per day, or around 1.7 percent. There are major doubts about the amount of fuels and especially crude disappearing into the country's strategic stockpiles. China's national estimates may overstate oil demand, perhaps significantly, but the growth in the country's consumption is unlikely to have been zero. So the probable envelope for oil demand growth lies between 1.0 million bpd (if China's consumption has been flat) and 2.3 million bpd (if China's consumption has grown as much as its own data show). The midpoint of the range is 1.65 million bpd, roughly in line with the 1.7 million bpd demand increase the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"International Energy Agency (IEA) is projecting for the world as a whole in 2015 ("Oil Market Report" Sep 2015). Confidence in this range estimate is bolstered because the increase in reported demand outside China is so broadly based and there could be further increases in countries accounting for as much as 20 percent of global demand. There is reason to doubt demand allocations to individual countries (for example the surge in Italy, which is three times the size of the increases reported in Britain, France or Germany). National statistical agencies may be struggling to discern between domestic consumption, exports and stock increases. But because the rise in demand is being reported in so many countries at the same time, it is unlikely to be a major error at global scale (national errors allocating between domestic and export demand should cancel out to some extent). Some of the increase in reported demand may actually be going into increased stocks held by refiners, distributors and end customers. But the continued strength of fuel prices and refining margins suggests that stocks have not built up to unwanted levels. According to the IEA, oil demand is climbing at the fastest rate in five years, and the national statistics collated by JODI appear to bear out that conclusion. (Reuters) Media World Ltd

Argentina loses WTO dispute over service suppliers

30 September 2015

Reuters News

GENEVA, Sept 30 (Reuters) - Argentina was wrong to use tax, registration, foreign exchange and financial measures to discriminate against the service suppliers of certain countries, a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization dispute panel said on Wednesday, upholding a complaint by Panama.

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO member countries are not allowed to offer different terms to different suppliers, but Panama said in 2012 that Argentina discriminated in eight ways against countries that did not exchange information with Argentina for the purposes of fiscal transparency.

The panel rejected many of the other points in Panama's complaint. Either side could appeal against the ruling. (Reporting by Tom Miles; Editing by Dominic Evans)

Thomson Reuters (Markets) LLC

OMC dice Argentina incumplió ciertas normas con medidas transparencia fiscal; 

30 September 2015

Agencia EFE - Servicio Internacional

Ginebra, 30 sep (EFE).- La HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Organización Mundial del Comercio (OMC) dictaminó hoy que Argentina incumplió ciertas normas comerciales internacionales al imponer un grupo de ocho medidas financieras, fiscales, cambiarias y de registro contra ciertos países.

Argentina designa a los países afectados como "países no cooperativos" en materia de transparencia fiscal.

Un panel de expertos analizó durante más de dos años la cuestión y valoró las posiciones de Argentina y de Panamá, que presentó la querella ante la organización internacional.

Entonces, Panamá se encontraba en el listado de países que Argentina consideraba de baja o nula tributación y, por lo tanto, carente de un sistema para el intercambio transparente de información fiscal.

En el transcurso del arbitraje -desde el 1 de enero de 2014-, el país centroamericano salió de esa lista.

Sin embargo, el grupo de expertos continuó su tarea y hoy emitió un dictamen que indica que "en algunas de esas medidas" Argentina no respetó artículos del Acuerdo General de Comercio y Servicios relacionados con el principio de nación más favorecida.

En cambio, otras medidas relacionadas con el principio de "trato nacional" fueron encontradas compatibles con el contenido de dicho acuerdo.

Las partes tienen 60 días para apelar este veredicto comercial. EFE

Agencia EFE S.A. 

ARGENTINA DEBERA AJUSTAR SUS CRITERIOS PARA DEFINIR PARAISOS FISCALES

30 September 2015

Agencia Diarios y Noticias

BUENOS AIRES, set 30 (DyN) - La Argentina tendrá que ajustar a

criterios internacionales los parámetros que usa para determinar

si un país es un paraíso fiscal, según determinó un panel de la

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Organización Mundial del Comercio (OMC) establecido a pedido de

Panamá en 2012.

El fallo, conocido hoy, igualmente rechaza la mayoría de una

serie de reclamos hechos por Panamá contra ocho medidas de tipo

fiscal, comercial, y de tipo cambiario, que adoptó el gobierno

argentino.

Según consta en el decreto 589 de 2013, una norma que

reglamenta la ley de Impuesto a las Ganancias, la Argentina considera como

países "no cooperadores" en materia tributaria a todos aquellos

que no suscriban con ella un acuerdo de intercambio de

información.

"Se consideran países, dominios, jurisdicciones, territorios,

estados asociados o regímenes tributarios especiales cooperadores

a los fines de la transparencia fiscal, aquellos que suscriban con

el Gobierno de la República Argentina un acuerdo de intercambio

de información en materia tributaria", dice el artículo 1 del

decreto.

Ese punto agrega que también serán considerados cooperadores

los países que tengan "un convenio para evitar la doble imposición

internacional con cláusula de intercambio de información amplio,

siempre que se cumplimente el efectivo intercambio de información".

El decreto le reserva a la Administración Federal de Ingresos

Públicos (AFIP) la elaboración de los listados que el país

considere paraísos fiscales.

El decreto no establece otros requisitos, y le concede al

titular de la AFIP, Ricardo Echegaray, la facultad de incluir o

eliminar a países de los listados en base a criterios propios del

organismo.

El panel de la OMC, según consta en la página de la

organización, "recomendará" al Organismo de Solución de Diferencias (OSD)

que "solicite a Argentina que ponga sus medidas en conformidad con

las obligaciones que le corresponden en virtud del GATT".

El gobierno argentino, no obstante, se manifestó "conforme"

con el resultado del tribunal arbitral, ya que al rechazar los

reclamos de Panamá consideró que es "un contundente aval" a las medidas

aplicadas por el país contra el lavado y le elusión de impuestos.

Según indicó la Cancillería, el panel dijo que las medidas

aplicadas por Argentina "se encuentran justificadas tanto en su

racionalidad como en su diseño". CGL MB Agencia Diarios y Noticias S.A.

EFE

 

 

cid:image001.png@01CC55E4.A4F90770

 

Josep Bosch, Information Officer

Information and External Relations Division

+41227395681

 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.
