Global trade talks open with call to fight poverty, diversify economies
Kenya demands fairer treatment of developing world at trade talks 
WTO conference opens in Kenya amid calls for strengthening trade regime
WTO must deliver trade deals or change role – Kenya
WTO Needs to Take up New Issues Too, Says DG Azevedo
African leaders push for WTO pact but experts are sceptical
World Trade Organisation faces bleak future, says Kenyan minister
China, India join hands, make case for Doha Round in WTO talks
Afghanistan, Liberia to Benefit From Better Governance With WTO Membership
WTO gears up for negotiations over modernisation
China worried about ITA free riders
NGOs push for continuation of Doha in Nairobi
Economic Affairs; The myth of US-China economic competition
 
Global trade talks open with call to fight poverty, diversify economies
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Peter Martell
15 December 2015
Agence France Presse
Global trade talks opened Tuesday with host Kenya highlighting their role in combating poverty, and urging African nations to diversify their economies.
War-torn Afghanistan and Ebola-ravaged Liberia are set to join the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) as it holds a ministerial conference in the Kenyan capital Nairobi, its first such meeting on African soil.
Leading experts have doubted the meeting's chances of breathing new life into current trade talks, but Kenyan President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Uhuru Kenyatta still called gathering "historic and crucial".
"This conference will boost trade and investment, create employment and ultimately contribute to poverty eradication," he said in a welcome message.
He also stressed the need for African countries to diversify their economies.
"National, regional and multilateral policy choices that we make will matter," Kenyatta said. "The choices and positions we take will have consequences."
Security is tight for the conference, with some 6,000 delegates in Nairobi.
Kenya has been hit by a string of Islamist attacks by Al-Qaeda's East Africa branch, the Somali-led Shebab, but last month hosted Pope Francis, while in July, US President Barack Obama visited.
The four-day Nairobi meeting comes two years after ministers from HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO member countries reached a landmark deal in Bali on overhauling global customs procedures.
The 2013 pact was the first multilateral agreement concluded by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO since its inception in 1995, and also the first concrete progress since the Doha Round of trade liberalisation talks began.
"We took 18 years to deliver our first multi-lateral agreement in Bali, that's way too long, we can't wait another 18 years to deliver again," WTO chief HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevedo told reporters Tuesday.
But there are few signs that countries will be able build on the momentum gained in Bali to carve out even a limited deal in Nairobi.
"I think if we go out of Nairobi with renewed confidence and with a common vision for the future that will be a fundamental achievement," Azevedo said.
Insiders say negotiators will focus on trying to nail down a partial deal focused on agriculture export competition and trade development in the world's poorest nations, but admit the chances of succeeding are shaky at best.
"It will attempt to deliver on the elusive agreements of the Doha Development Agenda, and deal with controversies over agricultural subsidies and market access for developing countries," the European Centre for Development Policy Management (ECDPM) think tank said.
"However, despite previous efforts, scant progress has been made and a breakthrough at Nairobi seems unlikely."
WTO deputy director David Shark was more upbeat, saying it was hoped that deals would be struck on agriculture, export subsidies and food security, and that there would be a debate on the nature of international trade.
"There is a very broad issue that members are discussing: how do we conduct trade negotiations in the future," he said.
"Do we continue in the same vein as we have under the umbrella of the Doha round? Or do we look for new and different ways? That is a very contentious issue amongst our members."
Kenyan Foreign Minister Amina Mohamed, who is chairing the conference, has warned that a failure to strike a deal -- requiring every member's agreement -- would raise questions about the negotiating role of theHYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO.
"We will need to either fix it, agree on a new way of negotiating or maybe agree to remove it," she said.
Ceremonies for the accession of Liberia are expected to be held on December 16, with the accession of Afghanistan a day later, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO said.
Liberia earlier this month released its last two known Ebola cases from hospital and started the countdown to being declared free of the virus for a third time. Afghanistan has been mired in conflict for decades.
Agence France-Presse
Kenya demands fairer treatment of developing world at trade talks 
By Thomas Burmeister, dpa
15 December 2015
dpa International Service in English
Nairobi (dpa) - Kenyan President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Uhuru Kenyatta called on industrial and developing nations on Tuesday to overcome conflicts of interest and advance a more liberal global trade system, speaking on the first day of ministerial HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) talks in Nairobi.
Kenyatta called on rich Western nations to dismantle agricultural subsidies and treat developing nations more fairly, adding that more economic growth through stronger global trade is in the interest of all countries.
Pointing to the success of this month's Paris climate talks, the Kenyan president said it was possible to produce results at multi-lateral negotiations despite strong differences.
Starting in the afternoon, the four-day meeting is intended to unblock the Doha round of talks on free trade and development that was started in 2001, but experts have said there were slim chances that trade ministers from HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's 162 member countries would achieve a breakthrough in Kenya's capital.
The United States and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union are demanding that big emerging economies, which have turned into rivals for developed countries, should no longer insist on getting preferential trade conditions that were originally aimed at boosting the development of poor countries.
Countries like China and India are strongly opposed to this idea and demand that the Doha round be continued despite the lack of progress.
WTO Director General HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevedo said ahead of the conference that he would spare no effort to achieve at least progress on parts of the Doha agenda, for example by agreeing to reduce agricultural subsidies and by adopting measures to help least developed countries.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union has signalled that it could compromise on agricultural subsidies, "but only as part of a comprehensive, balanced deal based on parallelism," EU Trade Commissioner Cecilia Malmstrom said before flying to Kenya.
dpa Deutsche Presse-Agentur GmbH
WTO conference opens in Kenya amid calls for strengthening trade regime
Deng Yaomin
15 December 2015
Xinhua News Agency
NAIROBI, Dec. 15 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xinhua) -- The 10th ministerial conference of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) opened Tuesday in the Kenyan capital Nairobi, with a rallying call for strengthening the global trade regime.
Kenyan President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Uhuru Kenyatta and his Liberian Counterpart, Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, joined trade ministers, policymakers and diplomats at the opening ceremony of the gathering, the first of its kind being held in Africa in two decades.
In his key note speech, Kenyatta stressed that the establishment of a strong and rules based multilateral trade system is key to unleash new growth and prosperity.
"There is a global consensus on the need to address major global crisis like poverty, insecurity and inequality through increased trade," Kenyatta said.
An estimated 6,000 delegates from 162 HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO member states attended the four-day Nairobi meeting that will discuss earlier resolutions that aim to promote fair trade in goods and services.
Negotiators are expected to reach a consensus on contentious issues surrounding agricultural subsidies, trade in services and environmental goods as well as support for least developing countries during the conference.
"I urge the negotiating teams to reach a mutually acceptable compromise on areas of concern like subsidies in the agriculture sector and non-tariff barriers," Kenyatta told trade ministers, adding that African countries are willing to become an integral part of a global trading regime that is fair, inclusive and environmentally conscious.
Trade ministers will also discuss provisions contained in the Doha and Bali accords that root for the establishment of a liberalized and equitable trade regime to catalyse global economic growth.
Liberian President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf noted the Nairobi WTO ministerial conference provided a golden opportunity for the international community to restart trade negotiations that had previously stalled.
"We look forward to the adoption of a Nairobi declaration that chart the way forward in multilateral trade. The outcomes of this historic summit should focus on ways to foster global trade and achieve prosperity," she said.
The biannual HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO ministerial conference has provided a platform for the international community to take stock of progress made in the establishment of rules based and fair multilateral trade system.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevedo, WTO Director General, said multilateralism underpins efforts to address global challenges like poverty, inequality and environmental degradation.
"Thanks to the revived spirit of multilateralism, we now have a climate deal that has inspired us to fast-track negotiations leading to an accord that promotes international trade," said Azevedo.
Xinhua News Agency
WTO must deliver trade deals or change role - Kenya
15 December 2015
Reuters News
* HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO ministers meet for four days in Nairobi this week
* Kenya sees "very little value" from HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO as stands
* WTO Director general says body must deliver more
By Edith Honan
NAIROBI, Dec 15 (Reuters) - Ministers meeting this week should decide whether the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization continues to negotiate major trade deals that have proved elusive or find it a more modest mandate, like arbitrating trade rows, the summit host Kenya said on Tuesday.
The Geneva-based HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO, which has more than 160 members, has been trying and largely failing to agree on a worldwide package of trade reforms since a meeting in Doha in 2001 hatched an ambitious plan for knocking down trade barriers.
A goal of the Nairobi meeting is to determine how the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO moves forward after years of talks without any major successes.
Kenyan Foreign Minister Amina Mohamed said the body had offered members "very little value" so far, voicing frustrations particularly of developing nations who stand to gain most from gaining access to markets in more industrialised nations.
"A decision clearly needs to be made in Nairobi on what to do with this organisation," said Mohamed, speaking at a news conference to open the four-day meeting, the first HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO ministerial meeting to be held in Africa.
She said a failure to reach a major trade deal, which must secure the agreement of every member to pass, would prove that the "negotiating function of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO is broken."
"We will need to either fix it, agree on a new way of negotiating, or agree to remove it so the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO focuses on dispute settlement, on trade policy review and the other areas that do not have a negotiated element in them," she said.
Talks in Bali two years ago were seen as more successful, resulting in several agreements, including one to standardise and streamline customs procedures. This was hailed as good for global business, but it has yet to be adopted by many countries.
The idea of scrapping the existing round of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO negotiations has been backed by the United States, but others, led by India, are staunchly in favour of perservering. Kenya's comments suggest some developing nations are growing weary of stalemate.
The United States and other wealthier economies have increasingly focused on reaching trade deals with other regional blocs, rather than seeking global consensus.
India has been at the forefront of calls for richer nations to offer more trade concessions. African countries in particular have urged wealthy states to reduce their farm subsidies which make African products less competitive.
WTO Director-General HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevedo said last month that talks were deadlocked before the Nairobi meeting, but was more optimistic in his comments on Tuesday, saying he saw "fundamental changes" taking shape within the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO.
He said the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members had to "regain the habit of negotiating, regain the habit of delivering. And that has been missing."
"We took 18 years to deliver our first multilateral agreement in Bali. That's way too long," he said. 
Thomson Reuters (Markets) LLC
WTO Needs to Take up New Issues Too, Says DG Azevedo
Kirtika.Suneja
16 December 2015
The Economic Times - Kolkata Edition
Kicking off the tenth ministerial conference of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization here in Nairobi, the organization's Director General HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevedo said that negotiations can go ahead if there is a common vision on the exiting issues as well as the new ones.
India has strongly opposed inclusion of new issues in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO negotiations and this could be a sore point as discussions progress.
While developed countries have been trying to insert new issues related to investment, competition, labour, government procurement, environment, climate change and global value cha ins, India has vehemently opposed this move and asked for a logical conclusion of the Doha round by solving the existing issues. "Need to regain the habit of negotiating and delivering and that has been missing... Com delivering and that has been missing... Common vision for the future is about not only issues on the table but looking around the world and begin to discuss these things and making the system responsive to needs of members," Azevedo said while answering media queries after the opening session of the four-day-long ministerial starting on Monday.
His statement echoes the draft ministerial text of the conference that was silent on special safeguard mechanism and a permanent solution for the food security concerns of developing count ries--the two things that are high on India's priority."There are important issues still on the table which will support growth and development, and decisions which will determine the forward path of global trade negotiations," Azevedo said during the conference."He may be speaking the words of some developed countries, but this is a member driven organisation. Many countries who support us may say things that are unexpected from them," said an official in the Indian delegation.
In fact, chair of the ministerial, Amina Mohamed, had similar views even though she said it is time for the multilateral system to work so that the negotiating function remains alive.
Categorically stating that a decision has to be taken on how the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO goes forward, she said, "Do we talk of all issues on table or issues after TFA (Trade Facilitation Agreement) in Doha Development Agenda or we add new issues that will take us to the next level of the organization in the multilateral trading function. It's taking a tremendous amount of resources on it. It's not working for us. We are keeping missions pen in Geneva open for this. And yet very little value for money. Because for developing countries, patience is running out. We have been paying for a very long time. It is time for the system to pay back by ensuring that the negotiating function remains alive." She even urged those countries which had not ratified the TFA to do so."'TFA has been ratified by 51 countries. Why is it difficult to get another 51 countries to get past the halfway mark," she asked.
India is one of the countries which is yet to ratify the pact.
Bennett, Coleman & Co., Ltd. 

African leaders push for WTO pact but experts are sceptical

15 December 2015
Deutsche Welle
Mixed expectations and goals are emerging as the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO opens its first ministerial conference in Africa in the Kenyan capital Nairobi. African ministers are pushing for major changes to benefit developing countries.
Kenyan President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Uhuru Kenyatta opened the ministerial HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) discussions calling the gathering "historic and crucial."
"This conference will boost trade and investment, create employment and ultimately contribute to poverty eradication," he said in a welcome message.
He also stressed the need for African countries to use the meeting as a springboard to diversify their economies.
"National, regional and multilateral policy choices that we make will matter," Kenyatta said. "The choices and positions we take will have consequences."
Liberian President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, addressed participants and proposed that less developed counties should be supported to boost their trade and achieve sustainable development goals. Liberia is set to become a member of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO this week.
“We are optimistic that this council meeting is poised to impact local trade, strengthen multilateral trading system, and ensure that the less developed nations of the world are given a better deal by the removal of barriers which will foster a larger percentage of global trade,” she said.
A long process
This current round of negotiations, known as the Doha round, has been going on for 14 years. The original goals were to liberalize global trade between developed and developing countries by reducing subsidies, removing customs barriers and opening markets to all members.
However there are large rifts between developed countries like the United States and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union and big emerging economies like China and India, which have turned into rivals.
The US and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU believe that these countries should no longer insist on getting preferential trade conditions that were originally aimed at boosting the development of poor countries. China and India disagree and are asking for negotiations to continue. Developing countries like Kenya and Liberia are pushing for greater access to markets but are largely stuck in the middle of this dispute.
WTO chief Roberto Azevêdo has opted for a more optimistic tone.
"I think if we go out of Nairobi with renewed confidence and with a common vision for the future that will be a fundamental achievement," he said.
Challenges remain
A partial deal focused on agriculture export competition and trade development in the world's poorest nations is also possible this week, but experts admit the chances of this are shaky at best.
"It will attempt to deliver on the elusive agreements of the Doha Development Agenda,” the European Centre for Development Policy Management (ECDPM) think tank said. "However, despite previous efforts, scant progress has been made and a breakthrough at Nairobi seems unlikely."
Kenyan Foreign Minister Amina Mohamed, who is chairing the conference, has warned that a failure to strike a deal, requiring every member's agreement, would raise questions about the negotiating role of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO.
"We will need to either fix it [Doha], agree on a new way of negotiating or maybe agree to remove it," she said.
Deutsche Welle
World Trade Organisation faces bleak future, says Kenyan minister
John Aglionby in Nairobi
15 December 2015
Financial Times (FT.Com)
The future of the deeply divided HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" World Trade Organisation will be determined this week, with members either agreeing a modernisation strategy or acknowledging that its negotiating framework is fundamentally broken, according to the chairwoman of the group’s biennial ministerial conference. 
Amina Mohamed, Kenya’s minister of foreign affairs and international trade, said that failure to agree a future vision for the 20-year-old organisation might result in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO no longer remaining the forum for negotiating multilateral trade negotiations. 
Ministers from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO’s 162 members are meeting in Nairobi until Friday to try to break the deadlock in the 14-year negotiations over the Doha Development Agenda with some delegations warning that the differences are insurmountable. Officials say the number of unresolved issues on the agenda ahead of the conference is almost unprecedented.
One of the biggest areas of conflict is whether Doha should be retained, augmented or scrapped. The US has stated publicly this week that the framework has not delivered sufficient results while others, including the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU, want the addition of issues like ecommerce that barely existed when Doha was adopted in 2001.
Many developing nations oppose any alterations as they fear that will ease pressure on advanced economies and dilute the issues still under discussion. These include transparency, agricultural subsidies and trade assistance for the poorest nations.
“A decision clearly needs to be made in Nairobi on what to do with this organisation, with its negotiating function. If we have a successful ministerial [conference] it will change because we will have invigorated it, we will have renewed the organisation [and] hopefully modernised it,” said Ms Mohamed, speaking hours before the conference opened.
“If we don’t agree then we will see a change, because obviously what the membership will be saying collectively is that the negotiating function of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO is broken.” 
Ms Mohamed said the scale of the paralysis in the consensus-based HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO was demonstrated by the fact that even issues agreed upon at the last ministerial conference, in Bali two years ago, had not been implemented. Only 57 members have ratified the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO’s Trade Facilitation Agreement, a pact to ease red tape at borders around the world sealed in Bali. Another 51 states have to ratify the agreement for it to come into effect. 
“For us, as developing countries, patience is running out,” the minister added. “We have been paying for a very long time — it is now time for the system to give back.” 
The failure to reach a deal on Doha has led to a proliferation of regional trade deals in the past few years, such as the recently concluded Trans-Pacific Partnership, which includes the US, Japan and 10 other economies.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevêdo, the WTO’s director-general, agreed the organisation needed to become “more responsive to the needs of its members” and agree “on a common vision for the future”. 
“We took 18 years to deliver our first multilateral agreement, in Bali. That’s way too long. We cannot wait another 18 years to deliver another.”
The Financial Times Limited 
China, India join hands, make case for Doha Round in WTO talks
Sidhartha
16 December 2015
The Times of India
NAIROBI: A group of 47 countries — including India, China, South Africa and host Kenya — on Tuesday came together to argue that Doha Round should remain firmly on HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO’s agenda and in the process attempted to block moves by advanced countries led by the US to focus on "new issues" without dealing with their concerns.
A joint statement released on the day the first HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO ministerial began in Africa was meant to clearly signal that several developing and poor countries remained united in pushing the Doha agenda, which included reduction in farm subsidies by the developed countries and allowing more open flow of professionals and FDI across borders in return for lower import duty on agricultural and industrial goods.
"We recognize that the Doha Development Agenda (DDA) is a significant multilateral attempt to respond to trade and development interests of developing members and redress the imbalances codified in the rules resulting from the previous rounds of multilateral trade negotiations. We reaffirm the Declarations and Decisions we adopted at Doha, and all subsequent Declarations and Decisions and reaffirm our full commitment to give effect to them," a joint statement released late Tuesday evening said.
It also set the tone for the ministerial meeting amid fears in the Indian camp that Doha may be given a quiet burial and new issues such as competition policy, labour and environment may enter the agenda.
"…we recognize that a comprehensive conclusion of the DDA with economically meaningful and balanced outcomes will provide impetus to global trade liberalization and facilitation, correct the development deficit in the rules resulting from the previous rounds of multilateral trade negotiations and improve the trading prospects of developing Members, and enhance the primary role of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO in global trade governance," the statement said.
Earlier on Tuesday, India applauded host Kenya’s attempt to keep the focus on the Doha Round and issues that impact the poor. "The Kenyan president (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Uhuru Kenyatta) spoke what many of us have felt… The outcomes are important and it was heartening to know that the emphasis is on agriculture and that livelihoods of people are linked... It is now up to the ministerial to deliver," commerce & industry minister Nirmala Sitharaman told reporters.
She said that agriculture issues marked a very important component of the developmental debate.
India has been pushing for special safeguard measures to protect farmers from import surges besides seeking a permanent solution, or a change in formula for calculating the support given for food procurement.
On Tuesday, Sitharaman met her South African trade minister Rob Davies and is expected to meet her Chinese counterpart Gao Hucheng.
In their address Kenyan trade minister Amina Mohamed and the WTO chief HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevedo identified the success at the Bali ministerial meeting two years ago – in agreeing to a trade facilitation agreement along with addressing India’s concerns on food procurement – but there was no specific mention of delivering on the latter here.
There was also recognition that the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members were deeply divided and an ambitious work programme with a one size fits all approach would not work. "We are not looking at a perfect outcome… Whatever the outcome it will not be as comprehensive and ambitious as when we began the journey," Azevedo said.
Bennett, Coleman & Co., Ltd.
Afghanistan, Liberia to Benefit From Better Governance With WTO Membership
15 December 2015
Sputnik News Service
NAIROBI (Sputnik), Anastasia Levchenko — On Wednesday, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO is expected to welcome two new members from its list of least developed countries (LDCs) — Liberia and Afghanistan.
"What HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO does… it helps to build institutions that are strong and that help to deal with problems and challenges countries have domestically. So our membership is about good governance and transparency," Osakwe said on the sidelines of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's four-day 10th Ministerial Conference (MC10) in Kenya.
Osakwe added that the two countries were also expected to join the trade organization's agreement on government procurement, aimed at regulating acquisition of goods and services based on the principles of openness, transparency and non-discrimination.
The decisions on the two countries' accession were made by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members in October and November correspondingly. Liberia and Afghanistan will bring the total number of LDCs who joined the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO since 1995 to nine.
Rossiya Segodnya International Information Agency
WTO gears up for negotiations over modernisation
Joel Lewin
15 December 2015
Financial Times (FT.Com)
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation will “fundamentally change” after this week’s ministerial conference in Nairobi because members will either decide to modernise it or accept that its negotiating function is broken, according to the meeting’s chairwoman.
Amina Mohamed, Kenya’s minister for foreign affairs and international trade, said:
A decision clearly needs to be made in Nairobi on what to do with this organisation, with its negotiating function.
If we have a successful ministerial [conference] it will change because we will have invigorated it, we will have renewed the organisation, hopefully modernised it.
If we don’t agree then we will see a change because obviously what the membership will be saying collectively is that the negotiating function of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO is broken, is broken.
Many diplomats believe the divisions between the 162 members of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO are too great to bridge in the four days of negotiating allocated to ministers. The US has stated publicly the Doha Development Agenda – the 14-year-old negotiating framework – has not delivered while other nations, like the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU, want additional issues added, writes John Aglionby in Nairobi.
Many developing nations oppose any alterations because they fear that will ease pressure on advanced economies to remove subsidies.
Ms Mohamed highlighted how little progress has been made, saying that even issues agreed at the last ministerial conference, in Bali two years ago, had not been implemented.
She said that if no agreement is reached in Nairobi then “we will need to either fix it, agree on a new way of negotiating, or agree to remove it so the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO focuses on dispute settlement, on trade policy review and the other areas that do not have a negotiated element in them”.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevêdo, the WTO’s director-general, agreed the 20-year-old organisation needed to become “more responsive to the needs of its members” and agree “on a common vision for the future”.
He added:
That vision has to be about negotiating, discussing, not focusing our attention only on the issues that are on the table but looking around [at what is going on in the world].
We took 18 years to deliver our first multilateral agreement, in Bali. That’s way too long. We cannot wait another 18 years to deliver another.
The Financial Times Limited 
China worried about ITA free riders
POLITICO
by Victoria Guida 
NAIROBI, Kenya - Chinese negotiators have raised worries about making unreciprocated concessions in the expansion of the Information Technology Agreement, World Trade Organization diplomats tell POLITICO.
Because every WTO member would benefit from the removal of tariffs under the ITA expansion whether or not they decide to make concessions, those participating in the talks have sought to make up a so-called "critical mass" of information technology exports - now set at 90 percent of the world's tech products - to minimize the effect of "free riders," or countries that reap the benefits without offering their own tariff cuts. Some countries, like India, are members of the original ITA but are not part of the expansion effort.
Beijing is seeking assurances, perhaps through a chairman's statement, that members would be allowed to re-evaluate the deal if it winds up not representing critical mass, WTO diplomats say. Nothing has yet been agreed to on that front.
China also still hasn't put forward its final offer for phasing out tariffs, putting the U.S. and the EU in the position of considering whether to take the deal as is if Beijing's offer does not improve. Even so, diplomats are hopeful an agreement can be struck tonight.
NGOs push for continuation of Doha in Nairobi
POLITICO
By Victoria Guida 
NAIROBI, Kenya - A geographically diverse group of nongovernmental organizations at the World Trade Organization ministers meeting are advocating that members stick to the Doha talks and not explore new issues.
"We were never frankly in favor of the Doha Development Round, but we do believe the development mandate of the Doha Round should not be allowed to come to an end, and there should be no new issues on the table," said Biraj Patnaik, principal adviser to India's Supreme Court Commissioners on the right to food.
Patnaik participated in a press conference with civil society groups like LDC Watch hosted by the Our World Is Not For Sale network, which describes itself as a loose coalition of advocacy groups "fighting the current model of corporate globalization embodied in global trading system," in one of the NGO tents outside the Kenyatta International Conference Center. The groups later staged a protest inside the center, holding up signs emblazoned with "NO NEW ISSUES" and similar demands.
Patnaik also called for a permanent solution on the purchase and storage of food by governments for distribution to the poor, warning that the "peace clause" that shields programs like India's from litigation under the WTO's Agriculture Agreement wouldn't allow African countries who don't have such programs to develop them in the future.
"We also abhor the suggestion of the U.S. trade representative and the EU that special and differential treatment would not be available to emerging economies," he said. "And if you want to understand the deep hypocrisy of this position, all you have to look [at] is the figures," he added, saying the United States spends about $1,600 per capita a year on food stamps for 47 million Americans, while India spends roughly $30 per capita a year on food aid for more than 800 million of its citizens.
Economic Affairs; The myth of US-China economic competition
Linda Lim For The Straits Times
16 December 2015
The Straits Times, Singapore
Talk of competition between the US, a supposedly declining superpower, and a 'rising' China is driven more by politics and domestic considerations than the realities of trade and economics.
As a United States-based academic "expert" on the Asian and global economies, I am often asked by the international business media to comment on Asian regional and world economic developments. In the past several months, the dominant narrative shaping most of these media requests, regardless of their country of origin, is a US versus China battle for hegemony in the Asia-Pacific.
Frustratingly, journalists and editors tend to ignore economic analyses of trade, investment and currency developments, instead selectively highlighting much more simplistic (but more headline- grabbing) interpretations that support this narrative of intensifying political contention between a supposedly declining superpower and a "rising" one. Such rhetoric also unfortunately emanates from the two governments themselves.
TRADE AND DOMESTIC POLITICS
Take, for example, the recently concluded but not yet ratified Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) trade deal. In both the US, a TPP member, and China, not a TPP member, this is invariably presented as a grand attempt by the US to prevent China from "setting the rules of the game" for intra-Pacific trade.
Nobody seems to know - or care - that the TPP was originally initiated in 2005 by four smaller Pacific nations - Brunei, Chile, New Zealand and Singapore - or that many of its provisions derive from what were once called "Singapore issues" - trade-related investment measures, competition policy, government procurement transparency, and trade facilitation - that the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation (WTO) declined to pursue.
ST ILLUSTRATION: MANNY FRANCISCO
The US is just one of the 12 Pacific nations which have signed on to the TPP. It and others have said that China and other current non-members, like South Korea and Indonesia, are welcome to join the deal if they accept its terms, collectively negotiated over many years. Even China has said it does not rule out joining the TPP, unlike US ally India, which is likely to stay out for the foreseeable future.
The US is the largest and most influential member of the TPP, and President Barack Obama has promoted it as necessary to "prevent China from setting the rules of the game".
But this is simply a bow to domestic political realities in a highly charged presidential election year, when trade liberalisation is never popular. It is also an attempt to elevate a unifying national interest over divided domestic business interests: for example, US agribusiness supports TPP but the auto industry has opposed it - both because it includes Japan.
Economically, the TPP, like any preferential free trade area (PFTA), is a "second-best" option to multilateral trade liberalisation. But the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's failure to advance trade liberalisation on a global scale has led to the proliferation of many PFTAs: it is easier for fewer countries, already relatively open and closely linked with one another, to agree to further economic integration measures.
INVESTMENT AND THE AIIB
In the investment arena, the China-led HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) has caused some controversy.
There is no question that many Asian developing countries have pressing infrastructure needs that more external funding would help meet. But the US initially opposed the AIIB, on grounds that a China-led venture would not follow the "best practices" developed over decades by the multilateral HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Bank (headed by an American), HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" International Monetary Fund (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF, headed by a European) and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Asian Development Bank (ADB, headed by a Japanese).
These "best practices" are supposed to include rigorous financial standards, observance of human rights and environmental protections, and prevention of corruption - though in practice many funded projects have not met these requirements.
Despite US objections, 57 countries have joined the AIIB, variously interested in obtaining more funds for infrastructure development, contracts for home-country companies, and better business relations with China itself. This is not unusual in the world of international development assistance: foreign policy goals of donor/lender/ investor nations always play a role, especially where their taxpayer funds are employed.
China is no different from the US, Japan or European countries in seeking benefits for its own banks and infrastructure companies through AIIB, especially given slowing growth and excess capacity at home for its mostly state-owned steel, railway and construction companies.
It deviates from other donor/lender/investor nations mainly by using high-profile China-centric imagery such as the "One Belt One Road" project and "New Silk Road" fund, which are not part of AIIB but closely associated with it.
Contrary to intentions, the strong identification of these projects with China, when it is also asserting territorial rights in the South China Sea, could backfire on its foreign policy goals. Some backfiring happened with decades of bilateral development assistance by the US in Latin America and the Middle East, and China itself in Africa more recently. A multilateral organisation like the AIIB is less likely to rouse similar resentment among recipients, especially if properly and transparently governed.
The participation of many experienced donor/lender/ investor nations in the AIIB - to which China will contribute 26 per cent of the funds, without a veto - should help ensure that international "best practices" are adopted, for example in risk management.
Sufficient checks and balances within the AIIB operation should mitigate concern that large-scale foreign debt incurred for insufficiently well-evaluated projects might pose a systemic financial risk to the regional and world economies.
So far there is no indication that Chinese lenders are offering financial terms that are too lax for infrastructure projects in South-east Asia and Central Asia; the opposite may even be true; although the projects themselves may be cheaper with Chinese contractors and inputs. China will also continue to be involved in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Bank, where the US has a veto, and the ADB.
From an economic perspective, both the TPP and AIIB are not "zero-sum games". Despite the internal operational challenges that each faces, both have the potential to benefit China and the US, neither of which is precluded from joining either.
Rather, it is the current domestic political context in each country that has transformed both institutional innovations into an apparent struggle for international dominance.
CURRENCIES
Thus the so-called "rise of the yuan" is presented in the Chinese media and online discourse as reflecting China's successful ascent to global economic leadership, "rivalling the dollar". This narrative was boosted by theHYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF's recent acceptance of the yuan as an official reserve currency in its Special Drawing Rights (SDR) basket that already includes the US dollar, euro, yen and pound.
Never mind that there is less to this move than meets the eye. The yuan accounts for only 2.5 per cent of global payments and 1 per cent of foreign exchange reserves (versus 64 per cent for the dollar), despite China's 12 per cent share of world trade (similar to the US share); most of this use occurs in Hong Kong and among affiliates of Chinese companies operating abroad.
SDR status has not stemmed the ongoing massive capital outflow from China, and the yuan has continued to weaken despite the authorities intervening to stem its slide - chiefly by selling record amounts of US Treasuries - as the US dollar continues to soar.
The causes of flight from the yuan are many, including China's gross domestic product (GDP) growth slowdown and monetary stimulus; Chinese asset-holders' insecurity following the aggressive anti-corruption campaign; expected continued yuan weakening as the government increasingly allows its value to be set by market forces, in line with the longer-term requirements of a global reserve currency; and the attraction of higher yields on dollar assets given strong US GDP growth and the Fed's impending interest-rate hike.
This last factor has spawned a conspiracy theory widely held in China and among Chinese nationals overseas: the belief that the dollar is the source of much of the US' global power, which it will go to any lengths to defend, including, in one version, destabilising the Middle East via the Iraq War to undermine the euro. Chinese conspiracy theorists accord particular relevance to the value of "seigniorage" - the difference between a currency's face value and its production cost - which the dollar's popularity as a reserve currency has enabled the US to enjoy for decades.
In this narrative, the Fed is raising interest rates not to contain potential inflationary pressures in a full-employment economy - as standard Keynesian economic theory would prescribe - but rather to deliberately weaken the yuan to deflect its "challenge" to the dollar's supremacy. Never mind that the US supports the yuan becoming a reserve currency - believing, like the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF, that this will accelerate financial liberalisation in China - or that the strong dollar is already detracting from US GDP growth and corporate profits.
Interestingly, the Chinese belief that the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" US government controls the value of the dollar dovetails with the belief of American libertarian fantasists who demonise the Fed and have convinced many mainstream legislators that its powers should be curtailed. Both groups have difficulty understanding that it is global financial market actors representing millions of individual savers and investors responding to ever-changing risk/return calculations, who decide the value of freely floating currencies (which the dollar, euro and pound are, but the yuan is not).
Such conspiracy theorists are not alone: during the 1997-98 Asian financial crisis, legions of senior bankers, industrialists and politicians in South-east Asia and South Korea believed a "Wall Street-Treasury-IMF" cabal was responsible for engineering the collapse of their overvalued fixed currencies.
More seriously, every recent US presidential election year has seen Chinese "currency manipulation" become a major issue. Even the 2012 Republican nominee HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Mitt Romney, an alumnus of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Harvard Business School and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Bain Capital - who should therefore know better - declared that his "first act as President" would be to "brand China a currency manipulator", thereby justifying the imposition of stiff penalties on Chinese imports.
Targeting of Chinese currency policy early in the current presidential election season has waned, in part because of the strong US economy, low unemployment, and crowding out by other, even sillier, issues. But next year, as higher interest rates begin to bite, the long US economic expansion wanes, and the yuan continues its forecast depreciation, the issue is likely to resurface. Never mind that any "currency manipulation" the Chinese government undertakes is likely to be intervention to strengthen, not weaken the yuan.
SCARY GOVERNMENT POLICY
Market forces may be non-transparent and scary, but not any more so than government policy actions, especially when, as in China's case recently, they are accompanied by a strict clampdown on information and its purveyors. This suggests that economic problems might be worse than they appear, and that policy can aggravate them by retarding reforms, increasing uncertainty, and paralysing both state actors and private investors.
No doubt the US and China have their differences, and compete for global influence. But politicians and pundits on both sides of the Pacific should ratchet down their rhetoric that privileges domestic political myth over international economic reality.
If not, a rising risk of conflict over the other's hegemonic aspirations that each rails against, might make the rest of us both poorer, and less secure.
* The writer is Professor of Strategy at the Stephen Ross School of Business, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" University of Michigan in the United States.
Singapore Press Holdings Limited
END
 
Josep Bosch, 
Head of Media unit
Information and External Relations Division
+41227395681
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.