HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "US trade chief moves within reach of big Trans-Pacific prize
·         HYPERLINK \l "Ukraine ready to start consultations on new imports duties in WTO
·         HYPERLINK \l "India Cites Multitude of Errors in WTO Ruling on U.S. Poultry Ban
·         HYPERLINK \l "Dominican Republic Criticizes U.K. Tobacco Plain Packaging Proposal
·         HYPERLINK \l "Trips extension for pharma sector
·         HYPERLINK \l "S. Korea faces possible oversupply of rice on record output, imports
·         HYPERLINK \l "Obama seeks to fold U.S. trade agencies into one-stop-shop
·         HYPERLINK \l "Franc fort: l'USP veut une table ronde pour le secteur agro-alimentaire
·         HYPERLINK \l "Swiss Economy Braces for Franc’s Impact
·         HYPERLINK \l "Switzerland remains offshore wealth magnet
 
 
US trade chief moves within reach of big Trans-Pacific prize
By Shawn Donnan, World Trade Editor 
3 February 2015
Financial Times
 
Despite obstacles, Froman is resolute that agreement will protect workers

If all goes to plan in the coming months, Mike Froman, US trade representative, is set to land arguably the biggest prize in the country's recent economic history.

The 12-country Trans-Pacific Partnership, now nearing conclusion almost seven years after the US joined negotiations, is daunting in size and scope and dwarfs the North American Free Trade Agreement with Canada and Mexico that went into effect two decades ago.

Some 40 per cent of global output will be covered by the TPP, including two of the top three economies in the world (the US and Japan). It will significantly lower tariffs and other trade barriers around the Pacific Rim on everything from rice and steaks to cars and chemicals. It will contain enforceable standards on labour and the environment. It will set benchmarks by delineating rules for state-owned enterprises in the developing world and the digital economy. It will leave rivals in Beijing and Brussels salivating.

Yet the TPP is being derided by many inside President Barack Obama's Democratic party and by the unions it has relied on for its base. At a time when Mr Obama is putting a new "middle-class economics" and the fight against inequality at the centre of his agenda, his push for new trade agreements causes many on his side of politics to squirm.

Such are the politics of trade in the US.

The consensus among many Democrats with regard to trade agreements and globalisation is that they have not been kind to the middle class, having contributed to high-paying manufacturing jobs being shipped offshore and wages stagnating.

Economists such as Joseph Stiglitz and Paul Krugman have raised doubts about TPP. Even as she has made friendly noises on trade, Nancy Pelosi, the powerful Democratic leader in the House of Representatives, has been blunt about the administration's challenge. "The burden is on [the White House] to demonstrate that this is good for American pay cheques," she said last week.

But, sitting before the brick hearth in his office, a spitting distance from the White House, Mr Froman is resolute.

"We're doing this to protect American jobs and American workers," he tells the Financial Times in an interview.

The TPP is, he argues, a way to open up more markets for US goods and services in fast-growing Asia and to create high-paying jobs at home. It is also a way to level the playing field for American workers by including stronger labour and environmental standards that will be enforceable via trade sanctions. And, with Canada and Mexico included, to deliver on President Obama's long-ago campaign promise to renegotiate Nafta, something the progressive wing of the Democratic party has long sought.

"There are a lot of people who raise very legitimate concerns about the impact of globalisation on patterns of production, on jobs, on wages. But I think it's also important not to conflate globalisation with trade agreements," Mr Froman says.

"Globalisation is a force. It exists. The question is whether we can use trade agreements to shape it, or whether we want to just sit and be shaped by it."

The US, he says, needs to be at the forefront of setting global rules of commerce. Countries like China are engaged in their own rival bids to create regional blocs that exclude the US and do not include the sort of rules the US is pursuing on labour, intellectual property or the internet. Ceding ground to such rivals "has got to be worse for American workers and the American middle class than even the status quo".

Negotiators from the US, Japan and the 10 other countries in the TPP are involved in almost constant discussions. Obstacles clearly remain and negotiations are tough. But a TPP deal is "a small number of months" away, Mr Froman forecast during a Senate hearing last week.

The US has told its partners within the TPP that it wants to complete negotiations before the summer so that an agreement can be put to Congress by the end of 2015 and before the 2016 presidential campaign heats up.

Amid pitched partisan battles on other issues, importantly the new Republican leadership in Congress says it wants to give Mr Obama the "fast-track" authority he needs to close the TPP and, eventually, a parallel negotiation with the EU.

Business groups, Republicans and the administration all believe a healthy majority in Congress will back a vote on what is formally called Trade Promotion Authority. Asked whether he expects such a vote to succeed, Mr Froman answers: "Yes".

The consensus in the US is that Congress is likely to vote on fast-track authority within two-three months and that a TPP deal will be closed shortly thereafter. Mr Froman's big moment - the US's big trade moment - may well be not very far away.
 
 
Ukraine ready to start consultations on new imports duties in WTO 
 
Kyiv, February 2 (Interfax-Ukraine) - Ukraine is ready to commence consultations on the introduction of additional 5-10% imports duties for 100 groups of goods in the World Trade Organization's (WTO) Committee on Balance-of-Payments Restrictions.

According to a posting on the WTO's official website, temporary import surcharge is being introduced because of serious deterioration of the balance of payments of Ukraine, a significant reduction of its monetary reserves.

The objective of this measure is to address quickly the negative balance of payments of Ukraine, a significant reduction of monetary reserves of the National Bank and to restore equilibrium of the balance of payments.

In 2014 balance of payments of Ukraine was affected by a combination of extremely adverse factors such as increased barriers to Ukrainian export to traditional markets, unfavorable market prices for major export goods, anti-terrorist operation in eastern Ukraine and annexation of Crimea, dramatic devaluation of the national currency, destabilization of the banking system and outflow of investments.

Following 11 months of 2014 the balance of payments has been formed as negative at more than $11.046 billion. As of January 9, 2015 the international reserves amounted to $ 7.34 billion which provided funding of future imports for 1.4 months.

 
India Cites Multitude of Errors in WTO Ruling on U.S. Poultry Ban 
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, February 3, 2015
 
Feb. 2 — A World Trade Organization dispute settlement panel committed a long list of legal errors and misinterpretations in its decision against India's ban on U.S. poultry imports, India said in its appellate filing.
 
The panel's Oct. 14 report said India's ban violated the WTO Sanitary and Phytosanitary (SPS) Agreement because it was not based on the relevant international standards, among other failings.
 
India alleged that the WTO panel inaccurately interpreted the Indian policies used to prevent harm to its citizens and did not rule objectively in other matters of the dispute.
 
U.S. poultry and egg producers have long argued that there was poor scientific basis for India to prohibit exports of their products and called the ban “thinly-veiled protectionism” (199 WTO, 10/15/14). Annual U.S. poultry exports to India could surpass $300 million if the trade barriers were eliminated, according to industry estimates.
 
Article 2.2
 
India's appeal said the panel ruled incorrectly in its determination that India's avian influenza (AI) measures were inconsistent with Article 2.2 of the SPS Agreement.
 
Section 2.2 of the agreement requires members to “ensure that any sanitary or phytosanitary measure is applied only to the extent necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health, is based on scientific principles and is not maintained without sufficient scientific evidence.”
 
The panel agreed with the U.S. argument that India's measures did not adequately conform to the World Organization for Animal Health's (OIE) Terrestrial Animal Code, the relevant international standard for SPS determinations in this case.
 
The panel further said India's AI measures were applied “beyond the extent necessary to protect human and animal life or health.”
 
India countered that the panel erred in its interpretation because it: 
• made an “incorrect interpretation” Article 2.2 the SPS Agreement;

• disregarded India's evidence that its AI measures are based on scientific principles and sufficient scientific evidence;

• failed to take into account the difference between highly pathogenic avian influenza and low pathogenic avian influenza; and

• disregarded India's argument that its AI measures are based on a risk assessment that takes into account relevant international organizations.

Articles 3.1 and 3.2
 
India said the panel erred in its finding that Indian AI measures did not conform to international standards and urged the panel to reverse its decision that the measures were inconsistent with articles 3.1 and 3.2 of the SPS Agreement.
 
The panel decision said India was “not entitled to benefit from the presumption of consistency of its AI measures with the other relevant provisions of the SPS Agreement and of the GATT 1994 because India's AI measures do not ‘conform to’ the [OIE] Terrestrial Code.”
 
India said the panel incorrectly disregarded India's “arguments and evidence” and failed to interpret the OIE Code “in accordance with the customary principles of international law as codified in Article 31 and Article 32” of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties.
 
Further, the panel arrived at a conclusion “which is not supported by the evidence available and thus is not an objective assessment of matter,” India's appeal claimed.
 
Articles 6.1 and 6.2
 
India's appeal said the dispute panel erred in finding that India's AI measures failed to separate disease-free areas and areas of low disease prevalence, thus violating sections 6.1 and 6.2 of the SPS Agreement.
 
India countered that the first sentence of the SPS Agreement only requires recognition of the concepts of pest- or disease-free areas and areas of low pest or disease prevalence and not of implementation of these concepts.
 
India's added that the panel failed to recognize that Section 6.1 of the SPS agreement requires an importing country to adapt its sanitary measures to the sanitary or phytosanitary characteristics of the area of the exporting country “only upon receiving a formal proposal.”
 
“Since the United States has not made any formal proposal pursuant to Article 6.3 of the SPS Agreement, India has not acted inconsistently with Article 6.1,” the appeal said.
 
Other Objections
 
India objected to several rulings on claims that it said were not argued by the U.S. in the dispute.
 
India sought to reverse the panel's findings that were based on individual expert testimony that India said exceeded the scope of the OIE code.
 
India further urged the panel to reverse findings that its AI measures were more trade restrictive than required to achieve an appropriate level of protection.
 
Typically, the WTO Appellate Body has 90 days to issue a report following an appeal.
 
 
Dominican Republic Criticizes U.K. Tobacco Plain Packaging Proposal
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, February 3, 2015
 
Feb. 2 — The Dominican Republic protested the United Kingdom's plans to introduce plain packaging of tobacco product regulations during a recent World Trade Organization meeting.
 
Trade officials from the Dominican Republic said they are “deeply concerned” that the U.K. is considering a proposal that requires the elimination of trademarks and geographical indications on tobacco packaging as part of its effort to reduce smoking, according to a statement that was made public on Feb. 2.
 
The Dominican Republic and four other WTO members—Ukraine Honduras, Indonesia and Cuba—are already embroiled in an ongoing legal challenge against Australia's 2011 Tobacco Plain Packaging Act and are concerned that more countries will seek to restrict how tobacco manufacturers label cigarette packaging.
 
The dispute is likely to be a topic of discussion at the next meeting of the Council for Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) scheduled for Feb. 24-25 in Geneva.
 
‘Destroys' IP Rights
 
Last month, the U.K. government proposed new rules to require tobacco manufacturers to sell cigarettes and hand-rolling tobacco in packages with standardized colors, text and health warnings (15 WTO, 1/23/15).
 
Opponents of such laws have argued that they impose unfair restrictions on the use of trademarks, geographical indications and other markings in violation of the TRIPS agreement, the agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
 
Specifically, the plain packaging rules exceed the goals of protecting public health and could make it easier and cheaper for counterfeiters to sell cigarettes under false labels, the countries have said.
 
The U.K.’s plain packaging tobacco product proposal “destroys the intellectual property rights of our producers and undermines their competitive opportunities, without providing any concrete advantage for public health,” the Dominican Republic said in a statement that first circulated Jan. 21.
 
Awaiting 2016 Decision
 
The WTO's Dispute Settlement Body is not expected to issue its final decision on the complaint against Australia's tobacco labeling rules until the first half of 2016.
 
In the meantime, the five opponents of plain packaging rules have sought to persuade other WTO members not to seek new, neutral tobacco packaging rules while a resolution to the dispute is pending.
 
New Zealand is considering tobacco labeling legislation that reflects the rules implemented by Australia, as are Ireland and France.
 
The U.S. is not directly involved in the complaint but has reserved its right to participate as a third party.
 
 
Trips extension for pharma sector 
Wasi Ahmed 
3 February 2015
The Financial Express (Bangladesh)
 
Bangladesh, Feb. 3 -- The country's pharmaceutical sector, despite its commendable growth, is fraught with the big question whether it would get period by way of an additional transitional period until the WTO Trade-Related Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) agreement comes into full force. Although the general transitional period for application of the TRIPS agreement in the case of the Least Developed Countries (LDCs) has been extended until 2021, the same will not apply to the pharmaceutical sector. This has been regarded by observers as a lost opportunity, as reviving the issue in favour of extension in future negotiations may not be easy, if not extremely difficult. Currently, under the WTO-TRIPS agreement, Bangladesh is allowed to manufacture and export any kind of generic drugs -- patented or not -- which will not be the case in the absence of a further extension.

One of the difficulties in gaining further flexibility for the pharma sector is that not many countries among the LDCs have been able to develop this sector to a level where expiry of the TRIPS transition period means much to them. The case with Bangladesh is altogether different; the country with its considerably developed pharmaceutical sector is but a loner in the league of the LDCs. This, in other words, means that Bangladesh may find it difficult to team up with the rest of the LDCs in collectively moving the issue at the WTO, as the benefits from extension will be more in favour of Bangladesh than any of its LDC partners.

It may be recalled that the Council for TRIPS adopted in June 2013 a resolution at the WTO that allows LDCs an eight-year extension on exemption from implementing intellectual property (IP) rules under the TRIPS Agreement. But the exemption excludes pharmaceutical products. The LDCs proposed for an extension that would enable them to remain exempt from implementing nearly all provisions of the TRIPS agreement, including for pharmaceutical products, until the time they are classified as "least-developed." Following the refusal of the USA and European Union to accept the LDCs' request for such comprehensive extension, the LDCs will now have to go back to the WTO ahead of the 2016 deadline to renegotiate an extension.

In the face of opposition, led by the USA and the European Union (EU), a compromise was, however, developed. The members of the World Trade Organisation agreed to extend the deadline by eight more years, until July 1, 2021 allowing the LDCs to access more affordable medical technologies such as diagnostics and medical devices for a few more years. However, this compromise does not address the looming 2016 deadline of a second transition period, which exempts the LDCs from implementing stringent IP regulations for pharmaceutical products.

Exclusion of pharmaceutical products from the general extension is viewed by many as not only harsh but unbecoming also. Experts opine that given the crucial importance of pharmaceutical products, the LDCs should insist on an unconditional extension. "It is clear that wealthy countries are ignoring the huge health challenges LDCs face by refusing to grant them a longer and more complete extension" says Medecins Sans Frontieres, or Doctors Without Borders (MSF), a humanitarian medical organisation. MSF reports that it is noticing ever more unaffordable and inaccessible medicines in developing countries that have implemented the TRIPS Agreement and for the LDCs to be forced to do the same by 2016 would be disastrous.

The case of the WTO LDC Members for an extension of the time period within which they must become compliant with the TRIPS Agreement covers all forms of intellectual property protection under TRIPS. Even though it is true that some LDCs have signed other treaties that might impose some IP obligations (e.g., the Paris Convention on Industrial Property or the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works), freeing themselves from the broader and stronger spectrum of IP mandates in TRIPS will enable their access to broad classes of essential public goods, including all medical commodities, educational and informational resources, agricultural resources, and green/climate control technologies. The LDCs thus must retain the right to rollback implementation, application and enforcement of patent and data rights with respect to pharmaceutical products and the right to seek further extensions of the 2016 transition period.

Some observers wonder whether the move for further extension would cover the previous extension granted to LDCs in 2002 pursuant to Paragraph 7 of the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health covering "pharmaceutical products." In technical terms, the 2002 extension applied with respect to Section 5 and 7 of Part II of the TRIPS Agreement, namely the sections dealing with patents and data protection. The term "pharmaceutical products" is not defined in the 2002 LDC Extension (which runs until January 01, 2016), but whatever its interpretation, its application is not as broad as all the medical technologies and commodities that would be covered under the general LDC extension request.

At home, the ministry of commerce is reportedly preparing for the negotiation on extension. Within this month (February), the ministry is to submit a proposal to the LDC group committee currently headed by Uganda. A good deal depends on how good or worse Bangladesh fairs in taking the LDC group with it in the crucial negotiation ahead.
 
 
S. Korea faces possible oversupply of rice on record output, imports 
 
SEJONG, Feb. 2 (Yonhap) -- South Korea may face an oversupply of rice this year as its output reached a five-year high while rice consumption continues to shrink, government officials said Monday.

According to the officials from the Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Rural Affairs, the country's self-sufficiency rate for rice is expected to reach 97 percent in 2015.

The country's overall output of rice inched up 0.3 percent on-year to some 4.24 million tons in 2014.

South Korea is also required to import at least 408,700 tons of rice every year under a special agreement with the World Trade Organization (WTO), which had allowed the country to postpone opening its rice market over the past 20 years.

South Korea liberalized its rice market through tarrification at the start of this year.

The oversupply problem will likely be further accelerated by a drop in the country's rice consumption, the ministry officials noted.

In 2014, the country's annual intake of rice per person dipped 3.1 percent on-year to a record low of 65.1 kilograms.

The per capita consumption is again expected to shrink this year, continuing its steady decline over the past 40 odd years since 1970 when it hit a record high of 136.4 kg, officials said.
 
 
Obama seeks to fold U.S. trade agencies into one-stop-shop 
 
WASHINGTON, Feb 2 (Reuters) - President Barack Obama on Monday revived a proposal to fold the office of the U.S. Trade Representative and other trade bodies into a one-stop-shop for U.S. exporters, a plan that in the past drew mixed reviews.

The proposal in the fiscal year 2016 budget brings back a plan first suggested in 2012, which the administration said at the time could save $3 billion over 10 years.

It comes at a hectic time, with U.S. negotiators hoping to complete work on the 12-nation Trans-Pacific Partnership within months and lawmakers expected soon to consider legislation to streamline the passage of such deals through Congress. The United States is also negotiating a trade pact with Europe.

The revamp would put USTR, the Export-Import Bank, the Overseas Private Investment Corporation, the U.S. Trade and Development Agency, the Small Business Administration, parts of the Department of Commerce and rural business programs at several agencies under the same roof.

"By bringing together the core tools to expand trade and investment, grow small businesses, and support innovation, the new department would coordinate these resources to maximize the benefits for businesses and the economy," the budget proposal said. Commerce Deputy Secretary Bruce Andrews said there was no updated estimate for potential savings.

In the past, some lawmakers voiced cautious support for the streamlining plan while others worried it would create a bureaucratic behemoth that would compromise the independence of some of the trade bodies.

The Republican chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, Orrin Hatch, said eliminating USTR was "misguided at best."

"Folding an agency with a proven track record, like USTR, into a massive government bureaucracy would only undermine its effectiveness," he said in a statement.

USTR has the lead on free trade deals and World Trade Organization disputes. The Commerce Department supports exporters and helps adjudicate complaints about unfair competition from exports, and Ex-Im provides financial support for exporters and overseas buyers of U.S. goods.

The budget proposal also includes $469 million to expand duty-free access for exports from selected trading partners and a separate program aimed at African nations.
 
 
Franc fort: l'USP veut une table ronde pour le secteur agro-alimentaire 
 
Berne (awp/ats) - L'Union suisse des paysans (USP) demande une table ronde pour le secteur agro-alimentaire. Après une première lettre de doléances envoyée au conseiller fédéral Johann Schneider-Ammann, une deuxième va suivre, adressée cette fois au secteur du commerce de détail et aux transformateurs.

Le fromage et par là la production de lait est le secteur agricole le plus touché par la fin du taux plancher, suivi du sucre et du vin."Les fromages suisses sont plutôt chers, souvent au-delà de 20 euros par kilo, souligne Manuela Sonderegger, cheffe des relations publiques de Switzerland cheese marketing dans une interview à 'Agri', une limite psychologique pour les consommateurs européens".

"En 2013, 37,2% de la production helvétique de fromages a été exportées. L'Emmentaler, le Gruyère et l'Appenzeller sont les produits les plus vendus à l'étranger", souvent plus de la moitié des quantités produites pour ces fromages.

"Emmi a déjà dit qu'il allait baisser le prix du lait, a indiqué lundi à l'ats Sandra Helfenstein, porte-parole de l'USP. L'USP, dont le comité s'est réuni lundi à Berne, va donc s'adresser cette semaine encore au secteur concerné, via un courrier.

L'USP a déjà réagi en envoyant une première lettre au conseiller fédéral Johann Schneider-Ammann le 26 janvier dernier. Dans celle-ci, l'organisation réclame une augmentation de près de 45 millions de francs des moyens financiers mis à disposition de la loi chocolatière.

Le Parlement avait inscrit à ce titre 70 millions de francs au budget 2015. L'USP demande d'augmenter cette aide jusqu'au plafond fixé par l'Organisation mondiale du commence (OMC) de 114,9 millions de francs.

Concernant le sucre, l'USP souhaite une contribution spécifique pour la culture de la betterave et un ajustement des protections douanières. "Le sucre suisse subit déjà la pression du sucre européen, très bon marché", avance Martin Rufer, responsable du département Production, marché et écologie.

L'USP veut également 13 millions de francs à titre de promotion des ventes pour le fromage et le vin. Enfin, l'organisation pense à remercier le client suisse de consommer local et réfléchit à une action, a encore relevé Sandra Helfenstein.
 
 
Swiss Economy Braces for Franc’s Impact 
BY NEIL MAC LUCAS 
3 Feb 2015 The Wall Street Journal Europe
 
ZURICH—When the Swiss National Bank tied the Swiss franc to the euro 3 ½ years ago, it feared a surging franc would tip the economy into recession. With the SNB now having lifted the cap, the economy is back to square one: a stronger franc again threatens to snuff out growth in one of Europe’s few bright spots. 
 
Swiss watchmakers are among those companies whose exports could fall because of the central bank’s decision to let the franc float freely against the euro.

Switzerland’s export sector, equal to about 70% of gross domestic product, is most at risk. Swiss goods could be priced out of the eurozone, the country’s biggest market, threatening both Swiss corporate profits and jobs. 
 
Zurich-based private bank Julius Baer Group AG said on Monday that it would cut about 200 jobs to “mitigate” the effects of the strong franc, in the first response among Switzerland’s outsize banking industry. Like other Swiss private banks, Julius Baer reports most of its costs in francs, but derives most of its income in euros or dollars. 
 
The country’s two leading economic research institutes—KOF and BAK Basel— now predict that the economy will enter a recession before the end of this year. “The first sector likely to be hit by the shock rise in the franc will be exports, which could drop by around 1.3% this year,” said BAK Basel economist Alexis Bill Körber. 
 
Switzerland’s three largest banks still expect the economy to avoid a recession, commonly defined as two consecutive quarters of declines in gross domestic product. But they have cut their forecasts to an anemic growth rate of between 0.5% and 0.8% this year. That compares with expected growth of 1.4% in 2014. 
 
Neither the SNB or the government has issued new economic forecasts since the central bank’s surprising decision to lift the cap on Jan. 15, which sent the franc rocketing against the euro and roiled global markets. The bank defended its decision, saying the upturn in the U.S. economy had boosted the dollar against the euro and the franc, making the franc’s cap untenable. 
The franc on Monday traded at 1.0502 against the euro, compared with around 1.2008 the day the cap was lifted. 
 
The Swiss government, which supported the SNB’s decision, has limited its response so far to urging firms to raise their productivity. The head of the country’s economics department, Johann Schneider- Ammann, recently said that pay cuts may also be necessary. Mr. Schneider-Ammann has held two meetings with business, industry, trade-union and public-service bodies to discuss responses to the SNB’s move. 
 
Swiss officials have for now ruled out an economic stimulus plan. They have, however, agreed to a program to compensate workers placed on shorter hours because of the strengthened franc. 
 
The Swiss unemployment rate of 3.4%, remains low by European standards; the eurozone jobless rate hit 11.4% in December. But economists expect Swiss companies to push the country’s unemployment rate higher in coming months. Swiss industrial lobby group Swissmem has warned that the strong franc could put around 20% of its members out of business. 
 
In addition to banks, retailers are likely to be hard hit by the stronger franc. That is particularly true for those near Switzerland’s border with Germany, France and Italy, a relatively short drive away for shoppers seeking to take advantage of the stronger franc. 
 
Swiss retailer Migros Group expects sales to decline at its stores along the border, according to comments made to Swiss media by Chief Executive Herbert Bolliger. The difference in staff costs between Migros and its German competitors is “enormous,” Mr. Bolliger said, adding that a Migros cashier in Switzerland earns around 4,000 francs (€ 3,800) a month compared with the € 1,600 a month made by a cashier in Germany. 
 
In September 2011, when the SNB first imposed its cap on the franc, the central bank cited “an acute threat to the economy,” and the risk of a “deflationary development.” Those two threats remain, analysts say. 
 
The threat of falling prices is actually more acute now than it was 3 ½ years ago, they say, as the decline in oil prices has put further pressure on Swiss prices. The SNB is forecasting Swiss prices will drop an average 0.1% this year because of lower oil prices and the stronger franc. 
 
“A technical recession in Switzerland cannot be excluded,” said Cornelia Luchsinger, a senior economist at Zuercher Kantonalbank.
 
Switzerland remains offshore wealth magnet
By Matthew Allen
Feb 2, 2015 - 14:16
Swissinfo.ch
 
The world’s wealthy still consider Switzerland the best place to park their riches despite tax evasion scandals ending banking secrecy. Swiss banks held $2 trillion (CHF1.87 trillion) of offshore wealth last year, according to financial consulting firm Deloitte.
 
This confirms Switzerland as being ahead of Britain ($1.7 trillion) and the United States ($1.4 trillion) as the world’s leading destination of cross-border wealth management. However, smaller Asian centres, such as Hong Kong and Singapore, continue to grow at a faster rate than Switzerland despite remaining some distance away in terms of absolute size of assets under management (AUM).
 
“Switzerland remains the world’s largest centre, but other locations are catching up rapidly – especially Hong Kong [142% AUM growth], the US [28%] and Singapore [25%],” Daniel Kobler, Deloitte Switzerland’s head of Banking Strategy Consulting, said in the report.
 
Kobler’s comments echoed those being made by various observers – most notably WealthInsight in 2013 – in the past two years that warned of Asian competitors catching up with, and overtaking, Switzerland in the next few years.
 
Behind Switzerland’s headline AUM statistic lurks further problems for the Swiss private banking sector. The majority of the 14% AUM growth in Switzerland since 2008 has been realised by rebounding markets swelling the size of assets that took such a hit during the financial crisis.
 
This masks the fact that Switzerland lost 7% of its AUM in the same period as a result of clients withdrawing their money in the face of a growing global crackdown on tax evasion. This has put a serious dampener on overall growth of the Swiss wealth management business.
 
Declining profitability
 
The Deloitte study, however, reveals that Switzerland was a long way from being the worst affected jurisdiction in this respect. Only Hong Kong and Singapore saw more wealth deposits than withdrawals between 2008 and 2014.
 
While Switzerland lost $135 million through this process, Britain saw $300 million disappear (-21% of total AUM) while a staggering $1.3 trillion of offshore wealth drained away from Panama and the Caribbean (a loss of three-quarters of cross-border AUM).
 
The latter group of jurisdictions suffered so badly due to their close proximity to the US, while the British government has made some efforts to clean up the image of its numerous tax havens, such as Jersey and more far flung protectorates.
 
Another serious issue facing Swiss banks is their declining profitability. Deloitte calculates that profit margins in Switzerland have shrunk from 40 basis points in 2008 to 24 bps last year. 
 
This decline has been largely caused by tax evasion legal costs, implementing new regulations and other expenses, such as new technology to keep up with the industry’s digitisation drive. Income has also taken a hit as clients eschew risk and demand more for the fees that banks charge them.
 
“Swiss providers face some challenges on both revenue realisation and sustainable cost management,” said Kobler.
 
Higher costs, lower revenues
 
The effects of higher costs and lower revenues has not been lost on the sector. The past few years have been punctuated by several reports highlighting the problem, particularly for smaller banks that lack the financial clout to redirect their resources to other locations.
 
The larger banks have been busy shutting down operations in less profitable countries and expanding in growth regions. This includes Asia (where UBS is the largest wealth manager) and also mainland Europe where some Swiss banks have been building up offices to capture some of the offshore wealth that is leaving Switzerland.
 
A handful of traditional private banks, such as Pictet and Lombard Odier, have abandoned their unlimited liability models to find an extra source of funding as stock-listed banks.
 
But the much-hyped wave of consolidation in the Swiss private banking sector has so far only really materialised in the dwindling number of foreign banks in Switzerland. The predicted fall of many smaller local banks has not yet come to pass.
 
The industry is also bracing itself for the negative effects of the strong franc that soared 20% against the euro when the Swiss National Bank abandoned its euro peg on January 15.  Julius Baer announced on Monday that it needed to save CHF100 million by shedding some 200 jobs as a result of the strong franc pressures on margins.
END


  ________________________________  
Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.