Headlines:
IT tariffs slashed in biggest WTO deal since 1996
WTO members cut import tariffs on 201 IT products in major trade deal
Deal to end high-tech tariffs offers ray of hope at WTO talks 
Liberia becomes WTO member, eyes investment
WTO ministers tussle over future course of global free trade talks 
Poorest countries left little options as fair trade talks show no progress
Nairobi conference raises great hopes for African continent despite modest results being expected
India says limited convergence among WTO members on export competition deal
China says abandoning multilateralism in trade talks shortsighted, irresponsible
Australia calls for overhaul of WTO
WTO must ponder its raison d'etre amid prolonged Doha stalemate
Congress spending bill repeals COOL meat labeling
Kenya: African cotton producers declare WTO trade dispute
India exports fall for 12th straight month
Putin decrees to suspend free-trade zone with Ukraine
 
Details:
IT tariffs slashed in biggest WTO deal since 1996
John Aglionby in Nairobi
16 December 2015
Financial Times (FT.Com)
More than 50 members of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation on Wednesday concluded the biggest tariff-reduction deal in almost two decades, eliminating restrictions on the $1.3tn trade of 201 IT products.
The expansion of the 1996 Information Technology Agreement will increase global gross domestic product by $190bn a year, according to IT experts, as the costs are cut in trading goods from GPS devices and video game consoles to next-generation semiconductors.
Trade ministers said it would also help reinvigorate the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO, which is deeply divided over its failure to break the years-long deadlock in negotiations over the 2001 Doha Development Agenda.
Many developed nations at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO’s biennial conference in Nairobi this week have called for the DDA to be shelved or augmented to include new issues. Most developing nations want to retain the framework in a bid to secure more concessions from advanced economies, especially on agricultural subsidies.
Barriers will be eliminated in three stages under the expanded ITA. 65 per cent of the new tariff lines representing 88 per cent of imports will be cut immediately on implementation of the deal in July 2016.
Three years later, additional cuts will mean 89 per cent of tariff lines representing 95 per cent of imports will have been cut. The remaining tariffs will be eliminated by January 2024.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevêdo, director-general of the WTO, defended the staggered implementation of the deal, despite the fast pace of change in the IT industry. “The staging was part of the deal from the beginning,” he said.
“In every single agreement you have to have flexibility enshrined in it or it’s very difficult to strike a compromise.”
Agreement on the 201 products to be included was reached in July, but the conclusion was delayed after China declined to submit its timeframe for phasing out selected products’ tariffs.
Beijing finally submitted its list on Wednesday afternoon on the sidelines of the conference. The other ITA members then verified and approved the timeframe.
Although some important classes of products are not included, among them LED displays and lithium ion batteries, experts hailed the deal as a big breakthrough for multilateral trade negotiations.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" John Neuffer, president of the Washington-based HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Semiconductor Industry Association, described it as a “very big deal” for the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO. “The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO has been struggling to show relevance in opening up markets.” The sectoral agreement, “while only a small piece of the apple, creates a new and useful template”.
Mr Neuffer added that the economic benefit was likely to be greater than the $190bn annual boost to global GDP estimated by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Information Technology and Innovation Foundation.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO estimates trade in IT goods accounts for 7 per cent of trade and has overtaken that in automotive goods as well as in textiles, clothing, iron and steel combined.
The 53 countries participating account for 90 per cent of the trade in IT products. All HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO countries will be able to benefit from the deal, however, because the cuts will be included in the ITA participants’ HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO so-called schedules of concessions.
While the agreement was signed by 53 members, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU was counted as one member even though all 28 HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU member states, and Turkey with which the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU has a customs agreement, will be affected.
The Financial Times Limited (AAIW/EIW)
WTO members cut import tariffs on 201 IT products in major trade deal
By Edith Honan
16 December 2015
Reuters News
NAIROBI, Dec 16 (Reuters) - More than 50 members of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization signed an agreement on Wednesday to remove import tariffs on 201 information technology products, marking the first major global tariff-cutting deal in 19 years.
The products covered account for 10 percent of global trade and should mean consumers pay less for items such as GPS navigation systems, computers and other goods, while companies see cuts in the cost of machine tools.
The deal, signed by 53 countries including China, will remove tariffs on trade worth $1.3 trillion, which is expected to give a $190 billion boost to the world economy.
It is the first major agreement to come out of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization's ministerial conference under way this week in the Kenyan capital Nairobi, and was hailed as a victory for global commerce and for the famously slow-moving organization.
"The ITA expansion is a major win for the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization, the producers of the information and communications technology products and very importantly for consumers around the world," said U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman.
Froman has previously said that more than $100 billion of U.S. exports alone would be covered by the updated agreement, and industry estimates showed the removal of tariffs could support up to 60,000 additional jobs.
In July, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO finalised the list of 201 products. Tariffs on them will be lifted in several stages, taking effect for 65 percent of the products concerned immediately and full implementation within seven years.
New-generation semi-conductors, medical products including magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) machines, printed circuits and satellites are all included in the deal, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO said.
Once in force, the agreement will update the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's 18-year-old Information Technology Agreement and add the new products to the list of goods covered by zero-tariff and duty-free trade.
Technology manufacturers such as HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" General Electric Co, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Intel Corporation, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Texas Instruments Inc, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Microsoft Corp and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Nintendo Co are among companies expected to benefit from the deal. (Additional reporting by Tom Miles; Editing by Hugh Lawson)
Thomson Reuters (Markets) LLC
Deal to end high-tech tariffs offers ray of hope at WTO talks 
By Kennedy Abwao and Thomas Burmeister, dpa
16 December 2015
dpa International Service in English
Nairobi (dpa) - Dozens of countries completed a deal to eliminate tariffs on high-tech IT products on Wednesday at a high level HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) conference in Nairobi, despite serious differences over the future of global trade liberalization talks.
The Information Technology Agreement will phase out tariffs on some 200 products including telecommunication satellites, manufacturing equipment for smart phones and software that are worth 1.3 trillion dollars in annual trade.
"This is a continuing process to be completed in seven years," WTO Director General HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevedo said about the agreement, which was negotiated by more than 50 countries but will provide benefits to all HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members.
The deal had been agreed in principle in July but was negotiated in detail over the past months.
"It shows the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO can reach solutions acceptable to all," Azevedo said.
The breakthrough became possible as manufacturing giant China made concessions on exemptions and transition periods, according to delegates.
The IT deal offered a rare glimpse of optimism at the fractious meeting in Nairobi, where poor and emerging economies including China fought back Western proposals that could shift global trade talks away from their current focus on development.
Trade ministers from emerging and developing countries on Wednesday rejected Western ideas to scrap the blocked Doha talks process, which was launched in 2001 in Qatar to liberalize global trade and to create fair conditions for developing countries.
Industrialized economies would like to see the WTO tackle new issues related to globalization, such as rules for online trade, for foreign investment, or for the global value chain in which raw materials are processed into products in a series of countries.
African countries, as well as China, India, Ecuador and Venezuela, rejected negotiations outside the Doha framework.
WTO spokesman Keith Rockwell said there were serious difficulties in agreeing on a joint final statement for the conference, which takes place every two years.
Rockwell said that "the highly charged political issues of the future of the Doha Round and inclusion of new subjects by the members" were among the most divisive topics.
Delegations were also still far apart on ending export subsidies for farming products, he added.
In addition, negotiators disagreed on whether large emerging economies should continue to benefit from preferential trade conditions in the same way as poorer African countries.
The United States, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union and Japan are no longer ready to grant such preferential treatment, while China and India lead the group that insists on keeping the status quo.
"Every member state's contribution must be in line with its development level," said Germany's HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Matthias Machnig, a state secretary in the Economics and Energy Ministry.
Countries needed to accept "today's trade realities," he said.
EU Trade Commissioner Cecilia Malmstrom urged HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members to try new approaches.
"We cannot, however, simply repeat what we have been doing for the last 15 years and expect different results," she said, referring to the Doha round.
The Geneva-based trade body increased to 164 countries Thursday when the conference welcomed Liberia and Afghanistan as the newest HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members.
dpa Deutsche Presse-Agentur GmbH
Liberia becomes WTO member, eyes investment
Deng Yaomin
16 December 2015
Xinhua News Agency
NAIROBI, Dec. 16 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xinhua) -- The 10th HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) ministerial conference that is being held in Nairobi, Kenya on Wednesday formally approved Liberia's membership after eight years of negotiations.
During her opening remarks at the ceremony, Liberian President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf termed Liberia's membership to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO as "a historic milestone" as the country seeks reconstruction after decades of civil strife and devastation caused by the outbreak of Ebola epidemic last year.
Liberia has become the 163rd HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO member and the 35th least developing country (LDC) to join the trading regime.
Sirleaf reiterated her government's commitment to political and economic reforms to accelerate Liberia's reconstruction.
"In the last twelve years of peace and stability, Liberia enacted fiscal reforms while focusing on ways to lessen the debt burden while increasing domestic savings," said Sirleaf, adding her government had invested heavily in social services like education and health.
Liberia's entry into HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO is expected to attract foreign direct investment in key sectors of the economy.
Sirleaf said her government had created a "conducive environment" to attract investment in energy, transport infrastructure, tourism and agro-processing sectors.
She also said Liberia subscribed to Africa's common position on strengthening a multilateral trading system with binding rules.
WTO Director General HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevedo said Liberia's membership to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO was a confirmation of its strategic role in multilateral affairs.
"Liberia has demonstrated its commitment to adhere to our core values like openness, transparency and rule of law despite severe challenges," he said.
Xinhua News Agency
WTO ministers tussle over future course of global free trade talks 
By Thomas Burmeister, dpa
16 December 2015
dpa International Service in English
Nairobi (dpa) - Poor and emerging economies fought back Western proposals that could shift global trade talks away from their current focus on development, at a politically charged ministerial meeting of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) in Nairobi.
Trade ministers from emerging and developing countries on Wednesday rejected Western ideas to scrap the blocked Doha talks process, which was launched in 2001 in Qatar to liberalize global trade and to create fair conditions for developing countries.
Industrialized economies would like to see the WTO tackle new issues related to globalization, such as rules for online trade, for foreign investment, or for the global value chain in which raw materials are processed into products in a series of countries.
African countries, as well as China, India, Ecuador and Venezuela, rejected negotiations outside the Doha round.
WTO spokesman Keith Rockwell said there were serious difficulties in agreeing on a joint final statement for the conference, which takes place every two years.
Rockwell said that "the highly charged political issues of the future of the Doha Round and inclusion of new subjects by the members" were among the most divisive issues.
Delegations were also still far apart on ending export subsidies for farming products, and on the preferential treatment for developing countries. "I cannot report any progress," he said.
Negotiators in Nairobi disagreed on whether large emerging economies such as China or Brazil should continue to benefit from preferential trade conditions in the same way as poorer African countries.
The United States, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union and Japan are no longer ready to grant such preferential treatment, while China and India lead the group that insists on keeping the status quo.
"Every member state's contribution must be in line with its development level," said Germany's HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Matthias Machnig, a state secretary in the Economics and Energy Ministry.
Countries needed to accept "today's trade realities," he said.
EU Trade Commissioner Cecilia Malmstrom urged HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members to try new approaches.
"We cannot, however, simply repeat what we have been doing for the last 15 years and expect different results," she said, referring to the Doha round.
Despite these differences that have been hampering the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO, the Geneva-based trade body increased to 164 countries when the conference welcomed Liberia and Afghanistan as the newest HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members.
dpa Deutsche Presse-Agentur GmbH
Poorest countries left little options as fair trade talks show no progress
zhushaobin
16 December 2015
Xinhua News Agency
by Chrispinus Omar
NAIROBI, Dec. 16 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xinhua) -- Trade ministers from the Least Developed Countries (LDCs) attending the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) talks in Nairobi have been left with little options but to continue engaging the rich states on steps to correct the global trade imbalances.
The ministerial meeting is being held against a backdrop of a decline in LDCs's share of the world trade due to the huge subsidies given to farmers in developed nations.
Bangladeshi Commerce Minister, Tofail Ahmed, leading the LDC Group, decried the decline in the share of the trade. He said most of the world's poorest countries recorded a combined trade deficit of 6 billion U.S. dollars and their share of the world trade was a paltry 1.24 percent of the current 19 trillion dollars.
"We left the Bali ministerial conference expecting this ministerial conference would focus on our issues," Ahmed said on Wednesday in an address to the Nairobi Ministerial Conference.
To correct the trade imbalance that has mostly affected the poor countries, the LDC states negotiated for a series of special measures to help boost their share of world trade.
Ahmed said while focus on ensuring fair trade depended most on the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's pre-eminent role in promoting global trade and ensuring it benefits the members. He said the Nairobi meeting must ensure the export trade is not affected in the middle of trade distorting practices by the rich states.
"The Nairobi Declaration should conclude the Doha Development Agenda (DDA) and transform the decisions taken in Bali into action," Ahmed reiterated.
At the ministerial conference, South African Trade Minister Rob Davies, said the LDCs and the African producers of crops were being cheated of their hard-earned income from the trade in agricultural products.
Citing the case of coffee, which earns African countries some 6 billion dollars, Davies said recent reports indicate the global trade in coffee products brought in some 100 billion dollars, most of which ended up in the western world.
"Africa is an importer of finished goods and an exporter of raw materials. We have identified measures that would help us to develop an industrial value chain. The developing countries must be allowed to pursue their industrialization goals," Davies told the ministers.
For Africa to benefit from international trade, Davies said poor countries require "special and differential arrangements" to be made available to promote export trade.
He said to correct the trade imbalance, countries not only need to concentrate on trade rules but also on the lack of finished products to trade and work towards creating a regional production chain.
"We prioritize the industrialization goal of Africa and the removal of the subsidies that affect markets," Davies said.
Davies said the Chinese assistance to help African countries develop local industrial parks, special economic zones and the provision of funding for industrialization, were of importance.
Xinhua News Agency
Nairobi conference raises great hopes for African continent despite modest results being expected
16 December 2015
Bulletin Quotidien Europe
Nairobi, 15/12/2015 (Agence Europe) - After a few ngoma (Swahili) drum rolls, supposed to bring good results (according to local tradition), Kenya's President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Uhuru Kenyatta, Trade Minister Amina Mohamed and WTO Director-General HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevedo declared the 10th ministerial conference of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation (WTO) officially open in Nairobi on Tuesday 15 November. This is the first HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO ministerial conference to be held on the African continent.
It is a conference for which the expected results - greatly awaited by the African continent, which houses most of the world's least developed countries (LDCs) - remained not only modest on Tuesday (in relation to the ambitions raised by the conclusion of the Bali package at the previous HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO conference at the end of 2013) but also very uncertain (given the persisting deep divisions between the big HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO actors).
Seizing the momentum of the Paris climate agreement. “2015 is a year that has enabled us to express our unprecedented cooperation on a number of urgent issues for humanity. We have agreed on measures which until that point seemed impossible”, Kenyatta said, speaking to over 3,000 delegates from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO member countries. A new HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO agreement would be “a result that would enable us to respond to other challenges (Ed: than climate change) - insecurity, inequality and sustainable development”, he said. “We must take inspiration from the breakthrough (at COP21 in Paris). Kenya has prepared the ground well. Now it's up to us to obtain a result”, said Azevedo.
Great hope for African continent. During his opening speech, Kenyatta also underlined the opportunity that the Nairobi conference represented for the African continent's development, and thus for the take-off of world trade as a whole. “Africa is the continent with the weakest participation in world trade and with the youngest population. World trade would gain if more trade was done with Africa. With its potential for strong growth, Africa has shown that it is ready to be included in world trade. It is a continent that is a source of dynamism, youth and optimism. But we need the goodwill and support of the rest of the world to resolve the problems of poverty, insecurity and environmental destruction”, he said.
Kenyatta criticised the “weak progress” on concluding the Doha round, and he attacked the multiplication of bilateral agreements, which are not “very positive for an open multilateral trading system”. “The multilateral system has nothing like it for improving trade”, he said. “The agricultural negotiations are those that interest the African countries most. But the distortions in this sector continue. African farmers cannot compete with the farmers of countries where farmers are heavily subsidised. I ask you then to do your utmost to unlock a positive result. We owe this much to the world and to our young people”, he concluded.
Alongside Kenyatta, Liberia's President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf hailed a “historic day” for the African continent. (Liberia is an African LDC which is due to join the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO officially on Wednesday 16 November). “I hope for a comprehensive result in Nairobi, which might enable fairer trade for the prosperity of our people. We look forward to a generous Nairobi declaration”, she said.
In a message on behalf of Uganda, which neighbours Kenya, Ugandan Prime Minister Ruhakana Rugunda underlined the importance of “true fair rules” for the citizens of the African continent. “Africa will host discussions on issues that affect it in particular. It accounts for 14% of the world's population and its rate of poverty accounts for 12.7% of the world's population. We have good hope that the promises of the Doha round might become concrete. The conclusion of the Doha round would bring over 360 billion in additional exports in the world per year”, he said.
Mohamed tackles Mike Froman. At the opening ceremony, the chair of the ministerial conference, Kenya's Trade Minister Amina Mohamed, said she expected the Nairobi meeting “to send a strong message that the multilateral trade system works”. “The centrality of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO is irrefutable. Nothing can substitute the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO”, Mohamed underlined, speaking out against the “risk of fragmentation” of the trading system with the proliferation of bilateral agreements. “Multilateralism gives great promises in theory, but also in practice” she added, in a pointed comment to US Trade Representative Mike Froman, who the previous day in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Financial Times had sounded the charge against the Doha round, calling on the world to free itself from Doha's restrictive limits, and arguing in favour of a “pragmatic” approach.
Agricultural section and package for LDCs at centre of discussions.
Crucial questions on the agricultural chapter of the Doha round will be at the centre of discussions in Nairobi this week - the export competition pillar (which aims to remove all forms of subsidy for exports), the special safeguard mechanism (SSM) in agriculture for developing countries (which would enable them to protect themselves against a large and sudden rise in imports of certain products), and the permanent solution for public stockholdings for food security purposes. The preparatory work of recent months on these issues has not, however, enabled the positions of the member countries to come closer.
The ministers will also try to finalise a package for LDCs, including the total exemption from customs duties for their products, a softening on the rules of origin, preferential treatment for services, and the cotton issue.
One of the only points of optimism is the confirmation of an agreement on the review of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO information technology agreement (ITA) to extend its scope to 200 new products.
The Nairobi conference could also confirm the extension of the moratorium on customs duties concerning electronic trade.
In addition, the 162 HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO member countries are also expected to approve the accession of two new members - Afghanistan and Liberia.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU wants an agreement on the end of support to agricultural exports. In its first package of conclusions to define the margin of negotiation of European Commissioner for Trade Cecilia Malmström, the Council of Ministers of the EU, meeting in Nairobi on Tuesday, hailed “the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU efforts towards a balanced and comprehensive outcome on all forms of export support in agriculture” and urged the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO member countries “to concentrate on those issues that are realistically achievable in Nairobi”.
Together with Brazil, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU has tabled a proposal, supported by Argentina, New Zealand, Paraguay, Peru and Uruguay, aiming to remove direct and indirect subsidies to exports for agricultural products by the end of 2018 for developed countries, and by the end of 2021 for developing countries (see EUROPE 11435).
However, the member countries in favour of a positive result at Nairobi on the chapter on export competition do not want to link this issue with other chapters of the agricultural section of the Doha round - the internal support and market access pillars - to which the SSM question belongs, on which the G33 developing countries, led by India, Indonesia and China, would like a result in Nairobi. Agence Europe SA
India says limited convergence among WTO members on export competition deal
BS Reporter
16 December 2015
Business Standard
India on Wednesday said an agreement over export competition, sought after by developed countries. would take time as there was limited convergence among nations on the issue.
Addressing the plenary session of the ongoing 10th ministerial conference by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization in Nairobi, commerce minister Nirmala Sitharaman said the issue was fairly new, expressing astonishment at the sudden push given to it by developed countries.
India believes export competition along with other issues relating to increased market access in agriculture and services are being pushed forward by the developed bloc to sideline older issues flowing out of the Doha Development Agenda (DDA).
Member entities at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO including the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union and Brazil, are seeking a deal on export competition. Developed countries, want developing nations like India to take greater commitments in terms of reducing their export support. However the developing bloc has hit out at the huge amounts of farm subsidies paid by developed countries to their farmers.
Some developed nations have raised questions over export support given by India to sugar shipments.
Brazil, one of the stronger proponents of the deal, has said it wants an outcome at the Nairobi ministerial. During the Plenary Session, EU trade Commissioner Cecilia Malmstrom said that a deal in export competition would be beneficial for developing countries.
"At this late hour new definitions and language are being proposed. It is not possible to react to these new concepts without extensive domestic consultations," Sitharaman said.
In the run up to Bali Ministerial meeting, the G-20 including India, had tabled a proposal on Export Competition.
But there could not be a binding outcome since many of the members, including some of the members who are now proposing to harvest this pillar, raised the same issue of balance in agriculture negotiations.
Reports suggest that Sitharaman has pointed that export competition as one of the three pillars of agriculture negotiations, saying these are finely balanced and the export competition agreement would disturb it. However, she has asked the WTO chairperson to consider a simplified offer of by the G-33 on the matter.
Business Standard Limited (India) 
China says abandoning multilateralism in trade talks short-sighted, irresponsible
zhushaobin
17 December 2015
Xinhua's China Economic Information Service
NAIRIBI, Dec. 16 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xinhua) -- China on Wednesday said abandoning multilateralism in trade talks were short-sighted and irresponsible, urging members of the world's major trade body to reinforce the Multilateral Trading System (MTS) and highlight its role in addressing development issues around the world. "The world needs to free itself from the bindings of short term interest and pursue goals that will benefit both the developed and developing countries," Chinese Minister of Commerce Gao Hucheng said during a plenary session of the 10th Ministerial Meeting of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) being held in the Kenyan capital Nairobi. Gao said that the MTS is the choice of history because it has been the main channel for solving trade disputes over the years. "When we face difficulties in trade negotiations, talks of giving up on them are not only short-sighted, but also irresponsible, and will lead to severe retrogression to the multilateral trading system," the minister said.
He said that the MTS is the best mechanism to fight trade protectionism as well as advance free trade. "Through consensus, it has managed to reduce on average the import tariffs by 15 percent," he said. The Chinese minister noted that the MTS provides a framework for transparency in global trade. In addition, the MTS has made significant contribution to promoting world peace. "The MTS should therefore be solidified and is not replaceable," he stated. According to him, the biggest challenge facing the MTS is the emergence of the regional and other mega trade deals. The commerce minister stated that the proliferation of many regional trade agreements could lead to an increase in trade costs which is not in the interest of any nation. Gao also urged the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members to conclude the Doha Development Round that began in 2001. "Since its launch 14 years ago, it has been able to achieve multiple outcomes and is a catalyst to growth, especially for the least developed countries," he said. Gao urged HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members to remain committed, show more political will and take flexible approaches to the Doha round of talks due to the numerous benefits it will bring. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO was founded 20 years ago and its members currently account for 98 percent of global trade
China Economic Information Service of Xinhua News Agency
Australia calls for overhaul of WTO
17 December 2015
Australian Associated Press Financial News Wire
TRADE By Paul Osborne, AAP Senior Political Writer
CANBERRA, Dec 17 HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" AAP - Trade Minister Andrew Robb has launched a scathing attack on the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation's negotiating role saying it faces a "genuine crisis".
Speaking at a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO ministerial meeting in Kenya, Mr Robb said the Doha round of trade talks had been under way for 14 years.
And while a deal appeared close in 2008 it was now clear "a comprehensive outcome from the round is no longer in prospect", he said in Nairobi.
"We have long tested the patience of the governments and the peoples that we represent," Mr Robb said.
"The credibility of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO is at stake. If this situation is allowed to continue unaddressed it will even start to undermine the critical dispute settlement functions of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO."
He said a new system was needed to liberalise global trade and deliver benefits to business.
"The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO has not been able to agree to lower one tariff multilaterally since the Uruguay round - not one tariff," he said.
"Nor has it cut trade-distorting subsidies by one dollar ... that must be a sobering reflection for all of us."
At the same time, there were around 300 completed free trade agreements worldwide, and another 100 being negotiated.
"There is clearly no lack of interest in pursuing trade liberalisation and reform through preferential arrangements."
A possible way forward was for the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO to conclude specific agreements, such as in the areas of information technology and environmental goods.
Australian Associated Press Pty Ltd
WTO must ponder its raison d'etre amid prolonged Doha stalemate
17 December 2015
Business Times Singapore
WHILE the Paris climate conference and expectations around the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" US Federal Reserve's Dec 15-16 meeting have been hogging the limelight of late, another high-level global gathering of ministers is taking place this week without much fanfare - and so far without hitting the headlines as it did in the past.
Not that there hasn't been any media mention altogether, but news about the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization's 10th ministerial conference, which began in Nairobi on Tuesday, have focused on questions around the continued relevance of the 20-year-old Geneva-based institution amid a proliferation of bilateral and regional trade pacts today, and with its flagship Doha Round of trade talks still deadlocked after 14 years. As one analysis put it, the big question hanging over the conference in the Kenyan capital is - does the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO matter anymore? Launched in 2001, the Doha negotiations to liberalise global trade - and aimed particularly at helping developing countries join the global marketplace - have sputtered along, well past its original 2005 completion target and still going nowhere amid a stalemate between developed and developing countries over agricultural subsidies. Meanwhile, with the multilateral trading system failing to advance free trade, countries around the world proceeded apace with bilateral and regional trade negotiations. One of the most recent and most high-profile deals sealed is the 12-party Trans Pacific Partnership led by the United States.
And while many commentators have over the years declared the Doha Round to be as good as dead, the US has now in fact publicly called for the negotiations to be ditched and rebooted. In a strongly argued piece HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Financial Times ahead of the Nairobi meeting, the US Trade Representative said: "We need to write a new chapter for the (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) that reflects today's economic realities. It is time for the world to free itself of the strictures of Doha."
In response - and reflecting the deep divide in HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO rungs at the talks - a group of 47 countries (including India, China and host Kenya) issued a joint statement on the opening day of the Nairobi conference to rebut the US call and argue for the Doha Round to remain squarely on HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's agenda.
To be sure, no one - not even the WTO director-general HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevedo - sees any prospect of a deal being reached in Nairobi this week. Indeed, Mr Azevedo didn't venture to inspire optimism in an interview in late-November, when he said that even his best-case scenario for an outcome at Nairobi - a meaningful package to help poor nations and general consensus "on some kind of path for the future" - was "very unlikely to happen".
Yet, the 162 HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members, both advanced and developing countries, remain committed to the broad objectives of eliminating tariffs and freeing up global trade, at least in official rhetoric. And despite the challenges in getting agreement around the table, the rules-based multilateral trading system grounded on principles such as trade without discrimination, remains the best bet in ensuring that the wheels of global commerce run smoothly and predictably. There have been successes, if few and far between, including a pact in July 2015 on cutting tariffs for IT products. A widely hailed deal in late 2013 on overhauling global customs procedures, while good for global business, has yet to be adopted by many countries. While its role in global trade governance remains intact, after Nairobi this week, the question will increasingly be asked - Whither the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO?
Singapore Press Holdings Limited
China central bank sees growth slowing to 6.8%
17 December 2015
TODAY (Singapore)
BEIJING — China’s annual economic growth is likely to slow to 6.8 per cent next year, from an expected 6.9 per cent this year, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" People’s Bank of China said in a working paper published yesterday.
The world’s second-largest economy still faces downward pressure, and the impact of fiscal and monetary policies that were rolled out this year will be evident by the first half of 2016, said the central bank in the research report.
“Although downward pressures on growth will persist for a while due to overcapacity, profit deceleration, and rising non-performing loans, we expect that the number of positive factors will gradually increase in 2016,” it said.
Challenges are mounting for the Communist Party as it moves to an economy based more on services and less on infrastructure investment and exports. The 2015 growth forecast of 6.9 per cent was cut from a 7 per cent projection in June, the report showed.
The report came hours after the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Chinese Academy of Social Sciences (CASS), a top government-backed think-tank, released a forecast saying growth will slow to between 6.6 per cent and 6.8 per cent next year due to weak external demand and cooling domestic investment.
“This is very close to what the government would like to see,” said Mr Ding Shuang, chief China economist at Standard Chartered in Hong Kong. “They’ve already made it clear that 6.5 per cent is the minimum growth they will accept, and they’ll build some buffer.”
Last year’s 7.3 per cent expansion was the slowest since 1990.
The CASS think-tank recommended that China should widen its fiscal deficit to 2.12 trillion yuan (S$461 billion) next year from a planned 1.62 trillion yuan in 2015, keeping the deficit-to-GDP ratio within the warning level of 3 per cent.
“It’s quite necessary for China to increase strength on its fiscal policy as the economy faces downward and deflation pressure,” said Mr Li Xuesong, an economist at CASS.
China’s Vice-Finance Minister Zhu Guangyao said last month that economists the world over should reconsider what constitutes a danger zone for deficit-to-GDP ratios, in comments that some analysts took as a hint of more aggressive stimuli to come.
The government has embarked on its most aggressive policy easing since the depths of the global financial crisis, including six interest-rate cuts since November 2014, in a bid to hit its economic growth target of about 7 per cent this year.
The central bank expects China’s fixed-asset investment to pick up to 10.8 per cent next year from the 10.3 per cent increase they estimate for this year, according to the report written by Mr Ma Jun, the bank’s chief economist, and other central bank economists. China’s annual consumer inflation may quicken to 1.7 per cent in 2016 from an expected 1.5 per cent this year, they added.
The economists also said they expect exports to increase 3.1 per cent next year, reversing 2015’s decline.
Property investment may gradually stabilise and recover next year, supported by rebounding land and home sales, concluded the central bank’s researchers. Infrastructure investment growth may maintain a relatively rapid pace as the government accelerates approvals for water, rail and affordable home projects, said the staff.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD last month forecast that China will grow by 6.8 per cent this year before slowing to 6.5 per cent in 2016. That came after the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Bank cut China’s growth forecast to 6.9 per cent in 2015 and 6.7 per cent in 2016, down from its previous estimate of 7.1 per cent and 7 per cent respectively. 
MediaCorp Press Ltd
Congress spending bill repeals COOL meat labeling
16 December 2015
Agence France Presse
US congressional leaders have moved to repeal mandatory country-of-origin meat labeling rules that the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO said violated trade agreements and permitted Canada and Mexico to levy $1 billion in retaliatory tariffs.
US manufacturers and trade groups hailed the provision in the "omnibus" $1.15 trillion spending bill agreed late Tuesday that is expected to pass Congress by the end of the week.
On December 7 Canada and Mexico, the second- and third-largest US trade partners, won HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization approval to impose up to $1 billion a year in trade sanctions against the United States over its Country of Origin Labeling (COOL) law requirement on beef and pork.
The policy requires labeling on meat that states where livestock animals are born, where they are raised, and where they are slaughtered.
The labeling law, popular with US consumers for giving greater transparency to their food purchase, was enshrined in the 2002 Farm Bill. Congress strengthened it in 2013, even as Canada and Mexico were challenging the policy at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO.
But Ottawa and Mexico City, as well as the US meat industry, have campaigned against COOL as an unfair and costly burden on producers.
The spending bill, according to Senator Barbara Mikulski, vice chairwoman of the Senate Appropriations Committee, will repeal the parts of the COOL law that were ruled discriminatory by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO.
Manufacturers, many of whom were concerned about the impact of the punitive tariffs, welcomed the move Wednesday.
"Repeal of these COOL provisions is the only solution remaining that will protect US manufacturing jobs, and we are relieved that this spending deal includes this essential provision," HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Linda Dempsey of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" National Association of Manufacturers said in a statement.
"Manufacturers need to see congressional action quickly to prevent Canadian and Mexican retaliation from being imposed later this month."
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" The Wine Institute urged Congress to "immediately" approve the bill.
"At this late date, passage of the omnibus is the only way to guarantee US exports do not suffer devastating losses" from retaliation by Canada and Mexico, it said.
But opponents condemned the repeal as a rollback in consumer protection.
"Unfortunately, Congress bowed to pressure from the meatpackers... in order to obey the dictates of a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization ruling," said HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Food & Water Watch, a Washington-based nongovernmental organization.
"Congress willingly kowtowed to international trade tribunals to gut COOL and even tossed out the labels for ground meats that the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO ruled were totally trade-legal -- a holiday gift to the meatpacking industry from Congress."
Agence France-Presse
Kenya: African cotton producers declare WTO trade dispute
16 December 2015
PANAPRESS - Pan African News Agency
Nairobi, Kenya (PANA) - African trade ministers have declared plans to present a challenge to the U.S. cotton subsidies at the trade dispute resolution court in January 2016, if a new deal on removing financial support to producers of cotton in the U.S. and other rich countries is not signed in Nairobi.
We are moving towards the 48-hour deadline. We hope things can still change but if not, we are prepared to move to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation (WTO) dispute resolution tribunal in January,” Aya Thiam-Diallo, Malian Ambassador to the UN, told PANA in Nairobi Wednesday.
Thiam-Diallo said the four countries, known as the Cotton Four—Benin, Burkina Faso, Chad and Mali, were exploring measures to ensure an agreement is concluded at the Nairobi meeting.
Trade ministers from 161 countries are meeting in Nairobi to discuss steps to be taken in order to improve the world trading environment.
The African plea for the removal of financial support to local farmers in the rich countries, which has made the price of cotton unattractive to farmers in the poor countries, said the obstacles to an agreement on the issue came from the WTO Secretariat itself.
We want a sustainable solution to deal with the massive subsidies,” said Aziz Mahamat Saleh, Chadian Minister for Economy, Commerce and Tourism. This is the front we have been fighting for 12 years but nothing has come. We are still at the same stage as 12 years ago.”
WTO Director-General HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevedo said on Monday, an agreement on the removal of the subsidies was being finalized after a draft text was put forward. He said the draft deal was being cleaned up for a final signature which could be announced within a few hours.
The Chadian minister, however, said the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO appeared bent on stopping the African cotton producers from getting whatever they sought to gain from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO trade talks.
We do not exclude the ability to seek a solution within the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO courts,” Thiam-Diallo explained.
Trade ministers representing the cotton-producing countries, which account for 10 percent of the worldwide production of cotton, said there was potential for creating a global market for cotton within Africa.
We have to develop the infrastructure for cotton trade in Africa and to develop the products which have to be competitive, but goods coming from 10,000 km away from Africa are usually cheaper,” said Pocoun Dame Kombienou, Benin's Minister of Trade and Industry. We are interested in making things work but we have to wait until the very end of these talks to know the outcome of the negotiations.”
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO officials could not be reached for comment on the claims that the organisation was partly responsible for the lack of progress on the cotton negotiations.
But the African ministers insisted the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO was more interested on the signing of agreements on issues of importance to the rich countries.
So far, two major agreements favouring rich countries have been signed at the Nairobi talks. The first was an agreement on the opening up of government procurement to transparency and competition, and another deal was signed on Wednesday to remove taxes on equipment for making mobile phones and cameras.
Panafrican News Agency
India exports fall for 12th straight month
JOC Staff
16 December 2015
Journal of Commerce Online
A lack of global demand continues to drag down HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" India’s export performance and the passage of the Trans-Pacific Partnership could further impact the country’s exports.
November was the 12th straight month of year-over-year declines, and the trend raises fears that India’s annual exports will fall far short of the $310 billion figure recorded last fiscal year, which ended in March.
Last month marked the lowest month for exports in the past few years, as the value of India’s outbound shipments tumbled 24.4 percent from a year earlier to $20.01 billion, according to the newest provisional trade data released by the Ministry of Commerce and Industry.
“Looking at the current trend, we expect to end the year with an export figure of somewhere in between $260-270 billion,” said S.C. Ralhan, president of the Federation of Indian Export Organisations, in a written statement. “Past few days have also seen further decline in global crude oil prices, which is also expected to have further negative impact on India’s exports.”
Imports in November fell even more steeply, tumbling 30.3 percent year-over-year to $29.8 billion.  As a result, India’s monthly goods deficit with the world decreased to $9.8 billion from $16.2 billion during November 2014, the published data shows.
Total exports in the first eight fiscal months through the end of November were down 18.5 percent from a year earlier to $174.3 billion. The value of inbound trade volumes during the same period reached $261.8 billion, down 17.2 percent from $316.3 billion a year earlier, helping New Delhi narrow its cumulative trade gap to $87.5 billion from $102.5 billion during April to November 2014.
“While global sluggishness will keep exports subdued, especially when there is structural weakness in trade, India’s imports would rise as domestic demand and investments pick up and commodity prices stabilize,” said CRISIL, a unit of credit evaluator HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Standard & Poor’s, in a press statement.
The credit rating agency said the setting up of various regional free-trade deals, especially the TPP between 12 nations, including the U.S., is weighing heavily on India’s exports.
“TPP countries account for 25 percent of India’s exports.  Because of not being a part of TPP, India risks losing out a significant chunk of its export market to rivals,” CRISIL said.
The agency also said the deteriorating global competitiveness of Indian goods, particularly for gems and jewellery as well as textile products, is hurting export growth.
 United Business Media Global Trade
Putin decrees to suspend free-trade zone with Ukraine
16 December 2015
Prime News
MOSCOW/NAIROBI, Dec 16 (PRIME) -- President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Vladimir Putin has signed a decree for Russia to suspend a CIS free-trade zone deal with Ukraine from 2016, as seen by PRIME in the decree published at the government’s Web site for disclosure of legal information on Wednesday.
“Due to the extraordinary circumstances that cover interests and economic safety of Russia and demand an urgent action, I decree…to suspend the free-trade zone agreement, signed in the city of St. Petersburg on October 18, 2011, regarding Ukraine from January 1, 2016,” the decree read.
Deputy Economic Development Minister Alexei Likhachyov said that the decree means an introduction of import duties on Ukrainian goods in the regime of most-favored-nation treatment. But Russia is still ready to discuss the problem with Ukraine.
“We are ready to work to the last. We are even ready to work after that, after January 1, 2016. We only need some steps toward us to be made,” Likhachyov said.
Ukraine’s trade representative Natalya Mikolskaya told reporters that the country hopes to reach an agreement with Russia on its association deal with the E.U. during a December 21 ministerial meeting and is ready to hold talks on a transition period to implement technical regulations.
“We hope that we will agree on something on December 21,” she said on the sidelines of a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization’s conference.
Ukraine’s position is that Russia should provide grounds to all its concerns over the Brussels–Kiev free-trade zone, which will be in effect from January 1, 2016, and the concerns should not by hypothetical. Kiev is also ready to implement a transition period of two to three years to level technical regulations of the E.U. and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Eurasian Economic Union, she said.
At a previous ministerial meeting on December 1, the countries failed to agree and ease all Moscow’s concerns about the risks that the free-trade zone poses to its economy because of the CIS countries’ trade rules. Russian Economic Development Minister Ulyukayev said Moscow insisted on a legally binding agreement, but Ukraine said its conditions were unacceptable.
Ulyukayev also said earlier that if a compromise is not reached by 2016, Russia will have to impose import duties on Ukrainian goods.
ZAO PRIME
END
 
Josep Bosch, 
Head of Media unit
Information and External Relations Division
+41227395681
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.