Headlines:
POLL-Latin America's slump to extend into 2016 as Brazil sinks
China joining Pacific pact unlikely in near future: U.S. trade chief
China rules India's solar power market
TPP: No tariffs on 87% of Japan's industrial goods at trade deal launch
EU tax: Brussels set for multinational crackdown
Europe paves way for free trade deal with Australia
Regional Free Trade Agreements: Opportunities or Obstacles for Business?
Trade Facilitation: To ratify or not to ratify? Is that the question?
China remains main driver of global economic growth - Russia’s G20 Sherpa
 
Details:
POLL-Latin America's slump to extend into 2016 as Brazil sinks
15 October 2015
Reuters News
By Silvio Cascione
BRASILIA, Oct 15 (Reuters) - Most Latin American economies will only grow modestly next year as central banks raise interest rates and Brazil remains in recession, according to a Reuters poll that portrays a region increasingly vulnerable to a recent slowdown in global growth.
Banks and research firms downgraded their regional growth forecasts for another quarter and raised estimates for inflation as currencies such as the Brazilian real and the Colombian peso plunged to record lows.
Only Peru is now expected to expand faster than 3 percent in 2016 among Latin America's seven largest economies.
Latin America has been hit hard by plummeting prices of its commodity exports such as oil, iron ore and copper. The current slump is likely to extend for a few more months, with economic output probably bottoming out between the first and the second quarter of next year, the poll showed.
The timing of a recovery remains unclear, but economists say the path towards it will be bumpy and dependent upon unpopular leaders passing structural reforms to restore business confidence and boost productivity.
"For almost 10 years, Latin America's economies could pretty much sit back and enjoy the ride," said Marcelo Carvalho, head of Latin America economic research at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" BNP Paribas.
"Those days are over."
LITTLE WIGGLE ROOM
Indeed, policymakers have little manoeuvring room to prop up their economies as inflation remains high. Central banks are set to raise interest rates, the poll showed, and analysts say the best they could do is to limit monetary tightening to a minimum.
"The past depreciation is putting pressure on both inflation and some measures of inflation expectations," Ilan Goldfajn, chief economist at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Itau Unibanco, wrote in a note.
"However, because growth is weak, policymakers are also signalling that interest rates won't rise meaningfully."
The stakes are high for the region. Although full-blown currency crises are less likely in most countries due to their flexible exchange rate regimes, their credit stance could be at risk in coming years, potentially spooking much-needed foreign investors.
In a recent report, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Standard & Poor's, which stripped Brazil of its investment-grade rating, listed four other South American countries - Venezuela, Argentina, Colombia and Peru - as being among the five most vulnerable emerging economies to what it called "adverse global trends."
Mexico, regarded as relatively open to trade and market-friendly, has fared better than its Southern counterparts Brazil, Argentina and Venezuela, where recession and inflation are household names.
None seems strong enough to pull the neighbours out of their slump, though.
With regional trade volumes falling, Latin America has pinned its hopes on markets further away through the Trans-Pacific trade talks and the potential deal between Brazil's and Argentina's Mercosur with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union, by no means an infallible strategy.
"Many emerging markets may be hoping to capitalize on their newly competitive currencies... but there has so far been little evidence that any major region has benefited from a weaker exchange rate for any significant period," HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" HSBC economists Janet Henry and James Pomeroy wrote in a note.
GRIM FORECASTS
Brazil's economy is set to shrink 2.8 percent in 2015 and 1.0 percent in 2016, according to the median forecasts in the survey. Latin America's largest economy has not experienced two years of back-to-back contraction since the 1930s.
Mexico's growth prospects were also downgraded to an increase of 2.3 percent in 2015 and 2.8 percent in 2016, down from 2.5 and 3.1 percent in a July poll.
High expectations over the opening of the country's oil sector have long been replaced by caution, although a recent oil auction suggested policymakers may have learned from past mistakes, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Morgan Stanley economists said in a report.
The prospect of faster U.S. growth would also help Mexico, Latin America's country least exposed to China.
Argentina's economy is set to grow 0.5 percent this year and just 0.1 percent next year, following the October 25 presidential election in which government candidate Daniel Scioli is expected to win.
Although he will face market pressures from Argentina's shrinking reserves, Scioli is seen as likely to enjoy stronger Congress support than his main opponent, Mauricio Macri.
Colombia's economy is set to grow 2.8 percent both in 2015 and 2016. While an increasingly likely peace deal with the leftist FARC guerrillas could boost growth in the long term, it could drag on the country's budget in the short term at a time when revenue from its oil exports sinks.
Chile's GDP is expected to grow 2.2 percent in 2015 and 2.8 percent in 2016. With economic recovery turning out to be slower than expected, business confidence in the copper exporter has been in check, Nomura economist Mario Castro said.
Venezuela's economy is in a tailspin as oil prices plunge and pressures mount on Nicolas Maduro's leftist government. The country's GDP is expected to shrink 6.5 percent this year and 4.0 percent in 2016, with inflation far above 100 percent.
Thomson Reuters (Markets) LLC
China joining Pacific pact unlikely in near future: U.S. trade chief
Kakumi Kobayashi 
16 October 2015
Kyodo News
WASHINGTON, Oct. 15 -- U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman indicated Thursday that it is premature to discuss China's participation in a U.S.-led Pacific free trade initiative that was broadly agreed on earlier this month.
China has "a long way to go to be able to meet (TPP) standards," Froman told a teleconference organized by a think tank in Washington.
To join the TPP, China would have to deal with mounting new issues, such as labor and environmental standards, protections against trade secret theft, and a free and open Internet, Froman said.
"That means that China is going to have to up its game and raise its bar to compete" within the framework of TPP, Froman said.
He suggested China would have to demonstrate that it was "able and willing" to meet high standards if it wants to join the TPP, which would cover some 40 percent of global gross domestic product.
Froman said the United States has been working with China on an investment treaty as a way to urge the country to ease restrictions on American business. It is "a good test case" to see whether China can meet the high standards the United States calls for in trade and investment, he added.
The United States, Japan and 10 other countries agreed in principle to the TPP pact in their ministerial talks in Atlanta earlier this month after years of negotiation. The other parties are Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore and Vietnam.
Despite the recent agreement, the TPP still requires formal signing after fine-tuning of its final text, and then needs to be ratified by each member country before it takes effect.
It appears uncertain, however, that the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" U.S. Congress will give the green light to the trade deal without intense debate, given its potential impact on American jobs and the overall U.S. economy, as campaigning for next year's presidential election heats up.
"We're going to work with congressional leadership and the committee leadership on the precise timetable" for congressional approval, Froman said.
Kyodo News
China rules India's solar power market
Jayashree.Nandi
16 October 2015
The Times of India - Delhi Edition
As soon as a solar developer gets an order to set up a solar rooftop system in the city, they dial a Chinese company for the panels to be shipped to India. Despite the distance and logistics, the panels are far cheaper--with a difference of Rs 5 to Rs 6 per panel--than what a manufacturer in Noida or any other part of the country would quote. It takes about 30 to 45 days for the consignment to be delivered, but there are still no takers for locally-made ones. So, while cities like Delhi are gearing up for ambitious solar rooftop projects, the solar panel and cell manufacturing industry is dying a slow death. The manufacturers have recently petitioned the government to impose an "anti-dumping duty" on the cells and panels imported from China, US, Taiwan and elsewhere as they have flooded the market. A solar cell manufacturing company based out of Delhi that has its factory in Andhra Pradesh has stopped making cells altogether. "We have the same technology.
In fact, our products are of superior quality but the government has put no checks on imports. I read with great interest Delhi's draft solar policy --of installing 2 GW by 2025--but will it all be with imported panels? We have mailed the Delhi government our concerns," said Arun Mishra, member of the Solar Energy Society of India and vice-president of a solar products manufacturing company. Delhi's solar policy mandates all Delhi government buildings to install solar rooftop systems within three years of its notification. "We, as developers, and even state governments will opt for the lowest bidder. Indian manufacturers are expensive. It will take a long time to bridge this gap," said a manufacturer currently developing rooftop projects on government buildings in Delhi. In fact, solar manufacturers have petitioned the ministry of commerce to impose an "anti-dumping duty" a second time. "The last time around, the ministry of commerce recommended our demand to the ministry of finance but it did not take action. We have filed a petition again in September. While the number of solar projects is rising nationwide, the import base is also expanding massively . It's a global phenomenon but US, Europe, China all have antidumping duty to address the problem," HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Rahul Gupta, secretary , Indian Solar Manufacturers Association, said. The commerce ministry had recommended an antidumping duty of 0.11 to 0.81 US dollars per watt on solar cells imported from the US, China, Taiwan and Malaysia.
The only time private entities source India-made panels is when they are working on a government project. Projects under Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission mandatorily use locally made products. Activists have also been campaigning against US reservations regarding India's local content requirements under Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission. "The US continues to fight a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO case against India's domestic content requirements for the solar sector, undermining India's shift to renewable energy and the fight against climate change. We had written an open letter to the prime minister on this. The Indian solar market is struggling and enough jobs are not being created," Pujarini Sen of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Greenpeace India said. "We have been told there are also quality issues with locally made solar panels and cells. Plus, even after paying import duty Chinese panels are cheaper. We are not sure how state governments can help address this," said an expert associated with developing Delhi's solar policy.
Bennett, Coleman & Co., Ltd. 
TPP: No tariffs on 87% of Japan's industrial goods at trade deal launch
16 October 2015
Nikkei Report
TOKYO -- Tariffs will be lifted immediately for about 87% of the 6,500 types of industrial products that Japan exports under the trade deal recently agreed on by 12 Pacific Rim nations.
Details of the Trans-Pacific Partnership's provisions regarding the elimination of tariffs on industrial products became known on Thursday.
In terms of value, 76.6% of the roughly 19 trillion yen ($158 billion) in industrial goods that Japan ships to the other 11 nations would be free from tariffs as soon as the trade deal takes effect, which would happen only if the TPP members ratify it. This includes fields in which Japanese manufacturers are highly competitive, such as appliances, industrial machinery and chemicals.
Tariffs would be dropped immediately on 98% of Japanese industrial goods shipped to New Zealand and 94% of those exported to Australia, in value terms.
The 2.1% tariff that the U.S. levies on Japanese video cameras will be eliminated right away. The TPP's largest market is the destination for slightly more than a fifth of the roughly 490 billion yen in camcorders exported by Japan, so the trade deal will likely lead to lower retail prices in the U.S.
In the materials field, the U.S. has imposed tariffs ranging from 2.4% to 6% on aluminium, but most types of aluminium will have duty-free access to that market right after the trade accord goes into force.
Other products that will have tariffs lifted immediately include plastic goods -- of which Japan exports almost 200 billion yen worth to the U.S. a year -- nylon and other synthetic fibres, and materials for making carbon fibre.
The 2.4% tariff that the U.S. levies on Japanese motorcycles larger than 700cc will be eliminated five years after the TPP takes effect. Roughly 30% of the large motorbikes built in Japan by such manufacturers as HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Honda Motor, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Yamaha Motor and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Kawasaki Heavy Industries are exported to the U.S. Since large motorcycles are popular among affluent Americans now, the trade deal will likely lead to increased domestic production by Japanese companies.
Japan exports more than 960 billion yen in machine tools to North America every year. The U.S. will end current tariffs ranging from 2.2% to 4.4% on such products in the fifth year.
Small and midsize Japanese companies are seen benefiting from the trade pact as well. When the 9.1% tariff that the U.S. imposes on towels is dropped in five years, major towel manufacturing centers in Japan, such as Imabari in Ehime Prefecture, will likely enjoy a chance to boost exports.
Among industrial products, passenger car exports to the U.S. will have tariffs in force for the longest period. The 2.5% duty will start decreasing in the 15th year, reaching zero in the 25th year. At that point, all Japanese industrial products will be entering the U.S. duty-free.
Meanwhile, Japan has already ended almost all tariffs on imported industrial products, with the exception of textiles, leather products and chemicals. Japan will eliminate its tariffs on such leather products as shoes and bags by the 16th year after the TPP takes effect.
Nikkei Digital Media Inc. 
EU tax: Brussels set for multinational crackdown
By Christian Oliver in Brussels
15 October 2015
Financial Times (FT.Com)
Margrethe Vestager, the EU’s competition commissioner, looks set to launch the international community’s most punitive attack on corporate tax avoidance as early as next Wednesday, with rulings that could impose heavy costs on multinationals.
Ms Vestager is understood to have HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" postponed her first trip to China this week so she can finalise cases concerning HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Fiat in Luxembourg and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Starbucks in the Netherlands. Cases involving Apple in Ireland and Amazon in Luxembourg appear to be on a slower track.
Why are these decisions so important?
Ms Vestager is changing the rules. Cracking down on tax avoidance has traditionally been handled by toothless, gentlemanly agreements in forums such as the G20 and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD. The commission is now using one of its strongest weapons — state aid — to tackle the problem.
Essentially, this means that countries offering sweetheart deals in the form of tax rulings, or agreements, to multinationals are effectively giving them illegal subsidies. These rulings are often nicknamed comfort letters.
Ms Vestager’s first decisions follow lengthy investigations and can be appealed against by countries through the European courts. Her decisions are being watched closely because tax rulings have become a standard corporate practice, with thousands of companies using them.
So the countries and companies will be fined?
Not exactly. Ms Vestager has the power to issue recovery orders. This means that the country must claw back the unpaid tax from the companies. Some lawyers reckon that she could theoretically issue a verdict, without a recovery order, although this is still seen as highly unlikely.
Aren’t recovery orders good news for the countries?
The national treasuries will certainly benefit in the short term. However, the countries are far more concerned about long-term consequences, particularly investment flight. Ireland does not want the technology industry to be scared away. Luxembourg’s tax haven status is one of its major attractions to investors.
How much money are we talking about?
Billions of euros, in all. Still, the verdicts may well not make the sums immediately clear. The decisions are more likely to define a methodology to be used to calculate the difference between what the companies paid and what they would have done without a tax ruling.
How little were these companies paying?
Here are the figures from the commission’s initial concerns:
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Fiat Group’s profit was €896m in 2012 while the tax base was between €2.3m and €2.8m.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Starbucks global post-tax income was €1.08bn in 2012, while its tax is estimated at between €600,000 and €1m.
Apple’s pre-tax global income was €25bn in 2011, while it paid tax of between €2m and €20m internationally.
Amazon’s operating turnover in 2013 was €13.6bn, while its taxable income in its Luxembourg hub was €75m.
So what happens next?
All the countries and companies insist that they have done nothing wrong. EU officials expect lengthy court battles as the countries will almost certainly appeal against the decisions.
But aren’t comfort letters themselves simply illegal?
No. The commission accepts that some form of tax planning is essential to companies with complex cross-border operations. The malpractice comes when a country allows a company to engineer its tax so that it pays virtually nothing anywhere.
What will the main arguments be in court?
The court cases promise to be complex because competition policy is a novel — almost revolutionary — way to tackle tax issues. Under state aid laws, one of the key points the commission has to prove is that the letters were tailored “selectively” to certain sectors and were not simply available to anyone.
It will also have to deal with highly technical questions about how much tax a company would ordinarily have paid without a ruling. Another dispute is likely to hinge on how much of the profit is taxable in one country if the intellectual property is generated elsewhere.
Additional reporting by Vincent Boland and Duncan Robinson
The Financial Times Limited
Europe paves way for free trade deal with Australia
James Chessell AFR correspondent
16 October 2015
The Australian Financial Review
London | Australia is preparing for another trade deal after the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union said it would begin work on a free trade agreement in the coming months.
As part of a new trade and investment strategy announced on Wednesday, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Commission said it would seek authorisation from its 28 members to open separate negotiations with "close partners" Australia and New Zealand.
Any deal with the EU would have big implications for Australian farmers which have long been pushing for lower tariffs and greater access to a European market of 500 million customers.
However, the EU announcement said any deal would need to take into account "agricultural sensitivities" with European farmers likely to oppose any substantial relaxation of protectionist measures for sheep, beef and dairy imports.
Agriculture in the EU is heavily subsidised, with payments under the Common Agriculture Policy accounting for 40 per cent of the EU's budget.
According to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Commission, Australia ranked as the EU's 21st biggest trading partner while the EU represented Australia's third biggest after China and Japan in 2014. Total trade in goods amounted to €38.7 billion ($61 billion) in 2014.
Australia's exports to the EU have traditionally been dominated by mineral commodities and energy as well as agricultural products while EU's exports to Australia are predominantly manufactured goods such as cars.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Commission said the new trade and investment policy was a direct response to the "current intense debate on trade in the EU - including on the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership".
Australia has recently signed the Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement, which will create a free-trade area covering 40 per cent of the global economy aimed at addressing "21st-century trade issues" such as intellectual property protections, digital trade rights and protections for investors. The TPP followed another high-profile free trade deal struck with China in June.
Trade Minister Andrew Robb said a deal with the EU was a "missing piece" after the conclusion of the other agreements.
A number of steps must be completed for formal negotiations to begin. First, the EU will conduct an impact assessment of the FTA. Second, it will commission a study to examine areas of negotiation.
The European Council's 28 members must also give their permission to open negotiations but EU officials are confident previous consultation mean this stage is a formality.
One of the goals of the EU trade policy is to "expanding measures to support sustainable development, fair and ethical trade and human rights".
The potential focus on human rights clauses has been a source of tension in the past.
Former EU ambassador Brendon Nelson has previously argued Australia should never sign a free trade agreement with the EU if talks included demands for tough clauses on human rights, democracy and the rule of law.
A trade deal with Europe was discussed at last November's G20 meeting in Brisbane.
Fairfax Media Management Pty Limited
Regional Free Trade Agreements: Opportunities or Obstacles for Business?
15 October 2015
Business Wire
SYDNEY--(BUSINESS WIRE)-- HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Euromonitor International released today its latest consumer markets white paper titled, An Introduction to Regional FTAs in Australasian Markets: Business Perspectives from India and China.
With the greater economic integration of the Asia-Pacific region there has been a surge of recent free trade agreements (FTAs), from deals struck between neighbouring nations through to more wide-ranging negotiations, such as ASEAN's Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership and the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP).
"The recognition of the benefits of stronger regional trade ties has been widespread, with Australia and New Zealand also realising the advantages of fostering closer economic relations with their Asian and Pacific nation neighbours, particularly in the form of better access to key export markets, reduced tariffs and increased investments," says HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Euromonitor International ResearchAnalyst, Lily Lam. "Both nations are major producers of food and beverage products with a premium 'clean, green' international brand positioning, and can market their products accordingly to target Asia's emerging middle-class consumers."
An Introduction to Regional FTAs in Australasian Markets: Business Perspectives from India and China examines the prospects for companies looking to take advantage of the region's increasing number of trade opportunities.
Throughout the white paper, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Euromonitor International puts regional trade and demographics into perspective, highlighting key takeaways from New Zealand's past FTA experiences and analysing the China-Australia FTA in terms of its potential for food and beverage producers. In terms of the future, the white paper considers the TPP and a prospective Australia-India FTA.
"There are significant opportunities for Australasian companies as a result of the FTAs within Asia and the Pacific region," concluded Lam. "The message is clear for Australian and New Zealand businesses -- the door is open and it is now time to respond to changing consumer demands."
Business Wire, Inc. 
Trade Facilitation: To ratify or not to ratify? Is that the question?
15 October 2015
The Jakarta Post
Poppy S. Winanti , Yogyakarta
Trade facilitation is the only trade agenda that has survived from the WTO Ministerial Conference in Singapore, which was held back in 1996. The trade negotiation agendas, which are well known as "the Singapore Issues", consist of trade and investment, trade and competition policy, transparency in government procurement and trade facilitation.
While other agenda items were taken off the table after the Doha Ministerial Conference, trade facilitation was the only agenda that all HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members agreed to negotiate further.
After negotiations launched in 2004, it took almost 10 years for the Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA) to be finally concluded. The TFA was concluded at the WTO Bali Ministerial Conference in December 2013 as part of the "Bali Package" and has become the first multilateral trade agreement signed since the establishment of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO in 1994.
The TFA's main purpose is to ease customs procedures and facilitate the movement, release and clearance of goods. The TFA is expected to cut bureaucracy and corruption in customs procedures and consequently speed up trade and lower the cost of international trade.
The first section of the TFA contains approximately 40 technical measures that the government is required to implement in order to reduce trade costs. These comprise a series of measures for the prompt and efficient movement of goods across borders.
Each member is obliged to publish all information regarding procedures, regulations, fees and charges, penalties and any other necessary information.
All information should be available on the Internet, along with enquiry points that should be made available. Furthermore, the TFA also obliges members to issue an advance ruling, provide procedures for appeal or review, ensure border agency cooperation and provide a guarantee for freedom of transit, among other things.
In addition to the obligations embedded in the TFA, it should be noted that the TFA is the only HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO trade agreement that extends comprehensive and special provisions regarding developing countries and least developed countries (Section 2 of the TFA) that uniquely allows them to implement the Agreement based on their own assessment.
In this regard, each developing country and least developed country may determine when it will implement and identify whether it will need any technical assistance and support for capacity building to implement the measures.
In this context, the Agreement sets out three different categories of notifications. Category A provisions mean that the member is able to implement when the Agreement comes into force. Category B provisions mean that the member is able to implement the Agreement after a transitional period following it coming into effect.
Category C provisions allow a nation to not only implement the Agreement's requirements after a transitional period as in Category B, but also provides that nation with assistance and capacity building support. To assist with reaching these goals, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members also created the Trade Facilitation Agreement Facility (TFAF) in 2014 as a supporting body and a focal point to assist developing countries and least developed countries in dealing with their TFA obligations.
As part of Indonesia's obligations, on July 31, 2014, Indonesia notified the Preparatory Committee on Trade Facilitation that only three provisions could be categorised into Category A. These are provisions on penalty disciplines, pre-arrival processing, and the use of Customs Brokers. However, nearly two years after its conclusion at the Bali Ministerial Conference, Indonesia has not yet ratified the Agreement. Considering the next WTO Ministerial Conference will be held in December in Nairobi, the question is whether the Indonesian government has to make a decision to ratify the Agreement or not?
Nevertheless, this question is a little more complicated. Whether Indonesia decides to ratify the Agreement or not, the Protocol of Amendment and TFA requires two-thirds of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members to ratify and convey their acceptance to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO Secretariat in order for the agreement to come into force.
Based on the September member numbers of the organization, it would require around 107 out of 161 HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members to ratify the TFA.
Even though the latest data shows that as of September 2015, only 17 members have ratified the Agreement, including ASEAN members Malaysia and Singapore, the enforcement of the Agreement seems inevitable. Unless, Indonesia is able to influence other members not to ratify, the insertion of the Agreement into the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO Agreement is only a matter of time. With this in mind, to ratify or not to ratify is no longer the question. Once two-thirds of the Members have ratified, the Agreement will be automatically adopted, whether Indonesia ratifies the Agreement or not.
Against this background, perhaps the more appropriate question to ask is, what should Indonesia do to prepare itself? What efforts should be made to take advantage of any opportunities following from the Agreement?
By the time the Agreement comes into force, Indonesia has to provide notification of commitment categories for the TFA provisions. Conducting an assessment to identify three different categories of notifications under Section 2 of the TFA is indeed an urgent need. Indonesia, therefore, should take full advantage of the TFA by requesting technical assistance and support for capacity building to implement the provisions that Indonesia is not ready to implement yet.
Furthermore, designing a roadmap for TFA implementation is also a must. This roadmap can be used as the basis for policy recommendations. What are the targets, what should be done, when should it be done, how should it be done and which government agency should be responsible are among the important questions that should be addressed in the roadmap of Indonesia's implementation of its obligations under the TFA.
Therefore, consolidating and preparing Indonesia's own domestic readiness is much more crucial than debating whether to ratify the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO TFA or not.
PT Bina Media Tenggara
China remains main driver of global economic growth - Russia’s G20 Sherpa
15 October 2015
ITAR-TASS World Service
TASS
China remains main driver of global economic growth - Russia’s G20 Sherpa
ANKARA, October 15. /TASS/. -China, India, and other developing economies remain the driver of the global economic growth, representative of the Russian President in G20 Svetlana Lukash told TASS on Thursday after the G20 Sherpas meeting in Ankara.
"Based on HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF’s outlook, the attitude towards global economy’s growth prospects is still muted, though not skeptical. However, G20 members note nevertheless that positive processes are in place, making possible to hope for the best. In particular, Chinese financial markets are recovering. Although the seven-percent growth is the ‘new standard’ for China, this nation remains the main driver of the global economy," Lukash said.
"High hopes on the global economic recovery are also related to accelerated growth of the India’s economy," representative of the Russian President said. "This country currently has the second best economic dynamics among BRICS nations after China. Developing economies on the whole remain the economic growth driver at the global scale. The situation is also changing to the better in developed economies," she added.
ITAR-TASS Information Telegraph Agency of Russia
END
 
Josep Bosch, Information Officer
Information and External Relations Division
+41227395681
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.