India seeking 'balanced outcome' in WTO Nairobi meet
Government working on internal processes to ratify WTO's trade facilitation agreement
Pacific Rim free trade talks fail to achieve an agreement 
WITSA World Information Technology and Services: Applauds Expansion of Landmark IT Agreement
Senator calls for repeal of COOL requirements
Super computer exports restricted 
Chinese economy adjusting to "new normal"
OMC : un front de non-adhésion de l'Algérie se dessine en perspective 
 

India seeking 'balanced outcome' in WTO Nairobi meet
 
Business Standard Reporter, New Delhi 
August 1, 2015 
Last Updated at 16:14 IST 
 
Last year, India had fought hard to set the Bali accord straight, and have its concerns on food security and other issues addressed
India is seeking a "balanced outcome" at the World Trade Organization's (WTO) tenth ministerial meeting even as it is striving to get a permanent solution to the public stockholding issue for HYPERLINK "http://www.business-standard.com/search?type=news&q=Food+Security" food security purposes. 
The ministerial meeting, which is the highest decision making body of the WTO, will be held in Nairobi, Kenya. This is for the first time that a WTO meeting of all trade ministers is taking place in an African nation.
"India is also working with other WTO Members to ensure balanced, development-oriented outcomes at the HYPERLINK "http://www.business-standard.com/search?type=news&q=Nairobi" Nairobi Ministerial, including on the issue of public stockholding for food security," according to a commerce department note.
Last year, India had fought a bitter fight at the WTO to set the HYPERLINK "http://www.business-standard.com/search?type=news&q=Bali+Accord" Bali accord straight, which was signed and agreed in December 2013. India had decided not to join the consensus in the WTO on the implementation of the HYPERLINK "http://www.business-standard.com/search?type=news&q=Trade+Facilitation+Agreement" Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA) in July 2014 till its concerns relating to the implementation of other Bali ministerial decisions, in particular, the decision on public stockholding for food security purposes, were addressed.
India had then demanded that the farm subsidies given by it to its poor and subsistence farmers in the form of 'minimum support price' or MSP will continue to be given without inviting any complaint or dispute from other member countries, until a permanent solution to the issue is found.
Eventually, through a decision of the WTO General Council it was decided that India and other developing countries can continue to offer such subsidies to the farmers under the public stockpiling programmes until a permanent solution is achieved. The deadline for which is 2015.
Meanwhile, the government also started working on its notification commitments as well as internal processes for ratifying the TFA, which seeks to ease customs rules for seamless movement of goods.
Deadline to ratify the HYPERLINK "http://www.business-standard.com/search?type=news&q=Tfa" TFA is also December. So far only nine countries have notified it. China and European Union are expected to do it soon.


Government working on internal processes to ratify WTO's trade facilitation agreement 
 
The Economic Times
31 July 2015 18:28, 348 words, (English) 
NEW DELHI: The government is working on internal processes to ratify WTO's trade facilitation agreement (TFA), which looks to ease Customs procedures to boost trade, a senior commerce ministry official today said. 

"India is fully committed to honouring its international obligations and is working on its notification commitments as well as internal processes for ratifying the agreement," the official said. 
Last year, India had decided not to join the consensus at WTO on TFA implementation till its concerns on implementation of public stockholding for the food security purpose were addressed. 

Once this was done through a decision of WTO's General Council, the highest decision-making body of the organisation, India joined the consensus on implementing TFA. 

TFA aims at simplifying Customs rules, increasing transparency and reducing transaction costs for traders. 

The official also said India is working with other WTO members to ensure a balanced and positive outcome at the Nairobi ministerial meeting, including the food security issue. 
The WTO's General Council had accepted India's demand for extending the peace clause till a permanent solution is found on food stockpiling. 

This has enabled India to continue procurement and stocking of foodgrain for distribution to the poor under its food security programme without attracting any kind of action from WTO members even if it breaches the 10 per cent subsidy cap as prescribed by the multilateral trade body. 

For a permanent solution, India had proposed either amending the formula to calculate the food subsidy cap of 10 per cent, which is based on the reference price of 1986-88, or allowing such schemes outside the purview of subsidy caps. 

If no solution is found by the agreed deadline of December 31, the peace clause will continue till the time a solution is found. 
 
 
 
Pacific Rim free trade talks fail to achieve an agreement 
 
The Nation 2 August 2015
 
Agence France-Presse WASHINGTON But US official insists "significant progress" has been made on Trans-Pacific Partnership pact 
Delegates negotiating a huge Pacific free-trade agreement said they failed to reach a final deal after several days of intense talks in Hawaii, in a setback to US President Barack Obama. 
But US Trade Representative Michael Froman, in a statement on behalf of the 12 countries involved, insisted that "significant progress" had been made on the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) agreement. 
"After more than a week of productive meetings we've made significant progress and will continue on resolving a limited number of remaining issues, paving the way for the conclusion of the Trans-Pacific Partnership negotiations," said Froman. 
The negotiators were "more confident than ever that TPP is within reach", he said, adding that the Pacific Rim countries involved would continue to have bilateral discussions to try and iron out their remaining differences. 
"The progress made this week reflects our long-standing commitment to deliver an ambitious, comprehensive and high-standard TPP agreement that will support jobs and economic growth across the Asia-Pacific region." 
The failure to hammer out the final details of the accord is a blow to #124Obama as it could see the TPP become campaign fodder as the United States gets set to enter election season. 
The TPP is the most ambitious trade deal in decades, a vast free-trade bloc encompassing 40 per cent of the world's economy and part of Obama's much-vaunted "rebalance" towards Asia in the face of an increasingly assertive China. 
The 12 countries involved, including Australia, New Zealand, Japan and Canada, have faced criticism for carrying out their negotiations in what opponents have charged was in high-level secrecy. Critics say the proposals indicate a deal moving more toward protection than free trade, one more about corporate benefits than boosting economies and development. 
But backers say the modern global economy needs a new framework of rules to protect intellectual property-dependent 21st century industries that aren't covered in traditional free trade pacts like the World Trade Organisation. 
Several prickly issues were believed to have held up what was supposed to be the final round of talks this week on the island of Maui, prime among them differences over agricultural markets and protection for drug makers. 
With the US facing elections in November 2016, and voters suspicious of trade treaties, the delay could jeopardise its ratification in Congress. 
"Today's [Friday's] fourth 'final' TPP ministerial without a deal means the clock has run on possible US congressional votes in 2015," Lori Wallach, director of advocacy group Public Citizen's Global Trade Watch, said in a statement. "No deal means the TPP is thrown into the political maelstrom of the US presidential cycle and with opposition building in many countries there are reduced chances that a deal will ever be reached on a pact that US Trade Representative Michael Froman declared to be in its 'end game' in 2013 but that has become ever more controversial since. 
"It's good news for people and the planet that no deal was done at this final do-or-die meeting given the TPP's threats to jobs, wages, safe food, affordable medicines and more." 
Nation News Network Co., Ltd. 
 
 
WITSA World Information Technology and Services: Applauds Expansion of Landmark IT Agreement
 
08/01/2015 | 12:46am US/Eastern
4-traders
Vienna, Virginia: The World Information Technology and Services Alliance (WITSA) applauds the tentative agreement reached among World Trade Organization (WTO) members in Geneva, Switzerland on July 24th to expand the product coverage of the Information Technology Agreement (ITA). The expanded ITA is slated to be adopted at the WTO Ministerial Conference in Nairobi December 15-18, 2015 and will go into force on July 1, 2016. 
The ITA expansion is estimated to add an additional $190 billion annually to the global GDP through expanded trade in tech products. The total value of products now covered by the ITA amounts to $1.3 trillion, more than global trade in automotive products - or trade in textiles, clothing, iron and steel combined. Among the products covered in this agreement are new-generation semi-conductors, GPS navigation systems, medical products which include magnetic resonance imaging machines, machine tools for manufacturing printed circuits, telecommunications satellites and touch screens. 
"WITSA has long been a strong supporter of the ITA, since its inception in 1997?, stated WITSA Secretary General Dr. Jim Poisant. Poisant added that WITSA had called for an expansion of the ITA coverage in its September 2013 Statement of Policy on International Trade in ICT Goods and Services[1] as well: "In the absence of progress towards a comprehensive agreement as proposed at the WTO Ministerial Meeting at Doha in November 2001, WITSA urges all WTO member nations to build upon existing foundation agreements, such as GATS and TRIPS. This can be achieved through all WTO members acceding to agreements negotiated under the auspices of, and enforced by, the WTO, such as the ITA, and expanding its coverage in line with technological change." 
"The success of the ITA expansion initiative is the first major tariff-cutting deal at the WTO in 18 years" said WITSA Public Policy Chairman R. Chandrashekhar (NASSCOM). "This marks the beginning of a new trade environment which offers new opportunities to open markets based on multilateral trade principles such as most-favored-nation (MFN), national treatment, reciprocity and uniformity", added Mr. Chandrashekhar. "While the days of sweeping trade initiatives such as the Doha Development Agenda may be over, the ITA expansion gives renewed hope and optimism that sectoral agreements in the areas of services and environment goods can be successfully concluded as well." 
Chandrashekhar continued that technology adoption has brought huge gains in the post internet global economy. Trade agreements such as the ITA offer vast new opportunities for businesses to drive faster adoption and access to the global marketplace. There is a compelling economic case to support ongoing efforts that enable continuing global trade liberalization. Progress to-date has resulted in significant increases in the global distribution of income with substantial benefits accruing to all nations - developed countries, emerging economies and especially to some of the poorest nations". 
"We urge the governments of all nations to take advantage of the current momentum to redouble their efforts to establish and implement multilateral trade liberalization under the auspices of the WTO", said WITSA Chairman Santiago Gutierrez. 
See the HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/witsa-wp-site/wp-content/uploads/2015/08/,DanaInfo=.awjvveEuyo+2015_MediaRelease_on_ITA_final.pdf" PDF 
 
 
 
Senator calls for repeal of COOL requirements
Pat Roberts, chairman of the US Senate Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition and Forestry, addressed the Senate last week, calling for a repeal of the COOL labeling requirements. 
 
Refrigerated & Frozen Foods,
July 31, 2015
HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/authors/,DanaInfo=.awxyCvjlyqpo2m6ssv86Gy81.A2Z3ED+2065-jeremy-gerrard" Jeremy Gerrard
Last week, Sen. Pat Roberts, chairman of the US Senate Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition and Forestry, presented to the Senate his amendment to repeal mandatory country-of-origin-labeling (COOL) requirements for beef, pork and chicken to prevent Canada and Mexico from imposing billions of dollars in retaliatory tariffs on the US economy.
Roberts urged his colleagues to support the repeal or risk facing $3.2 billion in tariffs being applied to US exports. “This debate isn’t about the merits of a particular labeling program or our opinions about how our beef or pork or chicken should be sold,” Roberts said. “No, this debate is about a simple fact, and facts are stubborn things. Whether you support COOL or oppose COOL, the fact is retaliation is coming unless the Senate acts to stop this program that the WTO [World Trade Organization] has found to be discriminatory.”
The COOL law would require a label to be placed on meat packages detailing where an animal was born, raised and slaughtered. Consumer groups lobbied for the rule, but Canada and Mexico complained about it to the WTO, which sided with them.
The US House of Representatives voted in June to repeal COOL requirements for beef, pork and chicken. Under threats of trade retaliation from Mexico and Canada, the Country of Origin Labeling Amendments Act was passed by a vote of 300-131. The WTO had previously ruled the labeling requirements were discriminatory against both the US border countries, which said they would seek to impose tariffs worth billions on American products. This recent WTO ruling was the fourth and final decision on the law. In its three previous decisions, WTO ruled against the COOL law.
Recently, Canada’s Agriculture Minister Gerry Ritz and International Trade Minister Ed Fast issued a joint statement on the COOL law saying, “The US Senate must follow the lead of the House of Representatives and put forward legislation that repeals COOL once and for all. The only acceptable outcome remains for the United States to repeal COOL or face $3 billion in annual retaliation. Canada will continue to stand up for the rights of our cattle and hog producers to ensure this harm is ended and to restore the value of our highly integrated North American livestock market.” According to Roberts, Florida, Illinois, Iowa, Michigan, Minnesota, New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, Texas, Washington and Wisconsin each have $1 billion in exports that would be at risk for Canadian retaliation.
The US Senate has debated COOL for years, but it remains a divisive issue. Solutions hoping to appease all parties have been considered, though Roberts says the WTO decision means a repeal is likely the only way to avoid retaliation. The North American Meat Institute threw its support behind Roberts, adding that a full and simple repeal is essential.
“The House of Representatives recognized this fact and passed a straightforward repeal, HR 2393, by a vote of 300-131,” says Barry Carpenter, NAMI president and CEO. “Chairman Roberts has shown leadership by acknowledging this reality with his amendment. We can’t afford to waste precious time debating proposals other than a full and simple repeal. Anything else jeopardizes important segments of the US economy and ultimately our consumers.”
 
 
Super computer exports restricted 
 
The Jakarta Post
01 August 2015 19:49
China will ban exports of high-performance drones and computers due to national security reasons, trade and customs authorities said on Friday.
The ban, which will be effective from mid-August, urges manufacturers not to export drones that are capable of flying in gusty winds, hovering above 15,420 meters and having more than an hour of flight duration.
Computers with greater than 8 tera floating-point operations per second will also not be allowed for exports, said an announcement jointly issued by the Ministry of Commerce and the General Administration of Customs. It is the first time that China is imposing export restrictions on such products.
The authorities did not explain how the devices are a threat to national security in the short announcement. However, the decision will have limited impact on export of commercial drones, industry insiders said.
"The ban is targeting drones not designed for commercial use and will protect key technologies of Chinese companies," said Shao Jianhuo, vice-president of DJI Technology Co, a Guangdong-based company that controls about 70 percent of the global drone sales.
None of the DJI products will be banned, the company said after a review of the standards.
"It was a surprise decision for the industry, but it really makes sense in terms of national security and the healthy growth of the industry," Shao said.
The ban came two weeks after a drone likely made by a Chinese company was caught in international crossfire.
On July 15, Pakistan said it had shot down a spy drone owned by Indian military in the border area of the two nations while India dismissed the accusation. The flying object looked like a China-made product in shape.
The ban over super computers also makes sense, said Gene Cao, a senior information technology analyst at market research firm Forrester Research Inc.
"I think it definitely proves that China has the world's leading capabilities on super computing," he said.
China's rapid growth in the super computing sector has already raised eyebrows in nations like the United States, said experts.
The US government banned processors used in Chinese supercomputers some months ago, citing information security concerns. The move hurt Intel Corp's business with a number of labs and universities.
China is one of the world's largest makers of super computers. China-based Tianhe series is already the world's fastest supercomputer. The US and Japan are also investing on building the next-generation of supercomputers to leapfrog the Tianhe.
- See more at: http://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2015/08/01/super-computer-exports-restricted.html#sthash.5EHKWk3A.dpuf
 
 
Chinese economy adjusting to "new normal"
 
Last Updated: 2015-08-02 08:28 | Xinhua 
Jinjiang used to be a manufacturing boomtown, a place making shoes and garments for American and European supermarket shelves.
But these days, the city on China's southeast coast, like many of its manufacturing bases, is losing its edge because of rising wages and lack of product innovation.
"I'm considering moving to Bangladesh," said Lin Genghuang, a Jinjiang native who owns a shoe factory. "Business is barely holding up here."
Lin said the company's export volume is still climbing, but rising wages, the appreciation of the yuan and intense price competition are squeezing the already paper-thin profit margin.
After China's World Trade Organization accession in 2001, cheap labor has fueled its export boom and powered the economy to become the world's second largest. But China's manufacturing sector is running into problems these days: squeezed from one end by markets with even lower labor costs, such as Vietnam and Malaysia, and yet struggling to move to a higher value chain because of intensified competition from developed nations.
Some 3,000 km away from Jinjiang, in the northeastern city of Harbin, a deepening economic malaise is forcing companies to reinvent themselves to survive.
Harbin Boiler Company Ltd., a state-owned thermal power equipment manufacturer, is experiencing double blows -- the slowing economy and a national campaign to curb pollution and cut emissions.
With orders falling and profits shrinking, the company has no choice but to change, its president, Wang Dexing, said.
To improve competitiveness, the company is striving to develop new products, expand markets in emerging economies and tap into new businesses such as sea water desalination, nuclear power equipment and environmental protection.
This is a part of China's broader economic reality: Anemic economic momentum is driving the government to seek new sources of growth while forcing domestic and multinational companies to look for a Plan B.
Weighed by a property market downturn, cooling investment growth and unsteady demand both at home and abroad, China's economy has stumbled during the past two years and is widely expected to post its weakest growth in a quarter of a century this year.
Although growth is slowing, it is more balanced and sustainable -- a "new normal," as it is called by Chinese President Xi Jinping.
Under the "new normal," the importance of growth speed is eclipsed by immensely complex structural reforms going on to transform the economy to one that relies more on the services sector, domestic spending and innovation.
"The slowdown in China's economic growth means the government is making inroads with structural adjustments and policy efforts to address financial vulnerabilities," according to a World Bank report. In the medium term, these efforts are helping China gradually shift its growth model from manufacturing to services, from investment to consumption, and from exports to domestic spending.
The government has put in place policies to contain fast expansion in credit growth, regulate borrowing by local governments and eliminate industrial overcapacity, which help lower investment in sectors such as real estate. At the same time, it has tried to put a floor on the slowdown, with limited but targeted support measures.
Despite a stock market rout and mounting economic headwinds, the Chinese economy is holding steady and showing signs of a shift, albeit slowly, with consumption and the services sector gradually taking over as main drivers of growth.
"China's economy is functioning well in general, with some problems remaining that require the wisdom of all and solid efforts," President Xi said.
At a Thursday meeting, chaired by Xi, China's top decision-making body said the central government would take "effective measures" to nurture the steady growth of consumption, investment and exports, key engines of growth, while stepping up "targeted policies" to counter downward pressure.
 
 
OMC : un front de non-adhésion de l'Algérie se dessine en perspective 
 
par Reghis Rabah * 
En plus des propos tenus début juillet lors de la journée parlementaire sur les enjeux des accords commerciaux avec l'Occident et ceux régionaux, organisée à l'initiative du Parti des travailleurs en collaboration avec l'UGTA et d'autres personnalités scientifiques notamment économistes, un front pour la non-adhésion de l'Algérie à l'OMC semble se dessiner en perspective. 

Ceci confirme la ferme volonté de Louisa Hanoune, leader du parti des travailleurs qui dans un de ses meetings lors de la dernière présidentielle, avait dénoncé l'empressement du gouvernement de rejoindre le club de l'Organisation Mondiale du Commerce (OMC) avant les élections présidentielle d'avril dernier. Le ministre du commerce précise t-elle applique son agenda comme s'il était sûr des résultats de ce scrutin. Il est clair que la candidate pointe du doigt la dernière réunion de Genève et à l'issue de laquelle Benada, ministre du commerce de l'époque avait reconnu que l'Algérie devrait encore faire des efforts, soit concéder, en raison des contraintes objectives qui découlent de son statut de pays en développement et qui persistent. Il faut préciser que rien n'est fait pour lever justement ces contraintes. Bien au contraire l'accord d'association avec l'Union Européenne va encore compliquer la démarche de cette adhésion eu égard du volume des transactions commerciales que l'Algérie entretient avec cette région du monde. En plus, elle vient d'être classée 120 éme sur 138 pays analysés dans le cadre de facilitation des échanges commerciaux. En effet, The Global Enabling Trade Report 2014, qui compare les performances de 138 pays dans quatre domaines liés à l'accès aux marchés, l'administration aux frontières, les infrastructures et l'environnement opérationnel. Les initiateurs de ce type de rapports intègrent très peu, dans leur démarche, l'intérêt des pays en développement et se placent plutôt du point de vue des pays industrialisés, il n'en demeure pas moins que l'Algérie est sérieusement épinglée pour ce qui concerne le développement des infrastructures, l'accès aux marchés étrangers, la compétence logistique, la disponibilité et l'utilisation des TIC, l'environnement opérationnel, l'indice de protection de la propriété et l'administration aux frontières. Cet indice de facilitation des échanges commerciaux, utilisé dans le rapport, révèle que les grandes économies émergentes du monde rencontrent d'énormes difficultés dans leurs efforts pour faciliter les échanges et passer au stade supérieur de développement. Parmi les pays du BRIC, la Chine, principal exportateur mondial, se classe à la 54e place sur 138 économies et devance de peu l'Afrique du Sud (59e position), le Brésil (86e), l'Inde (96e) et la Fédération de Russie (105e). Parmi les obstacles usuels aux échanges dans les pays en développement et émergents figurent, selon le rapport, la bureaucratie aux frontières, la corruption, les déficits en matière d'infrastructures et les faibles niveaux de sécurité. 

Par ailleurs, la plupart des économies avancées appliquent, selon le rapport, de faibles droits de douane sur les importations, mais certaines, telles que la Suisse, la Norvège et les membres de l'UE conservent des régimes douaniers complexes au sein desquels il est difficile de se retrouver, notent encore les rédacteurs du rapport. En quoi consiste justement cette adhésion ? Quels en sont les enjeux ? Au state actuel des réformes, quel avantage l'Algérie devrait-elle tirer en rejoignant cette organisation ? 

Pourquoi une OMC. 

Historiquement l'accession dans les organisations politiques sociales et juridique comme l'ONU, le BIT ou l'UNESCO est plus faciles que celles du type commercial qui fonctionnent à la manière d'un cercle restreint où les membres doivent suivre des procédures complexes et sont acceptés au cas par cas. Ces pays sont acceptés soit pour commercer des biens (GATT), de services (GATS), de réglementation des investissements étrangers (TRIMS), de propriété intellectuelle liée au commerce (TRIPS) et de standards internationaux (OTC et SPS). L'Algérie pour des raisons tout à fait déconcertantes rêve de s'engager dans le processus d'intégration au système commercial multilatéral depuis juin 1987. 

Mais, en réalité, les négociations ont commencé à se concrétiser à partir de la présentation par l'Algérie de son aide-mémoire du commerce extérieur en juillet 1996 puis de la tenue de la première réunion du Groupe de travail en avril 1998. La période allant de juin 1987 à juillet 1996 ayant été marquée par un seul acte, le dépôt de la demande d'adhésion. 

L'ouverture tout azimute d'un pays dans la sphère du commerce international trouve son origine dans la théorie développé par David Ricardo en 1817 et qui se base sur l'avantage comparatif qu'un acteur possède soit sur ses ressources soit sur son savoir faire soit sur tout autre facteur que l'autre n'a pas et qui justifie l'échange. Donc, un pays, exportant un bien pour lequel il jouit de cet avantage comparatif, a tout intérêt à adhérer au régime commercial de l'OMC dont la logique repose sur l'accroissement des exportations dans le respect du principe de réciprocité. Ainsi, l'appartenance à l'OMC sécurise l'accès aux marchés pour les exportations d'un pays, celles-ci bénéficiant désormais des droits en vigueur au niveau multilatéral. De façon symétrique et partant du fait que l'un des effets de la procédure d'accession est la baisse des tarifs douaniers et des barrières non tarifaires, il peut en résulter une baisse du coût des importations. Le processus peut aboutir à un abaissement du coût des intrants et des biens intermédiaires importés par le pays. C'est pour cela que le requérant doit se mettre en conformité avec le régime de l'OMC, le processus comporte un biais en faveur des pays du groupe de travail qui ont l'exclusivité de la proposition. Le répondant doit prouver aux membres sa capacité à se mettre en conformité avec les dispositions de l'OMC et à réduire le niveau de protection de son économie. Par ailleurs, le régime de l'OMC constitue une garantie pour les opérateurs économiques internationaux quant au respect des droits de propriété et, plus globalement, une garantie de respect des principes et des dispositions du droit commercial international. L'adhésion à l'OMC sécurise l'espace transactionnel et contractuel des opérateurs économiques internationaux et peut apparaître comme un facteur favorable d'attractivité du territoire du requérant. 

Protéger sa production nationale ou opter pour le libre- échange est un vieux débat 

Déjà, moins d'une année avant le lancement des idées du libre échange, fortement justifié par la croissance des coopérations entre nations et l'augmentation des revenus, l'Etat américain taxait les produits importés pour protéger son économie. Cette politique protectionniste à outrance est légitimée par la protection de l'industrie locale mais aussi le découragement des importations. Ce protectionnisme a connu son apogée après la crise financière de 1929, qui a éclaté à la Bourse de New York aux Etats-Unis, s'est étalée au secteur bancaire puis à toute l'économie. Face à cette crise, le Congrès sous l'Administration du président Herbert Hoover (1929 - 1933), a recouru à des mesures protectionnistes, mettant en place la loi Hawley Smoot en 1930.En réponse à la politique protectionniste des Américains, d'autres pays augmentèrent à leur tour leurs droits de douane, mettant en très mauvaise posture les sociétés américaines qui vivaient de l'exportation. Cela conduisit à une suite d'augmentations des droits de douane qui fragmenta l'économie mondiale. La mise en place du programme "New Deal" par le président Roosevelt en 1933, n'a pas donné les effets escomptés, et ce n'est qu'après la Seconde guerre mondiale que l'économie américaine a retrouvé sa force économique et industrielle. Sortant vainqueur de la Deuxième Guerre mondiale et possédant une technologie de pointe et une solide industrie, l'Etat américain devait garantir des débouchés pour ses produits. A cet effet et pour contourner la progression du communisme de l'URSS, l'Administration américaine d'Harry S. Truman a mis en place le plan Marshall afin d'aider les pays européens à reconstruire leurs économies dévastées par la guerre. C'est dans ces circonstances que le GATT (General Agreement en Tariffs and Trade) voit le jour en 1947, ratifié par 23 pays. Son objectif principal étant la liberté des échanges par l'abaissement des droits de douane et la réduction des restrictions quantitatives ou qualitatives aux échanges. Les principales règles du GATT étant : élimination de toutes les barrières non tarifaires et consolidation des tarifs douaniers; non-discrimination entre les exportateurs étrangers et les producteurs nationaux ; l'accord d'un avantage commercial à un pays doit être étendu à tous les pays signataires du GATT ; interdiction des restrictions quantitatives sur les importations et sur les exportations ; l'interdiction du dumping et des subventions à l'exportation. La GATT s'organise sous forme de round ou de cycles qui prennent le nom de la ville où ils ont été ouverts, par le pays auquel appartient cette ville, ou par des noms de responsables politiques .Le dernier round à juste titre du GATT a donné naissance à l'OMC qui a vu le jour en 1995. A la différence du GATT, l'OMC s'est vu doter d'un organe de règlement des différends. Ses champs d'application ont été étendus aux services, aux investissements étrangers, à la propriété intellectuelle, à la santé et à l'environnement comme indiqué plus haut. 

La ligne de l'OMC est totalement contradictoire avec la démarche algérienne 

Il ne suffit pas de reconfigurer et clarifier son dispositif législatif et réglementaire ou tenter de le mettre artificiellement en conformité avec un régime fictif de commerce, comme le laissent entendre les responsables pour jouer dans la cours des grands. Ce sont désormais les réalités économiques qui en déterminent les critères. Quelles sont justement ces réalités qui sous tendent le développement du modèle économique Algérien ? Dès les premières années de son indépendance, l'Algérie devait opter pour un modèle de développement basé sur la mécanisation des moyens de production. Son objectif est d'aboutir à un tissu industriel qui créera le maximum d'emploi. Son premier plan triennal 1967-1970 prévoyait l'emploi de " toute la population masculine ". Il s'agissait d'œuvrer pour l'épanouissement du citoyen qui n'a que trop souffert de l'indigénat. Cela paraissait cohérent en dépit des insuffisances constatées, en tous les cas un large consensus se dégageait autour de ce modèle de développement. Il a été confirmé par une approche théorique qui consistait de créer un tissu industriel formé de puissantes sociétés qui auront la mission de capitaliser, consolider et surtout fertiliser le savoir et le savoir faire afin de prendre plus tard la relève des hydrocarbures. Cette ressource justement s'échangeait pour assurer le financement de cette démarche. Les technocrates qui avaient pris la gestion du pays après la mort de Boumediene, fortement impressionné par le modèle américain, pays où ils étaient formés ont procédé à une réorientation de l'économie nationale en commençant par un désengagement de l'Etat sans aucune transition consensuelle. La conséquence immédiate á été un déficit de confiance entre l'Etat et le citoyen qui se retrouve sans référence ni marqueur après plus d'une décennie d'effort et de privation qui semblent partir en fumée. Depuis, tout ce qui se mettait en place par les différents gouvernements qui se sont succédés ne donnait aucun résultat tangible sinon d'enfoncer plus le pays vers un avenir inconnu. Deux événements ont montré la vulnérabilité de cette réorientation. Le premier est le contre choc pétrolier de l'été 1985 qui a ramené le prix du baril à moins de 10 dollars suivi juste après de la chute du court du dollars, ont mis à nu la fragilité de l'économie Algérienne et sa soumission à des facteurs exogènes et qui échappent totalement aux décideurs. Le deuxième est venu avec le redressement des prix du baril de pétrole et la constitution de la fameuse manne financière. La croissance qui s'en est suivie n'a pas abouti au développent économique de l'Algérie mais plutôt aux partenaires étrangers. En effet, cette manne se trouve à l'étranger et sert au développement des pays où ces capitaux sont placés. Avec près de 65,75 milliards de dollars d'importation, c'est les fournisseurs des biens importés qui font activer leurs économies et certainement pas l'Algérie. Globalement, on peut qualifier la situation économique Algérienne de tout sauf de compétitive et diversifiée. Or, la compétitivité et la diversification sont l'essence même de la démarche de l'Organisation Mondiale du Commerce (OMC). Que peuvent contenir les accords déjà passés avec l'Argentine et l'Indonésie, Cuba, l'Uruguay, le Brésil, le Venezuela et la Suisse. Ensuite de quoi discute t-on avec les américains, l'Equateur, le Japon, le Salvador, l'Australie, la Corée du Sud, le Canada, la Nouvelle - Zélande et la Turquie. Cela fait trop de rounds pour trop de dépenses pour aucun résultat. Entre 2013 et 2014 il y a eu de la part des membres de l'OMC 170 questions qui s'ajoutent aux 1933 déjà traitées depuis son intention d'y adhérer. Pourtant deux à trois grandes questions suffisent pour que les Algériens sachent que cette histoire de rejoindre ce n'est qu'utopie. En effet, au stade actuel l'Algérie peut-elle abandonner sa politique de soutien des prix ? Lorsqu'on sait qu'une simple tentative de formaliser les transactions par des factures devait embraser le pays le 11 janvier 2011. Son impuissance d'éradiquer totalement le marché informel, favorise la spéculation et donc la non maîtrise d'une inflation à deux chiffres. Peut-elle se permettre d'ouvrir ses frontières aux produits étrangers face à un secteur public à terre et un secteur privé non encore créatif ? Que deviendront les emplois ? L'Algérie attend en 2014 plus d'un million de naissances qui nécessiteront de la santé, de l'éducation et de l'emploi. La croissance interne d'énergie augmente au rythme de 10% chaque année pour atteindre d'ici 2030 près 100 millions de tonne équivalent pétrole et exigera des pouvoirs publics d'importer pour combler le déficit énergétique et se posera dès lors la question avec quoi et comment financer le développent national ? L'Algérie qui a l'habitude d'entretenir une paix sociale en puisant sur la rente, comment peut-elle faire face à la grogne de la population qui ne va pas supporter l'inflation due à l'ouverture aux produits extérieurs sans aucun doute trop chers ? 

En conclusion, c'est aux questions internes que les pouvoirs publics doivent répondre avant d'entraîner le pays dans une démarche qui paralysera ce qui reste du tissu industriel, détruira l'emploi, accentuera la pauvreté et peut être conduira à une révolte. Donc l'inquiétude de la candidate au présidentielle 2014 est amplement justifiée. 

* Consultant et Economiste Pétrolier 
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.