Headlines:

·         WTO formally accepts Kazakhstan as new member

·         WTO Director-General Roberto Azevedo hopes Kazakhstan joins trade body by December

·         Nazarbayev, Azevedo call Kazakhstan's accession to WTO historic

·         Kazakh economy becomes stronger, more open in years of WTO bid, says president

·         Astana still against sanctions imposed on Russia

·         Kazakhstan to further support domestic agriculture after entering WTO - Aitzhanova

·         Kazakh minister pledges no abrupt decisions on tenge devaluation

·         Will Belarus Ever Become a WTO Member?

·         Taiwan agrees to ITAs expanded tariff scheme

·         Ukraine to cancel additional import tax early in 2016

·         Kenya industry safeguards place it on a collision path with WTO

·         Down to the wire on the Trans-Pacific Partnership

·         Trade Accord Nears Tricky Endgame

 

Details:

WTO formally accepts Kazakhstan as new member

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Ben Simon

27 July 2015

Agence France Presse

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization on Monday formally accepted Kazakhstan's bid to join the body, ending nearly two decades of negotiations that the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO has called among the most difficult in its history.

Meeting at its headquarters in Geneva, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO General Council approved the membership terms finalised last month.

After the formal approval, WTO Director General Robert Azevedo described the protracted accession process as "very challenging".

But, he said, talks moved quickly once the government in Astana made clear that it was finally serious about HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO membership.

"Once Kazakhstan decided to join the organisation, really, and they clearly gave that message to me less than two years ago, we managed to finalise this despite the immense complexity of the process," Azevedo told journalists.

Kazakhstan's President Nursultan Nazarbayev -- who has led the resource-rich nation for the past quarter century and was recently re-elected with more than 97 percent support -- was on hand to witness the formal acceptance by the council.

While the 74-year-old president of the ex-Soviet republic did not attend the press conference following the meet, his Foreign Minister Yerlan Idrissov described the accession as "historic".

"We have worked very hard. This has been a long and winding road," Idrissov said.

Kazakhstan began HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO accession talks in 1996, but negotiations were repeatedly stalled, in part because of Kazakhstan's membership in the Russia-led Eurasia Economic Union.

Also, the government of central Asia's largest economy had dragged its feet in implementing the economic liberalisations that are crucial to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO membership.

Economic Integration Minister Zhanar Aitzhanova told reporters in Geneva that Astana had agreed to "continue to undertake full liberalisation reforms".

Crucially, this will apply to the telecommunications sector, where previous caps on foreign investment are to be abolished.

Kazakhstan has also agreed to lower import tariffs and to make greater efforts to promote foreign investment.

Experts say Kazakhstan's economy is still far too reliant on resource-based income, with the recent collapse in global oil prices highlighting the urgent need for diversification.

Idrissov said diversification was Astana's "top priority" and that these efforts would be helped by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO membership.

"We believe that our membership will continue to help... the process of economic reforms," he told journalists.

The country's industrial output remains relatively weak, while agriculture accounts for less than four percent of its gross domestic product.

Analysts have said that in the short term, Kazakhstan's HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO accession will likely serve as a public relations boon for the government, but a dramatic or immediate impact on the ground is unlikely.

"There will be reforms. It is unavoidable because of the state of the economy... but this is not primarily because of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO accession," said Danielle Feldstein, a senior analyst and central Asia expert at the risk analysis firm Verisk Maplecroft.

She told AFP that certain benefits of the liberalisation were already being felt, as Astana had begun implementing certain HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO requirements while talks were progressing.

"Kazakhstan has been improving its domestic business environment over the last series of years," she said.

Once the formal ratification process is complete, expected by the end of the year, Kazakhstan will become the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO's 162nd member. bs/gd. Agence France-Presse

WTO Director-General Roberto Azevedo hopes Kazakhstan joins trade body by December

27 July 2015

ITAR-TASS World Service

GENEVA, July 27. /TASS/. Director-General of the World Trade Organization /WTO/ HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Roberto Azevedo expressed hope that Kazakhstan will take part in the 10th Ministerial Conference, which will be held by the trade body in Nairobi /Kenya/ from 15 to 18 December 2015, as its member-state, he said at a press conference after the ceremony of signing a protocol on Kazakhstan’s accession to the organization on Monday.

"Hopefully we will be able to confirm Kazakhstan’s membership at the conference in Nairobi as it will become the 162nd member of the organization. Unless it happens earlier," he said.

President of Kazakhstan Nursultan Nazarbayev and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Roberto Azevedo signed a protocol on the country’s accession to the organization at a session of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO’s General Council, the organization’s highest-level decision-making body in Geneva on Monday. Nazarbayev said the Kazakh economy has seen major structural changes since talks on its accession to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organisation (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO) began almost 20 years ago. The Kazakh economy "has become stronger and more open" since negotiations began, he said. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO member countries at the present account for more than 90 percent of the country"s foreign trade. "In the mid-1990s, Kazakhstan had ties only with post-Soviet states, while now we are trading with 185 countries of the world," President added. Countries of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union are its main economic partners, accounting for more than 54% of Kazakhstan’s foreign trade, he said, noting also a "sizable contribution" of trade with Russia, China, the United States, Canada and some other countries.

The next step will be ratification of the protocol signed on Monday in Kazakhstan, which is expected to be finished by October 31. The decision on Kazakhstan’s accession to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO will come into force automatically after 30 days pass from the moment when the trade organization receives ratification confirmation.

ITAR-TASS Information Telegraph Agency of Russia
Nazarbayev, Azevedo call Kazakhstan's accession to WTO historic

27 July 2015

EFE News Service

Geneva, Jul 27 (EFE).- The president of Kazakhstan, Nursultan Nazarbayev, and World Trade Organization director-general HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Roberto Azevedo both called Monday a "historic" day after the adoption of the protocol formalizing the Eurasian country's accession to the international trade body.

"Today is a truly historic day," Nazarbayev said in his address to the plenary session of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO General Council, the highest decision-making organ of the body, which had just adopted the accession protocol.

"Today is a historic day for Kazakhstan, but also for the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO, because it is closer to its goal of having universal membership," Azevêdo said in his address.

After almost 20 years of negotiations, the Eurasian country's accession was concluded on Monday with a vote in the plenary session, two long decades which, according to the Kazakh president, show his country's "perseverance" and that it has changed much over this time.

"Per capita GDP has increased eighteenfold in the past 20 years," Nazarbayev said.

The president also stressed that trade ties have expanded exponentially in the past two decades, with foreign trade reaching $120 billion.

"In the 1990s, we essentially traded with the countries of the former Soviet Union, and now we work with more than 85 states," Nazarbayev said.

In addition, the Kazakh president said the structure of his country's economy had changed and 54 percent of the GDP was now generated by the service sector, "to which we give a high priority."

"Everyone knows that we depend heavily on natural resources, such as oil and gas, but we want to diversify our economy in the future," the president said, calling on "foreign investors" to participate in the liberalization of the telecommunications sector.

Finally, Nazarbayev acknowledged that he "does not want to fall into the trap of middle-income countries," but wanted to further develop the economy, a process that should accelerate, thanks to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO admission.

Azevêdo agreed with the Kazakh leader, saying that accession "will have a major economic effect and systemic and human impact because it will create jobs." EFE

mh/lap/hv EFE News Service

Kazakh economy becomes stronger, more open in years of WTO bid, says president

27 July 2015

ITAR-TASS World Service

GENEVA, July 27./TASS/. Kazakh economy has seen major structural changes since talks on its accession to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organisation (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO) began almost 20 years ago, President Nursultan Nazarbayev said at a session of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO’s General Council, the organization’s highest-level decision-making body in Geneva on Monday.

"Today is a day of an historic importance for Kazakhstan. Kazakhstan completes the process of accession," he said.

"We have been engaged in these negotiations for almost 20 years, which proves our stubbornness," the president said, thanking HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO member countries for "support during a difficult process of negotiations".

Kazakh economy "has become stronger and more open" since negotiations began, he said. "GDP per capita has grown 18 times, reaching the level of countries of Central and Eastern Europe, while foreign trade has reached 120 billion dollars," he added.

The president said the structure of Kazakh economy had seen major changes, noting that the sector of services, whose development is in the focus of attention, accounts for 54 percent of country’s GDP.

"Kazakhstan is rich in mineral resources. However, we believe that we must change the structure of the economy, dependence on raw materials," Nazarbayev said.

He said HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO member countries at the present account for more than 90 percent of republic’s foreign trade. "In the mid-1990s, Kazakhstan had ties only with post-Soviet states, while now we are trading with 185 countries of the world," he added.

Countries of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union are its main economic partners, accounting for more than 54 percent of Kazakhstan’s foreign trade, he said, noting also "sizable contribution" of trade with Russia, China, the United States, Canada and some other countries.

WTO Director General HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Roberto Azevedo, also marked the importance of Kazakhstan’s HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO accession, welcoming the country to the organization which regulates international trade.

The ceremony of signing a protocol on Kazakhstan’s accession to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organisation was held in Geneva on Monday. The document was inked by Kazakh President Nursultan Nazarbayev and WTO Director General HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Roberto Azevedo.

ITAR-TASS Information Telegraph Agency of Russia

Astana still against sanctions imposed on Russia 

28 July 2015

Central Asia News

Kazakhstan will continue to oppose the economic sanctions imposed by Western countries on Russia, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Kazakhstan Erlan Idrissov told press conference in Geneva on July 27 following official ceremony of Kazakhstan's accession to the World Trade Organization.

The General Council of the World Trade Organization has approved the draft decision on the accession of Kazakhstan to the WTO. President of Kazakhstan Nursultan Nazarbayev, who is currently in Geneva, signed the document on behalf of Kazakhstan.

"Probably, the time for giving up on sanctions hasn't come yet. We will continue to call for the lifting of sanctions," RIA-Novosti cited Idrissov as saying.

He added that Kazakhstan is expanding its list of partners and opportunities for foreign investments, including China.

"We will develop our own ways to mitigate the impact (of the situation in the Russian economy) on business of both in Kazakhstan and Russia," said Idrissov.

CA-News

Kazakhstan to further support domestic agriculture after entering WTO - Aitzhanova

28 July 2015

Kazinform International News Agency

GENEVA. KAZINFORM - After Kazakhstan enters the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization (WTO), it will not reduce state support for domestic agriculture, Minister of Economic Integration Zhanar Aitzhanova told journalists.

"We will not reduce state support for domestic agricultural sector and will encourage investments into it. Moreover, measures are to be taken to stimulate service industry, financial and telecommunications sectors of Kazakhstan," Minister Aitzhanova added.

According to Ms Aitzhanova, Kazakhstan will create all opportunities to attract investments and new technologies. Thus, in her words, companies operating in the Kazakhstani market will gain competitive age.

Earlier it was reported that President of Kazakhstan Nursultan Nazarbayev and WTO Director General Roberto Azevedo signed the protocol on Kazakhstan's accession into the organization on Monday (July 27). Kazinform International News Agency

Kazakh minister pledges no abrupt decisions on tenge devaluation

27 July 2015

Reuters News

GENEVA, July 27 (Reuters) - Kazakhstan will not rush into any potential further devaluation of the tenge currency, Foreign Minister Erlan Idrissov said at a news conference at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization on Monday.

"As far as the speculation about the Kazakh currency is concerned ... the government is keeping a close eye on the situation and there will be no abrupt decisions. Everything will be done in an open and predictable way," Idrissov said.

He was speaking as Kazakhstan formally wrapped up its negotiation on joining the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO, and stands to become the 162nd member of the trade body by the end of the year, WTO Director-General HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Roberto Azevedo said.

Kazakhstan's accession to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO commits it to cutting tariffs and freeing up investment in its once Soviet economy.

It will remove a cap on foreign investment in the fixed-line telecoms sector and let foreign banks and insurance companies open branches, a change that will be phased in over five years.

Import tariffs will be limited to an average of 6.5 percent, Economic Integration Minister Zhanar Aitzhanova said.

Tariffs on agricultural imports would be limited to an average of 10.2 percent, and industrial goods to 5.6 percent, she said, although most tariff reductions would be phased in over 4-5 years.

She said Kazakhstan maintained its economic growth forecast of 1.5 percent this year. (Reporting by Tom Miles; Editing by Robin Pomeroy) 

Thomson Reuters (Markets) LLC

Will Belarus Ever Become a WTO Member?

27 July 2015

NewsKitchen.eu

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"MIL OSI - Source: Belarus Digest - 

Headline: Will Belarus Ever Become a WTO Member?

Two weeks ago, Belarusian Deputy Foreign Minister Aliaksandr Hurjanau declared Belarus was planning to finish all of the necessary technical work for the country’s accession to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organisation (WTO) in one year's time. However, exactly three years ago the he also projected that Belarus would join the WTO by the end of 2013. Is this time going to be any different?

The history of Belarus applying to join the the WTO is a story of unfulfilled promises to liberalise and privatise the economy. Instead of firmly declaring its aspirations to join the WTO by establishing its firm political commitment that could motivate it to introduce reforms, the Belarusian authorities have preferred to imitate engagement.

Belarus remains one of the very few countries in the world that does not belong to the WTO. To name but two issues, the overwhelming role of the state in the economy and its extensive agricultural subsidies are the clearest obstacles for Belarus's accession to the WTO.

Everyone but Belarus

The WTO's mission is to negotiate global rules for export-import relationships, developing multilateral trade agreements and reducing trade barriers. To date, 161 countries, which account for over 98 per cent of global GDP, have joined the WTO. Another 23 countries, including Belarus, are in the process of negotiating their accession, and only 14 states have shown no interest in joining. No country has ever left the WTO.

Russia's accession to the WTO in 2012 automatically forced other members of the Customs Union to comply with trade liberalisation policies in accordance with Russia’s obligations to the WTO.

Therefore, since 2012 Belarus has experienced the negative impact of Russia’s membership in the WTO with no direct benefits to its own economy. Goods made in Belarus neither have easier access to foreign markets, nor does Belarus have the right to use the WTO’s protection regulations for litigation purposes. Yet, Russia’s accession to the WTO has raised the level of competitiveness of the whole Customs Union and squeezed out a number Belarusian manufacturers from the market.

Unfulfilled Promises of Successive Governments

Belarus started negotiations on entering the WTO in 1993. After 22 years its WTO membership remains a distant prospect, though other former soviet republics have a track record of between 3 years (Kyrgyzstan) to 19 years (Russia) in their attempts to join the organisation.in 2014 the Russian government decreed it would spend $0.6m on initiatives supporting Belarus’ accession to the WTO

In over 20 years Belarus participated in numerous events to bring the national economy closer to the global organisation. The Working Party on the Accession of Belarus to the WTO, which is comprised of 41 countries, assesses the progress of Belarus in bringing national legislation into compliance with WTO agreements. To date the Working Party has already held 7 formal meetings in 1997-2005 and five rounds of informal consultations between 2006-2013.

In 2008-2013 the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"UN Conference on Trade and Development (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"UNCTAD) and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) Country Office in Belarus conducted a technical assistance project in support of reforms. The project consisted of many analytical studies, expert study tours, technical know-how exchange, seminars, and round tables. Two independent Belarusian think tanks, CASE and IPM, implemented another minor project in 2013. Last but not least, in December 2014 the Russian government decreed it would spend $0.6m on initiatives supporting Belarus’ accession to the WTO.

Minsk, however, has only been putting on a facade of deep concern about its quick accession to the WTO. Belarus’ application process is abound with numerous declarations by the Belarusian authorities to accelerate the process. In 2005, 2010 and 2012 Minsk claimed to that it would successfully wrap up negotiations in a year. Meanwhile, all of its neighbours and all of the current members of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Eurasian Economic Union have already joined the WTO (see the table below).

Stumbling Blocks for Belarus's Accession to the WTO

With an economy where state-owned enterprises produce about 70 per cent of GDP according to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (many of which are subsidised), Belarus does not have the slightest chance of joining the WTO.

WTO membership requires that candidate-countries commit to liberalising their economies and reduce the role of the state. The WTO has never admitted a country with such a quasi-socialist economy. For instance, the private sector in 22 of 29 post-socialist countries in Central and Eastern Europe and in Central Asia that have successfully joined the WTO accounted for 50 to 75 per cent of GDP at the moment of accession. The private sector's minor role in Belarus's GDP clearly reflects the scope of its lack of transition towards a market economy.The agricultural sector would immediately go bankrupt without the support of state subsidies

State support for the agricultural sector remains a particularly sensitive area of negotiations for Belarus’ potential accession to the WTO. Although its role in the economy has been diminishing over the last 25 years - from 23 per cent GDP in 1990 to 7 per cent in 2013, it still accounts for a rather significant part of the economy, employing 9.5 per cent of the total workforce according to official government statistics.

The agricultural sector is comprised mainly of state-owned collective farms which would immediately go bankrupt without the support of state subsidies. Only 10 per cent of agricultural firms could operate profitably without this support according to a study published in December 2013 by the Economic Research Institute of the Ministry of Economy. If Belarus were to join the WTO, it would have to significantly cut its financial support to this sector. Without the prior liberalisation and privatisation of the agricultural sector, this would likely signal its collapse.

Yet, Belarus’s membership in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Eurasian Economic Union​ does not interfere with its aspiration of joining the WTO. On the contrary, since the customs policy in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Eurasian Economic Union​ is the same Belarus and all other member-countries that have already joined the WTO, it means that Belarus is generally ready to instate a WTO-compliant customs policy. In other words, Belarus and the WTO could rather easily find some compromise in negotiations on tariff and non-tariff regulations of market access for goods and services.

Keeping the Quasi-Socialist Economy Alive

Though international competition defines growth in the long run, for an unreformed economy it poses a significant threat. The Belarusian authorities are aware of all of this, but remain reluctant to transform the economy. This is precisely why they continue to stall on implementing their promises towards quickly gaining membership in the WTO.

Without deep structural reforms, Belarus neither has a chance of join the WTO nor will it receive the benefits from accession. For the sake of its own national interests Belarus should at first advance its economic transition towards a market economy, including small and large scale privatisation, and at a later point focus on further foreign trade liberalisation, including its accession to the WTO.

Aleś Alachnovič

Aleś Alachnovič is the Vice President at CASE Belarus and PhD candidate at the Warsaw School of Economics, an alumni of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"London School of Economics​

Taiwan agrees to ITAs expanded tariff scheme

By Lauly Li 

28 July 2015

Taipei Times

Taiwan has informed the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO that it is joining the Information Technology Agreements (ITA) expanded tariff-elimination program, the Ministry of Economic Affairs said yesterday.

We have agreed to the 201 additional IT products and officially joined the declaration on the expansion of trade in information technology products, Bureau of Foreign Trade Director-General Yang Jen-ni told a media briefing.

GENEVA MEETING

Yang said the WTOs two-day General Council meeting, which started yesterday in Geneva, is to conclude discussions on the 201 added IT products today and move on to the next stage of the ITA negotiations.

All parties involved in the expanded program should provide no later than Oct. 30 a draft schedule containing the details of their tariff-cutting timetable for each of their products included in the agreement, Yang said.

The agreement is expected to be completed in the WTOs ministerial meeting in Nairobi, Kenya, in December and to take effect on July 1 next year at the earliest, Yang said.

According to the declaration, all ITA members should phase-in tariff eliminations for the 201 items over a three-year period, she said.

Once the duties are eliminated, the net benefits for Taiwan could reach US$820 million per year, she said.

FLAT PANELS

As for Taiwans flat-panel products, which are not included in the ITAs expanded scheme, Yang said that the ministry would draft policies designed to enhance domestic manufacturers global competitiveness, including helping them develop niche products.

According to a study conducted by the government-

supported Industrial Technology Research Institute, Taiwans annual flat-panel production led by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Innolux Corp and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"AU Optronics Corp (AUO, ) could grow 6 percent to NT$1.2 trillion (US$38.02 billion) this year.

Liberty Times Ltd.

Ukraine to cancel additional import tax early in 2016

27 July 2015

UNIANE

Additional import tax rates introduced in February 2015 to improve Ukraine`s balance of payments will be lifted as of January 1, 2016, according to Deputy Finance Minister Olena Makeyeva.

”The additional import tax will be lifted from January 1, 2016 – the decision has already been made,” she said at a Finance Ministry board meeting on Monday.

As UNIAN reported earlier, in late February the Ukrainian government introduced temporary measures in the form of import tax at a rate of 5% and 10% to stabilize the country`s balance of payments.

The tax is not applicable to critical imports, medical supplies, energy resources, particularly natural gas, and other goods essential for the Ukrainian economy and public needs.

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO) member states have urged Ukraine to cancel the tax no later than at the end of 2015.

Ukraine`s State Fiscal Service noted a significant surge in smuggling after the tax had been introduced.

At the same time, a vast majority of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO members acknowledged that the measures introduced by Ukraine were related to a difficult situation with the balance of payments and were in full compliance with the provisions of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO agreements, with Russia being the only HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO member that had not joined the majority. 

SPINTREX HOLDINGS Ltd. (UNIAN) 
Kenya industry safeguards place it on a collision path with WTO

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Allan Odhiambo

27 July 2015

Business Daily

Kenya faces a dilemma over continued protection of its manufacturers amid risk of reprisals from other HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organisation (WTO) members aggrieved by its actions.

The global body has in its latest audit report for July 2015 listed Kenya among countries that are using tariff barriers to shield domestic producers against external competition and warned that such measures could restrict trade and weaken the prospects for full recovery from the global recession.

The survey released on July 23 by WTO Director-General Roberto Azevêdo showed that 104 new trade-restrictive measures (excluding trade remedy measures) were put in place globally in the reporting period October 16, 2014 to May 15, 2015 – an average of around 15 new measures per month.

This monthly rate has remained relatively stable since 2012, though the overall stock of measures nevertheless continues to rise.

Of the 2,416 measures recorded since October 2008, less than 25 per cent have been removed, leaving the stock of restrictive measures still in place at 1,828. This represents an increase of 12 per cent compared to the last report.

“This remains a cause for concern and continued vigilance is required from WTO members,” Mr Azevêdo says.

“The multilateral trading system has proven its usefulness in providing a predictable and transparent framework governing trade between nations and in helping members resist protectionist pressures as a response to the global economic and financial crisis and thereafter,” adds the WTO boss.

“This role in providing a stable, predictable and transparent trading environment should be kept in mind as members prepare for the WTO’s tenth Ministerial Conference in Nairobi in December.”

Protectionism

Kenya has over the past decade found itself flagged in the WTO roll of countries effecting restrictive administrative measures even as the government maintained a series of measures it said would assist protect local manufactures from cheaper imports.

A report by the WTO in 2009 pointed out that between 1996 to 2006, Kenya effected upward tariff adjustments of at least 15 percentage points on 250 products and goods, making it one of the top users of tariffs to protect domestic producers.

The administrative measures escalated following the onset of the global economic crisis with many countries resorting to using formal as well as informal contingency measures to shield their economies from external competition.

“It is no secret that manufactures have had a difficult time in Kenya starting from the time fuel prices hit the roof and the cost of power was unbearable. The state had to come to the aid of manufacturers and protect the little money they were making,” Patel Shah, a plastics dealer in Nairobi said.

Kenya in December 2014, for instance, offered temporary support measures for several goods and items under the duty remission scheme.

Among the beneficiaries were importers of duplex board products for exports of unit and folding boxes, corrugated boxes, flower sleeves, labels, paper and paperboard products, and BOPP film.

Others were importers of textile and textile articles, and staple fibres, glucose and glucose syrup, industrial sugar, wheat grain and completely knocked-down kits for motorcycles.

In his 2015/16 Budget, Treasury secretary Henry Rotich issued an extension on these administrative safety nets, further complicating Kenya’s case before the aggrieved WTO partners.

The minister in his budget handed a lifeline to manufacturers of fish nets, gas cylinders, plastic packaging tubes and food processors – long affected by competition from cheaper imports – when he said the government would implement a deliberate strategy to support local companies by increasing the import cost of non-essential goods.

Manufacturers of paper and paper board products that have been subjected to a stay of application of the Common External Tariff (CET) at the rate of 25 per cent will also have some relief. The tax has over the years made paper and paper board products more expensive for the packing industries and other users.

In order to lower costs, Mr Rotich proposed the withdrawal of the stay of application of the CET and subjected the products to 10 per cent duty.

Skin and raw hide processors also got a reprieve after Treasury moved to harmonise export duty on their products to avoid smuggling.

“In order to deter smuggling, the ministers for Finance have agreed to harmonise the export duty rate on hides and skins at 80 per cent of Free On Board value or $0.52 (Sh50.49) per kilogramme, whichever is higher. The harmonised rate will be implemented during the 2015/16 financial year,” Mr Rotich said.

Motorcycle assemblers also won further extension of a special tax waiver on imported parts, raising hope for growth of the sector. Motorcycles are a popular mode of transport in urban areas in the region for their ability to beat lengthy delays caused by incessant traffic jams.

They are also used heavily in rural areas where they offer more flexibility and wider reach as most areas suffer from poor road networks.

Harrison Mwakyembe, chairman of the EAC Council of ministers said the tax waiver would now be further extended to June 2016.

“In exercise of the powers conferred upon the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Council of Ministers by Section 140 of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"East African Community Customs Management Act 2004, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Council of Ministers has stayed the application of the conditions contained in Legal Notice No. EAC/39/2013 of June 30, 2013 on duty remission for motor cycle assembly for one year,” he said in a gazette notice.

An earlier tax schedule by the regional tax schedule by the EAC Council of ministers, imported motorcycle parts – commonly known as completely knock down kits – would have attracted a 15 per cent tax starting July 1, 2014.

The implementation of the tax introduced in 2013 was, however, shelved for a year until June 31, 2015 following intense lobbying by manufacturers of motorcycles that have become a popular mode of transport especially in rural areas.

If implemented the unpopular tax move would mean that motorbike manufacturing firms will pay the full 25 per cent tax to import spare parts, which is the equivalent of duty paid for finished motorcycles under the EAC Customs Union protocol.

Only manufacturers who sourced for motorbike parts from any of the EAC member states were allowed to enjoy the 15 per cent tax waiver, according to earlier plans by the ministers.

The regulation applies in all the EAC partner states with each having varied duty remission rates. The duty remissions scheme, introduced eight years ago, allowed export-oriented manufacturers of commodities in the EAC bloc to pay reduced rates for import inputs instead of paying in full the 25 per cent common external tariff rates in line with the customs union protocol.

This is in addition to the requirement that manufacturers of the goods produced using inputs shipped in under the duty remissions scheme are supposed to sell up to 80 per cent of their products outside the EAC.

It means only 20 per cent of the goods manufactured using inputs that have benefited from the duty exemptions can be sold in the entire region.

Although these measures may be deemed beneficial to local manufacturers, a sustained use of tariff barriers may attract reprisal from other countries which felt disadvantaged by them.

“Although the reports have confirmed that the overall trade policy response to the 2008 crisis has been significantly more muted than expected based on previous crises, they have also drawn attention to a number of worrying trends,” Yonov Frederick Agah, deputy director general of the WTO says in a brief.

“For example, while WTO members are showing restraint with respect to the introduction of trade-restrictive measures, the accumulative stock of these continues to rise.”

In the aftermath of the 2008 economic and financial crisis, the WTO was requested to enhance its trade monitoring and surveillance function, so as to provide members with all the information needed to collectively prevent the risk of backsliding into protectionism.

“Today, there is widespread agreement that protectionism is counterproductive. Faced with an economic downturn, the probability of governments resorting to protectionist policies that favour domestic producers always tends to increase” Agah says.

Pressure

“Politicians, under domestic pressure from trade unions and industry lobbies, may opt for policies that may appear to provide short-term benefits for their constituencies, but in reality end up hurting domestic consumers and damaging competitiveness,” he further says.

Despite the action by Kenya and other countries, the WTO reckons that though such measures should ordinarily aim at protecting domestic producers from dumping, there was no evidence that these countries were victims of such trading practices.

“Of the trade-restrictive measures introduced since 2008, fewer than 25 per cent have been eliminated. Similarly, a large number of behind-the-border measures are creating barriers to trade and are hurting businesses, in particular small and medium-sized enterprises,” Agah says.

In 2013, Kenya was caught in a brief tariff tussle with Zambia that for a moment threatened to escalate into a full trade row.

Zambia temporarily imposed duty on Kenyan exports in retaliation to Nairobi’s refusal to allow hundreds of tonnes of its sugar to enter the country.

About 10 trucks laden with Zambian sugar destined for the Kenyan market were detained at the Namanga border for more than three weeks, prompting Zambia to retaliate.

The Zambian government invoked provisions of the protocol of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (Comesa), which allows retaliation against unfair trade practices. The two countries are members of Comesa.

Nation Media Group Limited

Down to the wire on the Trans-Pacific Partnership

Peter Drysdale 

28 July 2015

Business Spectator - Online

The pressure is on as countries negotiating the most important free-trade agreement in many years race to take advantage of a closing US legislative window.

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"East Asia Forum

Officials and ministers from around the Pacific are descending on Hawaii this week for what should be the final round in the negotiation of the terms of the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP). The big two in the arrangement -- Japan and the US -- appear to have settled, and this bilateral between the two largest parties to the negotiation will be by far its most significant outcome. But there is still uncertainty about whether the agreement will be put to bed within the week and what its shape will finally be.

The rush to the wire is important. It is ordered around the legislative imperatives that President Obama faces in trying to stitch this part of his pivot toward Asia together before his term expires.

If the TPP deal is not concluded within the first two weeks of August, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"as Rick Katz of the Oriental Economist points out, it will be legally impossible to bring the TPP to a Congressional ratification vote during the 2015 calendar year and that means it would likely spin out into the next US presidency. If the agreement cannot be done by the end of the month, there will be a sense of failure and loss of momentum. The Japanese know, for example, that the US needs to ratify the TPP during 2015; otherwise, it will be hard to get it ratified until the next presidential term and that could spill over into 2018, not 2017, and possibly not be done at all. If the agreement is to be signed at all it has to be signed very soon otherwise governmental energy in the region will ebb away. This way of thinking about where things are at has clearly helped persuade Japanese negotiators to get over the line.

The TPP is the most important free-trade agreement to be negotiated in many years. If completed, it will cover a larger part of world trade than any such preferential deal before it, with its members accounting for nearly 40 per cent of the world economy. Its aim is to set a new standard for what trade agreements should cover. So far there have been five years of negotiations among the twelve partners, over the 29 chapters of dense rules and tariff details that will comprise the arrangement.

One problem that remains is the TPP’s complexity. Even in respect of commodity trade, it will incorporate a morass of regulations, such as content rules specifying how much of a product must be made from local inputs and inputs from partner countries to qualify for entry to partner markets. Moreover, these ‘rules of origin’ have been negotiated bilaterally so when the deal is done, it is likely to have some of the characteristics of a series of bilateral arrangements rather than a genuinely common set of regional rules. This is far from ideal or platinum-standard in terms of economic efficiency since it will protect suppliers within the arrangement against lower cost suppliers outside it, such as China, Indonesia or Europe for instance, diverting trade away from them rather than creating it within the TPP.

Yet, after failure to seal a big global HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO deal, the TPP offers the chance of some success. The Japan–US component of the TPP should deliver substantial agricultural trade liberalisation, although not, it seems, the zero option that would have completely opened up Japanese agricultural markets to international competition and symbolised real progress with the Abe government’s structural reform agenda. The prospect of dairy market liberalisation in North America would also bring substantial trade and income gains although political resistance to liberalisation of dairy in the middle of a Canadian election cycle is threatening to scuttle that, with uncertain consequences.

Canada has still apparently to put an offer on the table for dairy and poultry, prompting talk in Washington late last week that the TPP might go ahead this time without the participation of Canada, New Zealand and Malaysia (for unrelated human rights violation reasons).

Leaving Canada out, or getting it to agree that it will have to join late, could have repercussions for New Zealand’s participation. The US dairy industry has argued that the US should not open its dairy market to New Zealand and others unless it was counterbalanced by Japanese and Canadian dairy market opening. Remarkable though that turn of events might seem, the final straight up and down vote on TPP in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"US Congress might depend on negotiators’ taking the threat seriously. Canada’s trade minister, Ed Fast, dismissed the threat as ‘another tactic to negotiate through the media’ and declared that Canada would ‘negotiate at the negotiating table’, and would not ‘be bullied into negotiating this through the media’. So there’s still a way to go.

Excluding dairy would be a sorry outcome for the value of the agreement. Dairy accounts for one-third of New Zealand’s total exports; New Zealand alone produces one-third of total global exports of dairy products. If Canada does not deliver, New Zealand -- one of the original members of TPP when it was called the Pacific-4 -- might not be able to sign on. As Katz reports an Asian analyst remarking: ‘What kind of agreement is it that keeps out the most efficient dairy producer in the world? So much for a “21st-century, high-quality” agreement that is the “gold standard” for future agreements’!

In this week’s lead, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"Shiro Armstrong scrutinises other aspects of the TPP likely to occupy a lot on negotiating time later this week. He argues that these issues, though vexed and still difficult to resolve, are trivial compared to the ability to get a straight up-or-down vote in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"US Congress -- now secured through TPA or fast-track authority, without which the deal would be a non-starter. The remaining issues, he says, can be easily horse-traded at the political level and compromises can be made in order to complete the deal.

Armstrong identifies the principal flaws in the TPP that may well overwhelm the positives in any agreement. “The first is that the core of the new rules involves aspects that further private (read: large multinationals) interests at the expense of general welfare in member countries. The most egregious of these is stronger intellectual property (IP) rights protections, which are HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"anti-development and simply HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"transfer wealth to US pharmaceutical companies and Hollywood.” Twelve-year or even seven-year data protection for HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"biologics is, as one Asian negotiator has put it, “outrageous”. Other issues are the exclusion of China, India and Indonesia from membership any time soon, with hurdles to entry that are unreasonably high; the investor-state dispute settlement provision; and the trade diversionary structure of trade rules.

“The temptation”, writes Armstrong, “will be strong to rush across the finish line for what will be a major political trophy -- but the risk is that the TPP will be an agreement that does more harm than good for economic and political relations in the Asia Pacific”.

An agreement on the TPP this week is not the final destination. If it’s to be more than a surrogate bilateral agreement between Japan and the US it will need to expand its membership, to include China and the rest of Asia. And if it’s not mainly about commodity trade liberalisation but about setting new rules for global commerce, the rules that are proposed had better be thoroughly scrutinised by all partners to the agreement before they finally sign on, not just by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"US Congress.

Peter Drysdale is Editor of the East Asia Forum. This article was first published by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"East Asia Forum and is reproduced with permission.

News Ltd.

Trade Accord Nears Tricky Endgame

By William Mauldin 

28 July 2015

The Wall Street Journal Asia

Hauling a skeptical Congress on board was hard enough. Now U.S. negotiators must resolve disputes ranging from drugs to dairy as they push this week to conclude a major trade deal with 11 Pacific partners.

As trade ministers gather Tuesday on the Hawaiian island of Maui, enough uncertainties remain that both participants and observers worry the talks may falter in what is supposed to be the final round.

"They will find out when they get to Hawaii how hard it is," said Clayton Yeutter, a Republican former U.S. trade representative in the George H.W. Bush administration. "Closure is a lot more difficult exercise than they think."

The goal is a 12-nation bloc accounting for two-fifths of global economic output that would boost growth and put pressure on China, which isn't part of the talks, to adopt American-style rules for commerce, U.S. officials say.

But the U.S., Japan, Canada, Malaysia, Australia and the seven other countries involved each bring sensitivities and demands ranging from disagreements over dairy and sugar to unease with U.S. rules on pharmaceuticals and the treatment of state-owned businesses.

"There's a lot of hard work to be done before this agreement is put to bed," Canadian Trade Minister Ed Fast said last week in Toronto.

Significant setbacks in wrapping up the Trans-Pacific Partnership would carry consequences, particularly for President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Barack Obama's trade representative, Mike Froman.

Delay could push a U.S. congressional vote on the deal into the middle of the U.S. presidential election season, lengthening the odds of its passage in Mr. Obama's second term.

Making deep concessions to achieve a quick deal would also be dangerous. If Mr. Froman gives too much ground in politically delicate areas-including automobiles, dairy, drugs, sugar and textiles,-he risks a backlash from powerful U.S. farm and industry groups that could erode the razor-thin majority in Congress that voiced support for Mr. Obama's trade policy in June. If the talks go well, the congressional vote on the deal could come as soon as late this year or in early 2016.

"If you don't get it right, there can be too many minuses and not enough pluses," said Rep. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Sander Levin (D., Mich.), the top Democrat on the House committee that oversees trade and a top critic of the Obama administration on trade. "There's a long way to go."

Spokesmen for Mr. Froman didn't respond to repeated requests for comment on the challenges negotiators face this week.

Some countries are dealing with opposition from politically influential farmers. Led by Canada, several TPP countries have said they are reluctant to lower tariffs and other measures protecting their domestic dairy industries, but other members of the group -- including New Zealand, where dairy is the biggest export -- are insisting on greater access to milk consumers around the Pacific bloc. Similarly, the U.S. has long worked to protect its domestic sugar-cane and beet farmers from low-cost producers abroad, but Australia is looking to boost sugar exports to North America through the deal.

With Vietnam, Mr. Froman has to strike a balance between allowing the country preferential access to U.S. apparel and footwear markets and maintaining rules favored by the U.S. textile industry that limit the use of Chinese fabric, common in Vietnam. Disappointing the well-connected U.S. textile industry and sugar farmers could alienate Republican lawmakers from southeastern states whose votes may be needed to pass the TPP.

Another thorny issue is pharmaceuticals. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"U.S. Chamber of Commerce and key lawmakers are warning Mr. Froman on achieving something close to 12 years of exclusive marketing ability for name-brand biologic drugs despite concerns in Australia and New Zealand, as well as from generic-drug makers and Democrats worried about the affordability of medicine.

Meanwhile, unions and other left-leaning groups are expected to criticize the deal's labor and environmental standards.

Mr. Froman worked to set the foundation for a successful gathering, traveling in the past month to meet trade ministers and lawmakers from Vietnam, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand and Singapore, as well as hosting top officials from Peru and Chile in Washington. His agricultural deputy has met with Canadian officials in an attempt to resolve a dispute over the country's dairy and poultry trade that has some U.S. lawmakers calling for Ottawa's exclusion from the TPP.

The history of international trade negotiations is rife with delays and setbacks. The TPP ministers failed to notch significant progress at meetings in late 2013, and the talks since have been plagued with disagreements between the U.S. and Japan -- now patched up -- and then by concerns about support in Congress. Difficulty in winning congressional approval for enhanced negotiating powers, known as fast track, nearly derailed the Pacific deal last month.

U.S. officials acknowledge the Hawaii negotiations could fail to produce a deal, thus triggering further talks.

Still, all the countries involved have economic and strategic reasons to play ball, notwithstanding their domestic concerns, according to backers of the deal. "Part of the reason all the ministers are coming to Hawaii is that they know the U.S. political schedule, and there are concerns that if this isn't wrapped up soon the ratification process could get bogged down," said HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Jeffrey Schott, trade expert at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Peterson Institute for International Economics, which backs trade liberalization.

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Dow Jones & Company, Inc. 

END

 

 

cid:image001.png@01CC55E4.A4F90770

 

Josep Bosch, Information Officer

Information and External Relations Division

+41227395681

 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.
