Kazakhstan to join WTO in official ceremony on Monday
Africa to negotiate for better terms at WTO meet
Food subsidies still haunt India at WTO
WTO expresses concern over growing list of trade-restrictive measures
Australia: Food labelling laws face questions
Food packaging norms to stay, India tells US
Inner Mongolia reports rare earth export growth in H1
Negotiators inch towards sealing historic trade pact; Trans-Pacific Partnership
Critics fear Pacific trade deal favours big business over states
Column: China, Will the bubble burst


Kazakhstan to join WTO in official ceremony on Monday

27 July 2015

ITAR-TASS World Service

ASTANA, July 27 /TASS/. An official ceremony of Kazakhstan’s entrance into the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO) will take place in Geneva on Monday in the presence of Kazakhstani President Nursultan Nazarbayev.

Kazakhstan’s negotiations with HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO that had been under way for almost 20 years ended on June 10. In his address to the people, Nazarbayev called it a historic event. "This is a historic event for us. All the leading global economies have recognized Kazakhstan to be a country with favourable investment climate that pursues its trade policy in compliance with norms of international law," the Kazakhstani president said.

He recalled that Kazakhstan and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO had reached agreements on positions, which are the most sensitive for the republic’s economy. "Support for agriculture was one of the thorniest issues for discussion because they demanded that we reduce agricultural subsidies but we defended our stance," Nazarbayev said noting that markets of financial services and communications were also part of the agenda.

"We managed to combine the requirements of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Eurasian Economic Union (EEU) proceeding from our national interests," he stressed.

Kazakhstan’s parliament will have to ratify documents, which Kazakhstan is going to sign in Geneva on Monday, in the next six months. A decision on Kazakhstan’s accession to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO will take effect in the course of 30 days after Kazakhstan notifies the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO of the ratification.

Twenty-one countries, including Azerbaijan, Belarus and Uzbekistan, are holding the accession talks with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO. Russia joined the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO in 2012.

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO), comprising 161 states and territories, is an international body, which supervises global trade. Its main purpose is to further liberalize trade and guarantee fair conditions of competition. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO is the successor to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade that had been valid since 1947.

ITAR-TASS Information Telegraph Agency of Russia

Africa to negotiate for better terms at WTO meet

JEFF OTIENO, The EastAfrican 

26 July 2015

The East African

Africa must demand new global copyright rules in the forthcoming HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organisation meeting to be held in Nairobi at the end of the year.

The rules would empower the continent to gain from global trade, since the current rules, known as Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (Trips) under the Doha Declaration, favour developed nations.

“What African countries need to do today is to make progress and embrace new challenges. The negotiations in December should address needs and solutions for the continent,” said Mukhisa Kituyi, secretary-general of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (Unctad).

Dr Kituyi said the Doha agenda did not adequately reflect the problems of Africa today.

The November 2001 Declaration of the Fourth Ministerial Conference in Doha, Qatar, provides the mandate for negotiations on agriculture, services, intellectual property and issues concerning the implementation of trade agreements.

Dr Kituyi said regional trade blocs in Africa need to strengthen their bargaining power and integrate their economies to maximise trade opportunities.

“In an increasingly large trading world, Africa’s fractured economy is just too small to make sense to investors when compared with developed nations’ large scale consumer and talent pool, which can only be acquired by enhanced regional integration,” he said.

Pan-African network

The Unctad secretary-general challenged leaders across the continent to develop a pan-African infrastructure network to improve trade.

“Improve infrastructure to increase trade, install capacity for service trade and go for all available opportunities,” Dr Kituyi added.

Foreign Affairs and International Trade Cabinet Secretary Amina Mohamed said Africa joins the negotiations as a team to improve its stake in global trade.

African leaders, Ms Mohammed said, will capitalise on the Lagos Plan of Action, where regional entities were formed as the first building blocks towards a continental Free Trade Area.

“We will go into the Nairobi round-table as a bloc to ensure our priorities, our expectations and our concerns are part of the deal,” said Ms Mohamed.

Nearly 7,000 delegates are expected to attend the Ministerial Conference, now in its 10th edition, and the first ever to be held in Africa. The decision to hold this year’s meeting in Nairobi was made by the World Trade Organisation General Council following a campaign led by Ms Mohamed.

Nation Media Group Limited

Food subsidies still haunt India at WTO

Uttam Gupta 

27 July 2015

Business Line (The Hindu)

But they needn’t, if India sticks to the view that the benchmark price for measuring extent of support is too low and outdated India is concerned over the delay in reaching a ‘permanent solution’ to the problem of dealing with food procurement subsidies. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO members are thrashing out a work programme for the 10th Ministerial to be held in Nairobi this December.

Under Agreement on Agriculture (AoA), developing countries can give agricultural subsidies or aggregate measurement support (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"AMS) up to 10 per cent of the value of agricultural production.

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"AMS has two components viz., (i) ‘product-specific’ or the excess of price paid to farmers over international price or ERP (external reference price) multiplied by quantum of produce; (ii) ‘non-product specific’ or money spent on schemes to supply inputs such as fertilisers, seed, irrigation, electricity at subsidised rates.

Peace clause

For computing HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"AMS, support on inputs to resource poor farmers was ‘excluded’ under the AoA. The rationale for this was that such support does not have any ‘trade-distorting’ effect. The same logic applied to product specific subsidies. However, it was not explicitly incorporated in the agreement as the minimum support price (MSP) given to farmers then was substantially lower than ERP, resulting in negative ‘product-specific’ HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"AMS. Indeed, this position continued till 2004-06.

Thereafter, due to significant increase in MSP, things have changed. For instance, at present for wheat, MSP at $226 per tonne (corresponding to Rs. 1,450 a quintal) is higher than 1986-88 based ERP of $130 per tonne. In view of product-specific subsidy going into positive territory and subsidies on agricultural inputs also increasing substantially, there is a real risk of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"AMS exceeding the 10 per cent ceiling.

The problem can be solved by re-visiting the AoA to (i) update ERP to current level and (ii) exclude purchases from resource poor farmers for computing product-specific subsidies. This indeed is a permanent solution that India has been looking for.

At Bali ministerial in December 2013, developed countries had agreed to a ‘peace clause’ (exemption from penal action for violations).

Under the peace clause, if a developing country gives agricultural subsidies in excess of 10 per cent of its agri-GDP, no member will challenge this until 2017 when HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO would look for a permanent solution to address their food security concerns. This meant that while peace clause would go in 2017, there was no guarantee that permanent solution would be in place by then.

The peace clause too came with a plethora of conditions, such as submission of data on food procurement, stockholding, distribution and subsidies (including their computation), etc. These also included establishing that subsidies are not ‘trade distorting’ which is nearly impossible to comply. In other words, even in the interim, any member can challenge farm support measures.

India’s intervention

Team Modi recognised that Bali agreement was flawed. So, in the meeting of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO-General Council (GC) in Geneva (July 31, 2014), it insisted on a time bound action plan to address the food procurement subsidy issue.

That was considered too ambitious by US. However, the WTO-GC in its meeting held on December 10-11, 2014, approved extension of peace clause till such time a permanent solution is put in place.

On the face of it, it might appear that India is in a safe zone. But, it is not so. This is because the conditions appended to peace clause have not been dropped and the search for a permanent solution has been deferred for an ‘indefinite’ period. The fear is of the US asking for all sorts of data to deny us benefit of peace clause even in the interim.

At the Nairobi ministerial, India should insist on getting a permanent solution ‘now’ by (i) updating ERP to the current level and (ii) excluding purchases from resource poor farmers for computing product-specific subsidies under AoA. The developed countries should recognise that a three-decade old ERP cannot be compared with today’s MSP in India to compute the current level of subsidy.

Likewise, if resource poor farmers can get exemption on input subsidies, how can they be denied exemption on product subsidies?

If, they still drag their feet, India should insist on ‘unconditional’ availability of interim ‘peace clause’ till such time a permanent solution is found. This must not be linked to any other issue on the table such as industrial tariff or services.

The writer is a policy analyst

Kasturi & Sons Ltd

WTO expresses concern over growing list of trade-restrictive measures

TIOL News Service 

26 July 2015

GENEVA, JULY 26, 2015: THE increasing stockpile of trade-restrictive measures introduced by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO members remains a cause for serious concern, and continued vigilance is required, according to the latest report on trade-related developments. On the positive side, an increasing number of trade-liberalizing measures, such as tariff-cutting measures, were adopted by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO members during the period under review, 16 October 2014 to 15 May 2015.

Key findings

104 new trade-restrictive measures (excluding trade remedy measures) were put in place in the reporting period 16 October 2014 to 15 May 2015 - an average of around 15 new measures per month.

This monthly rate has remained relatively stable since 2012, though the overall stock of measures nevertheless continues to rise.

Of the 2,416 measures recorded since October 2008, less than 25% have been removed, leaving the stock of restrictive measures still in place at 1,828. This represents an increase of 12% compared to the last report.

This remains a cause for concern and continued vigilance is required from HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO members.

More encouragingly, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO Members have adopted more trade-liberalizing measures (excluding trade remedy actions) than trade-restrictive measures since the end of 2013. Continuing this trend, during the period under review, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO Members implemented 114 new trade-liberalizing measures - an average of more than 16 measures per month.

The broader international economic context supports the need for vigilance and action with regard to trade-restrictive measures. According to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO's most recent forecast (14 April 2015), growth in the volume of world merchandise trade should increase from 2.8% in 2014 to 3.3% in 2015 and further to 4.0% in 2016, but remaining below historical averages.

The multilateral trading system has proven its usefulness in providing a predictable and transparent framework governing trade between nations and in helping Members resist protectionist pressures as a response to the global economic and financial crisis and thereafter.

This role in providing a stable, predictable and transparent trading environment should be kept in mind as Members prepare for the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO's tenth Ministerial Conference in Nairobi in December.

Taxindiaonline.com Pvt. Ltd. 

Australia: Food labelling laws face questions

Greg Earl 

27 July 2015

The Australian Financial Review

What's the difference between plain packaged cigarettes and a can of tomatoes with a green and gold bar chart on the back? It's a question that lawyers and food companies are asking themselves now that Tony Abbott has pulled on the national colours and imposed a new system of compulsory labelling on the $100 billion food and grocery processing sector just when legal challenges to labelling laws are a hot global issue.

The government says it is confident that the country-of-origin laws announced last week meet Australia's requirements under HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organisation (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO) rules and the Investor State Dispute Settlement (ISDS) clauses in trade agreements, which allow foreign companies to seek redress for discrimination.

But whether the laws are really COOL - as they are known by their acronym - won't be known until the legislation is in Parliament and the industry has worked out the practical details of the government promise to have them in force by late next year.

Gadens trade law partner Andrew Hudson says: "It always comes back to the words and process used and the attitude of the other trading parties and their exporters."

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Australian Food and Grocery Council took a distinctly neutral tone in its reaction to the announcement last Tuesday despite the general concern within its membership about what the government estimates will be an extra cost of $37 million a year.

This reflects the practical business end of dealing with any new government regulation: you can fight it or you can seek to influence the way it is implemented.

But the Australian move to require more information about how much of a product is sourced or manufactured in Australia comes as the government is also fighting a long running case in a private arbitration hearing in Singapore brought by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Philip Morris against the Labor government's cigarette plain packaging.

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Philip Morris bought the action under the ISDS provisions in Australia's Hong Kong investment treaty but it could be concluded just as Australia signs up to new ISDS rules under the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade zone at a meeting of ministers this week. The COOL laws are also being introduced just after the US itself has lost a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO action brought by Canada and Mexico against its enhanced local content labelling laws for meat products.

Industry experts have been privately debating whether a country or foreign company could try a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO or ISDS challenge to Australia's COOL laws, although the consensus is this is unlikely because they do not have the same impact as cigarette plain packaging. A company wouldn't want the brand damage of such a fight even if it feels the laws make it harder for their imports.

As one observer puts it: "As long as the government seeks to minimise impact on industry and imports, and respond to industry concerns in the design of the program, this risk should be minimised."

Nevertheless this has only underlined the complexity of the debate about foreign investor protection under ISDS clauses.

Mr Hudson says that even though the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"US government is pushing for ISDS provisions in the TPP - and Australia is likely to go along with this - at home the loss of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO case against the US meat labelling laws is fuelling a domestic backlash against ISDS.

Fairfax Media Management Pty Limited

Food packaging norms to stay, India tells US

Asit Ranjan Mishra 

27 July 2015

Mint

New Delhi, July 27 -- India has ruled out any change in its labelling or packaging requirements for imports of American food items, which mandate printing of the maximum retail price (MRP) and category of food item on the packet rather than putting on a sticker at the port as requested by the US.

In a meeting between the deputy US trade representative and India's commerce secretary last week, India told the US that its labelling requirements are Codex-compliant and applicable to all countries without discrimination.

The Codex Alimentarius Commission is a joint intergovernmental body of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Health Organization that creates harmonized international food standards to protect the health of consumers and ensure fair trade practices.

"Our labelling standards are Codex-compliant. We have asked them to let us know where we are not Codex-compliant. Today, when we export to the US, it requires that we print the MRP in dollars. Will they accept if we print the MRP in euro?" said a government official, speaking on condition of anonymity.

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Food Safety and Standards Authority of India also insists that the type of imported packaged food-vegetarian or non-vegetarian-needs to be printed on the packets rather than stickered on it to avoid tampering.

The official said the US also claims that India has a standard packaging size which is different from the one accepted all over the world.

"Our response was we have not done it for one country. This is the packaging standard for imports that are coming from the entire world. So, we are not discriminating against any one country. If one intends to export to a country, one has to abide by the requirements of the importing country," he added.

The matter was discussed between deputy US trade representative Robert Holleyman and India's commerce secretary Rita Teaotia when they met on Tuesday to discuss the agenda for the next round of ministerial-level meetings of the trade policy forum (TPF) in the US. India proposed to hold the ninth TPF meeting sometime by the end of October.

In the joint statement after the eighth TPF in New Delhi last year, both sides had signalled some progress on the packaging and labelling issue. "They (both countries) also noted the potential reconciliation of the definition of wholesale pack between departments, forthcoming rules to allow stickering of maximum retail price at the port, and timely implementation efforts concerning these issues," a joint statement said.

Arpita Mukherjee, professor at the Indian Council for Research in International Economic Relations, said the issue has become a teething problem for HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union and US exporters of food items after some seizures were made in Indian ports in 2013 for alleged violation of packaging and labelling requirements.

"While for bigger firms it is not a problem, for smaller firms, packaging and labelling specific to India's requirements poses a challenge especially because India is not a big market for them. Many foreign companies are also willing to package in India, but the packaging costs are very high in India," Mukherjee added.

The US is India's second largest trading partner, after China. India exported goods worth $42.4 billion and imported goods worth $21.8 billion in 2014-15. While exports grew 8.45%, imports contracted 3% during the same year.

While the relationship between both the countries have improved after the Bharatiya Janata Party-led National Democratic Alliance government took charge at the centre in May last year, significant differences in trade and economic policy issues remain. The US recently won a case against India at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO) for the latter not allowing its poultry imports. India has 15 months to implement the verdict.

The US is also fighting another case against India at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO on domestic content requirements under the Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission for solar cells and solar modules, the verdict for which is expected in a few days.

Both sides, however, worked together to correct the anomaly in the Bali WTO agreement last year to provide for an indefinite interim solution on public stockholding as demanded by India. The US conducted an out-of-cycle review of India's intellectual property rights (IPR) policy and implementation last year but desisted from further downgrading India's status to "priority foreign country"-a category of serious offenders that could invite US sanctions-from India's current status of "priority watch" list.

The US has expressed satisfaction with India's transparent process of forming a new IPR policy, for which an inter-ministerial consultation is on.

Trade minister Nirmala Sitharaman, however, in an interview in June, denied recent charges that India is under pressure to modify its IPR laws to suit the US.

Published by HT Syndication with permission from MINT.

For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com 

HT Media Limited

Inner Mongolia reports rare earth export growth in H1

caokai renhuibin 

27 July 2015

Xinhua's China Economic Information Service

HOHHOT, July 27 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Xinhua) -- North China's Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region, China's largest supplier of rare earth minerals, reported a substantial growth in exports as prices fell in the first half of 2015. Inner Mongolia exported 2,664 tonnes of rare earth products in the first six months, up 36.5 percent year on year, according to local customs. About half went to the United States and about one third to Japan, up 40 percent and 130 percent respectively. During the six months, the average export price of rare earth products was 32,000 yuan (5,229 U.S. dollars) per tonne, down 34.7 percent from the same period of last year. China began to set quotas and high duties on rare earth exports in 2010, causing friction with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union, Japan and the United States. Quotas were removed on Jan. 1 this year, and export duties were canceled in May after a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO ruling in August 2014 declared the measures inconsistent with HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO rules and China's accession protocol.

Rare earth metals are vital for manufacturing high-tech products ranging from smartphones and wind turbines to electric car batteries and missiles. 

China Economic Information Service of Xinhua News Agency

Negotiators inch towards sealing historic trade pact; Trans-Pacific Partnership

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Shawn Donnan

By Shawn Donnan, World Trade Editor 

27 July 2015

Financial Times

If the 12 trade ministers gathering at a beachside hotel on the Hawaiian island of Maui to put the finishing touches to the Trans-Pacific Partnership live up to the confidence of their negotiators, the agreement could be sealed this week.

For five long years negotiators from the US and other Pacific Rim economies have been labouring on the fine details of a trade agreement of more than 700 pages and 29 chapters.

The TPP, which with the US and Japan includes two of the world's three biggest economies, covers 40 per cent of the global economy. In scale alone it would be the biggest trade agreement the world has seen in two decades and the biggest regional agreement ever struck. As the economic backbone of US president HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Barack Obama's pivot to Asia and his strategic response to the rise of China, it also has geopolitical ambition.

Optimism that a deal can be finalised has grown in recent weeks after the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"US Congress handed the so-called fast-track authority the president needs to guarantee he can smooth the way through the legislature for the TPP.

The consensus view is that other countries have been withholding their final and best offers on any number of issues until that legislation, which restricts Congress to simple up or down votes on trade agreements, was passed. Without it they faced the risk of any deal struck by the Obama administration being ripped up by the legislature.

But can the US and its partners really seal the deal? Negotiators say they are within a whisker of a final agreement and are quietly confident of an announcement when ministerial meetings conclude on Friday. The US and Japan have all but completed their own bilateral deal over market access for everything from car parts to rice. The Obama administration is confident enough that it has told Congress it expects this TPP meeting to be the last.

Yet there remain enough sticky issues that ministers may still go home disappointed and have to reconvene in the heat of August for another attempt.

"We are at the point where we can nearly touch the goal line, but the last stretch of any negotiation is always the most difficult," HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Shinzo Abe, the Japanese prime minister, said on Friday.

Inside the negotiating room the biggest hurdles are to do with intellectual property and the patent protections afforded to new pharmaceuticals. Officials have also been working to adjust a controversial provision that allows investors to sue member countries for compensation and, critics say, circumvent local courts and potentially hinder governments' ability to regulate.

The most immediate threats to an agreement, however, may be political.

Canada is under intense pressure to open up its protected dairy industry to outside competition from countries such as New Zealand, home to Fonterra, the world's largest dairy company. But the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Canadian government, which is facing elections in October, has yet to even offer a proposal. That has prompted some in the US in particular to argue that Canada may have to drop out of the TPP. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Canadian government responded that it would not bow to any public bullying or what it has dubbed "negotiating via the media".

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Najib Razak, Malaysia's prime minister, is also facing a political scandal at home, and negotiators from other countries worry that his government may be too weak to make concessions on sensitive issues over state-owned enterprises and the country's preferential labour laws for ethnic Malays.

The Financial Times Limited (AAIW/EIW)

Critics fear Pacific trade deal favours big business over states

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Glenda Kwek

27 July 2015

Agence France Presse

With the end game in sight to what could be the world's most ambitious trade deal, critics fear a controversial mechanism to protect investors will strengthen the hand of big business while eroding national sovereignty.

The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) -- a wide-ranging accord that would encompass 40 percent of the world's trade -- could be sealed in Hawaii this week after more than five years of talks.

The United States, the chief architect of the ambitious pact which takes in 11 other Pacific Rim countries, says it would loosen trade restrictions, drive jobs growth and encourage investment by strengthening legal protection for companies.

But critics say it favours multinational corporations over state interests and individual consumers, pointing in particular to a proposed investor-state dispute settlement (ISDS) mechanism that would allow foreign companies to sue governments, likely through international tribunals.

They warn ISDS cases might expose states to potentially huge liability claims -- a bigger risk for developing countries that do not have deep pockets -- and may also threaten their ability to introduce health and environmental laws.

That is a particular issue because there are several developing countries among the prospective members, which are Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore, the US and Vietnam.

"There are risks for all governments involved in the TPP in relation to the investor-state dispute settlement," Matthew Rimmer, an intellectual property expert at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Queensland University of Technology, told AFP.

"Under the regime, investors -- particularly multinational companies -- can bring actions against governments, but governments cannot bring actions against corporations.

"So it's a very one-sided regime and it can provide special rights to foreign investors that are not present for domestic investors."

The issue has become a particularly hot topic in Australia, which was sued by tobacco giant HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Philip Morris after it became the first country to introduce plain packaging laws for cigarettes in 2012.

Canberra refused to reveal its legal bill for defending the claim from HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Philip Morris, which argued the legislation breached a bilateral investment treaty.

The case, and broader concerns about ISDS processes, saw Australia's top judge Chief Justice Robert French warn last year that claims tribunals could undermine domestic legal jurisdictions.

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Philip Morris' suing of Uruguay after the country ordered that the health warnings be larger on cigarette packets helped prompt billionaires HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Bill Gates and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Michael Bloomberg to launch a fund to support developing states in their legal battles with tobacco giants.

On a global scale, the number of cases brought by companies against governments has been on the rise in recent years, according to figures from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"UNCTAD).

Out of 608 known cases brought between 1987 and 2014, more than a quarter of them were over the past three years, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"UNCTAD said, adding that confidentiality agreements meant there were likely more.

Of particular concern to ISDS opponents, less developed economies have aced a larger proportion of such suits, although the relative share of cases against developed countries is on the rise.

Meanwhile, most litigation was started by investors from developed countries -- particularly from the US, Canada and several HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union nations -- accounting for more than 80 percent of all claims.

Tim Harcourt, former chief economist at Australia's trade promotion body Austrade, said the ISDS was a "blunt instrument" to protect companies' interests.

"Giving international companies the right to sue countries left, right and centre is probably not the way to build those (free trade) institutions," he told AFP.

"The way to protect investors is by building local institutions so they're transparent, and ultimately countries that don't have transparent institutions like Venezuela, people won't invest there."

Concerns have also been raised in the United States, including by influential Democratic Senator Elizabeth Warren.

"ISDS would allow foreign companies to challenge US laws -- and potentially to pick up huge payouts from taxpayers -- without ever stepping foot in a US court," she said.

But Alan Oxley, the first Australian to chair the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization's predecessor, said fears that the ISDS favours international business over governments were overblown.

He said an international arbitration tribunal would be an effective way to settle claims as it gave foreign investors an automatic right to appeal without government approval.

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Australia's foreign affairs department has released a "myth versus realities" TPP document that stresses an ISDS tribunal "could not overturn domestic court decisions nor force Australia to change its laws".

"If you talk to anybody in business, they'll say that's a good idea, whereas the opposition is coming from quite a small fringe group," Oxley, who heads up the Australian APEC Study Centre at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"RMIT University, told AFP.

grk/mp/cah/kma

Agence France-Presse

Column: China, Will the bubble burst

Meghnad Desai 

27 July 2015

Financial Express

There was a collapse on the Shanghai stock market which led the Chinese government to pump millions of dollars of liquidity to retrieve prices. For anyone with a sense of history, the mind will cast back to Wall Street in 1929, when the authorities desperately tried to revive the stock market and failed with well-known consequences. Gold price has collapsed as much as the oil price.

Indeed, gold and oil prices are highly correlated. Dollar, on the other hand, correlates negatively with them both. The strength of the dollar has surprised HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Janet Yellen. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Federal Reserve dithers whether to begin tightening the yield even by as little as 25 basis points. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Mark Carney, the Bank of England Governor, is more confident of raising interest rates sooner. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"The ECB cannot remotely envisage tightening while Greece is causing so much angst in the Eurozone.

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"IMF has warned that the new normal will be a low-GDP-growth, low-inflation scenario. I would label it the downswing of a Kondratieff long cycle. This may last anything up to 20 years. Only the US and UK are showing above 2% GDP growth among the Western developed countries. China has slowed down and if the Shanghai collapse is more serious than the authorities want us to believe, it may be in a tailspin.

The global economy is without doubt at a very peculiar juncture. The easy money policies adopted by the major central banks have now lasted seven years. Interest rates in those countries are practically zero. The huge amount of money pumped out has caused neither inflation nor output growth. Some of it has gone global in search of higher yields. A lot of it is churning around in the mergers-and-acquisitions market. Companies are buying and selling old equity, but not making new investments. Buyouts and takeovers are taking place at highly inflated prices. Indeed, the values in M&A have reached the previous peak of 2007. This cannot be a healthy development.

The moderate GDP growth reflects a slowdown in productivity growth. There is much worry about raising productivity growth back to what it was before the crisis. Education and skilling closer liaison between business and universities, better patents regime, help for start-ups have been listed as the ingredients for raising productivity.

Even so, the world is also waiting for the next burst of Schumpetarian innovations to raise the growth rate secularly.

Driverless and/or electric cars, robotics, new breakthrough in medical and pharmacy research arising from DNA mapping, faster and smarter electronic devices, solar-powered airplanes-the list can be stretched. There is however no sense of a revolutionary change in the production structures.

Could it be that before the global economy revives, it could go down again? That would be a short cycle of 8-10 years, 2008-2018 , which will dovetail with the long downturn of 20-25 years. It is difficult to be sure, but the signs are of a slowdown rather than acceleration of growth across the globe. The Eurozone is a massive drag and is unlikely to register 2% growth in the near future. The UK economy is forecast to grow at 2.5% for the next five years but there are problems. Household savings (pension payments excepted) has dropped to near zero per cent. Household debt is rising again as are house prices.

Of the BRICS economies, only India is on the up. If the various legislative obstacles that the government faces were to be cleared, expectations will improve. As it is, a better monsoon, lower inflation and a resultant interest rate cut are the only likely route to a revival.

India' s good growth performance in the 2000-2007 period was on the back of the global boom. If now India has to swim against the current to achieve higher growth, it would need a much more radical policy mix than is on the cards. So far, the idea seems to be that to get back to high growth only decisive executive action is needed and then the earlier growth trajectory will resume. This is a risky strategy. If, by any chance, the world has another recession, it will drag India with it. After all,India gained from the global boom before 2007. It could yet again be dragged down by the global economy.

There was a time when it looked likely that BRICS would provide an engine of growth for the global economy. Despite much growth of the emerging economies, the majority pull forces remain with the developed economies. They could be losing their momentum. They could take the BRICS with them. The author is a prominent economist and Labour peer

India Express Mumbai Limited

