Headlines:

EU, US trade negotiators get an earful from critics

India should press for greater people movement at WTO: Mittal

US trade negotiator 'very disappointed' at European GM food ban

China to adjust export tariffs of bulk commodities, likely boosting nonferrous metals

Modi Wants India to be Global Arbitration Hub

UN expert says secret trade deals threaten human rights

The EU makes a mess of bioengineered food; Brussels' plans for a GMO opt-out damages transatlantic trade talks

Congressional Panels Approve Fast Track for Trade Deal, With Conditions

U.S.-China Trade at a Crossroad

Pakistan: Govt to implement IT agreement

Terres rares: peu de risque de pénurie en Europe d'ici 2020 (étude)

Lagarde urge a avanzar liberalización comercial como motor económico global;

 

Details:

EU, US trade negotiators get an earful from critics

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"John M. Biers

23 April 2015

Agence France Presse

Opponents of controversial US-EU trade talks came out swinging at a public comment period Thursday, arguing the emerging agreement was a bad deal for consumers and the environment.

Critics of the proposed Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) included HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Jean Halloran, a senior adviser at the nonprofit HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Consumers Union, who suggested a treaty would be the worst of all possible worlds, exposing European consumers to "faulty HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"GM cars" and US children to toys that do not meet strict American standards.

"We cannot pursue mutual recognition or equivalence willy-nilly," she said.

Halloran's remarks came during a three-hour stakeholder comment session during the ninth round of TTIP talks, which concludes Friday.

The agreement, which could create the world's biggest free-trade pact, has been billed by President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Barack Obama and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union leaders as critical to boosting economic growth and jobs in both regions.

Obama last week called for "major progress" on TTIP, saying it and a proposed major trade pact with Asia-Pacific countries would "absolutely" benefit American workers. Supporters Thursday from across the business community emphasized that standardizing rules could boost jobs in both regions.

But the talks have prompted large protests in Europe, where thousands rallied last weekend in Madrid and Brussels and throughout Germany.

Opponents in the US have yet to take to the streets en masse, but about half of the roughly 60 scheduled presenters appeared to be TTIP foes, based on the names of their organizations. Some of the speakers did not show up, including Frack Free Nation and the Open the Cages Alliance.

Other frequent subjects of criticism included the secrecy surrounding the closed-door talks, as well as a dispute-resolution mechanism that campaigners say would undermine national sovereignty and favor big business.

Sharon Anglin Treat, a representative of the National Caucus of Environmental Legislators, said the trade agreement could gut stricter rules enacted by states, such as laws in Massachusetts and New Jersey to label or restrict bee-killing pesticides.

"US state laws and regulations do diverge from US federal law and EU regulations," Treat said. "That divergence is a hallmark of the US system of federalism and is enshrined in our Constitution."

But Ann Wilson of the Motor and Equipment Manufacturers Association urged negotiators to advance the talks, which offer the chance of uniform standards across jurisdictions.

"We are a global industry," she said. "It is important that we be able to operate on a global basis."

Eugene Philhower, a representative of the US Soybean Export Council, said that American farmers are as concerned about animal welfare and sustainability as their counterparts in Europe.

"American producers are just as interested in animal welfare," he said. "The biggest difference is whether to mandate it by the government."

If concluded, TTIP would be the world's biggest trade deal, linking about 60 percent of the world's economic output in a colossal market of 850 million consumers, creating a free-trade corridor from Hawaii to Lithuania.

Agence France Presse

India should press for greater people movement at WTO: Mittal

23 April 2015

Press Trust of India

New Delhi, Apr 23 (PTI) Industry leader HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Sunil Mittal today said India must press at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO for greater movement of professionals in global services market for a large share of 500 million jobs that are expected to be created worldwide by 2022.

Speaking at the inaugural function of Global Exhibition on Services (GES), Mittal said as India's economy grows, the services industry will continue to keep its pole position in economic activities.

"India, to my mind, is competent to serve the globe ... I would urge that in a bilateral and multi-lateral discussions at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO, movement of people needs to be settled in favour of India.

"We need to have that as part of the world trade agenda. India must take the lion's share of the 500 million jobs that are going to be created globally by 2022," Mittal, the founder and chairman of Bharti Enterprises, said.

Quoting a report, he said a shortage of 18 million skilled workers is expected by 2020.

"The only pool of young people lies in Saudi Arabia, some of the Middle-East countries and few African countries. But they are not prepared as Indians are ... we travel well, we are accepted globally very well and that makes India truly a place to source world's workforce," he added.

Mittal further said India needs to train 500 million people by 2022 and one million are joining the job market every month after month.

"If we can convert this workforce for both domestic and global markets there will be no looking back," he said, and added that country's demographic dividend is going to take India into the pole position in the global services market.

Mittal also requested Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Narendra Modi, who was present on the occasion, to add a new slogan 'serve from India, served in India' in his 'Make in India' campaign. PTI NKD RR MR

Press Trust Of India Limited

US trade negotiator 'very disappointed' at European GM food ban

23 April 2015

EurActiv.com

EURACOM

US Trade Representative Michael Froman expressed disappointment on Wednesday (22 April) that the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Commission has decided to let member states have 'opt-outs' on imports of genetically-modified food and feed.

Froman, who is America's chief negotiator in the ongoing Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) talks between the US and the EU, said the Commission's new proposals will allow member states to ignore science-based evidence and environmental facts.

“We are very disappointed by today's announcement of a regulatory proposal that appears hard to reconcile with the EU's international obligations. Moreover, dividing the EU into 28 separate markets for the circulation of certain products seems at odds with the EU's goal of deepening the internal market," Froman said.

"At a time when the US and the EU are working to create further opportunities for growth and jobs through TTIP, proposing this kind of trade restrictive action is not constructive," he continued.

On Wednesday, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Commission announced that it would allow member states to opt-out from the Europe-wide approval system of genetically-modified organisms (GMOs) with the objective to give national governments' view the same weight as scientific advice in the authorisation of GMOs in their territory.

>> Read: HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"EU proposal on GMO food critisised by Greenpeace, industry

Froman's criticism echoed those of the European Association of Bioindustries, EuropaBio, which said the rules would undermine internal market rules and thus damage jobs, growth, innovation and competitiveness.

In 2006, a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organisation (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO) dispute settlement panel found that member state bans of GMO products violated trade rules, as they were not based on risk assessments. Since then, the US has been working to "normalise" agricultural trade with the EU, Froman said in the statement.

communication@euractiv.com 

EurActiv PLC

China to adjust export tariffs of bulk commodities, likely boosting nonferrous metals

23 April 2015

Xinhua's China Economic Information Service

BEIJING, Apr. 23 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Xinhua) -- The export tariffs of several bulk commodities will be adjusted starting from May, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Ministry of Finance announced on Thursday. 

Iron and steel granules and powders, rare earth, tungsten, and molybdenum will be exempt from export tariffs, and wrought aluminum products will enjoy a zero tax rate. 

--- China loses HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO case and adjusts export polices 

In August 2014, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization ruled that China's export duties, quotas, and administration of rare earths, tungsten and molybdenum products were in consistent with HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO rules and China's Accession Protocol.

In March 2012, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union, Japan and the United States teamed up to bring a joint case to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO over China's measures on exports of rare earths, tungsten and molybdenum. 

They claimed that the so-called "restriction" had limited other countries' access to the minerals, given China a competitive advantage and hurt other producers and consumers. 

After China lost the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO case, it has to adjust export polices to meet HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO rules. 

Earlier, export tariffs of rare earth minerals, and tungsten and molybdenum products were 25 percent and 20 percent, respectively. 

-- Adjustment boosting nonferrous metals 

Statistics show that China's rare earth reserves account for 23 percent of the world's total, but it supplies more than 90 percent of the rare earth minerals in the world. Its tungsten reserves account for 47 percent of the world's total. 

The cancellation of export tariffs will boost rare earth exports, ease oversupply pressure on the domestic market, and help the market recovery. 

Once the export tariffs are abolished, prices of rare earth exports will fall sharply with increases in export volume. Rare earth prices on the domestic market will likely increase. However, the Chinese government hopes to stabilize the prices and maintain sustainable development of the rare earth resources. Therefore, the authorities will likely issue more policies to put the rare earth sector in order, said analysts of BOC International. 

Meanwhile, market participants expect that the government will replace export tariffs with high resource taxes. In the future, rare earth mining will be levied according to "ad valorem taxation" instead of "volume-based taxation" and the tax rate will be raised significantly. 

The tax rate increase in rare earth resources will push up rare earth prices. On China's A-share market, investors can focus on China Minmetals Rare Earth Corp (000831.SZ), Rising Nonferrous Metals Co. Ltd. (600259.SH), and China Northern Rare Earth (Group) High-tech Co., Ltd 

China Economic Information Service of Xinhua News Agency

Modi Wants India to be Global Arbitration Hub

24 April 2015

The Economic Times - Mumbai Edition

Batting for opening of sectors such as legal and finance to foreign players, Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Narendra Modi on Thursday asked the services industry to overcome its fears, asserting that India is globally competitive and suggesting that the country could become a hub for global arbitration with some changes in legislation. "Why should we need to go outside the country for global arbitration? We shouldn't think that if foreign lawyers come here, they will take away our jobs," the Prime Minister said, speaking at the inauguration of the three-day Global Exhibition on Services (GES). India must also work on intellectual property rights guidelines to match global standards, he said. With a 3.2% share in global services trade, India has a trade surplus in the sector, unlike the large deficit in merchandise trade. India's services exports stood at $151 billion in 2014-15.

To give thrust to services exports, India is organising the first GES, with participants from 60 countries including Pakistan, Australia, US, Russia and Germany . The Modi-led NDA government aims to encourage services sector along with the 'Make in India' campaign which is aimed at reviving manufacturing. The PM said India must align its patent laws with international standards to enhance collaboration and trade in sectors such as entertainment. "India needs to work on IPR guidelines matching global standards," said Modi. This comes amid intense pressure from developed countries including the US, which have asked India to amend its IPR rules. The PM said that India has made the transformation from a country worried about its "brain drain," to a country that thinks of "brain gain".

The focus sectors in the exhibition include IT and telecom, tourism, media and entertainment, healthcare, logistics, professional services (including project exports, banking and financial services, education, R&D, space, and the small and medium enterprises engaged in services).

In order to strengthen India's position in finance, the PM said the government is keen that global investments come directly to India rather than get routed through countries such as Mauritius and Singapore.

The GES, jointly organised by the commerce ministry and industry lobby CII, is a platform to showcase India's strength in the services sector. Pointing out that in the coming years India will only become a younger country, the Prime Minister said that people of different regions have different talents and efforts could be made to develop those specific skills to take advantage of the requirement of the global community. He added that there is a need to think of "multiple layers of services" which can be exported to the world. Speaking at the inauguration, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Sunil Bharti Mittal, CEO and chairman of Bharti Enterprises, pointed out that work was on to ensure that India gets a world-class broadband network so that internet can be accessed by all at the earliest. He added that there is a need to negotiate movement of people at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO to ensure that India gains from the global pact. Pratap C Reddy of Apollo said that the launch of visa-on-arrival and evisa facilities for a number of countries will make a significant impact on the inflow of foreigners wanting to avail themselves of medical services in India.

Bennett, Coleman & Co., Ltd.

UN expert says secret trade deals threaten human rights

23 April 2015

Reuters News

GENEVA, April 23 (Reuters) - Secret negotiations on international trade deals threaten human rights, and the inclusion of provisions that would allow companies to sue states appears to violate human rights law, an independent HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"U.N. expert said on Thursday. 

Alfred de Zayas, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"U.N. special rapporteur on promotion of a democratic and equitable international order, did not specify any particular talks, but his comments appeared aimed at large trade deals such as the TTIP and TPP agreements the United States is negotiating with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union and the Asia-Pacific states. 

Released: 2015-4-23T18:22:14.000Z

Thomson Reuters (Markets) LLC 

The EU makes a mess of bioengineered food; Brussels' plans for a GMO opt-out damages transatlantic trade talks

24 April 2015

Financial Times

Never watch laws or sausages being made: a maxim often attributed to Otto von Bismarck, one of Europe's greatest statesmen. Alas, such a warning often covers all production and regulation of food where the EU is involved.

The EU this week attempted to reconcile the competing demands of farmers, consumers and activists with a proposal on bioengineered foods and produced a genetically modified dog's breakfast . The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Commission's suggestion, that individual member states be allowed to ban strains of genetically modified seeds even if approved by the EU, is short-sighted, anti-scientific and possibly in breach of EU law.

It also reinforces the EU's reputation as an unreliable interlocutor in international trade talks. US farmers are adamant they want the use of genetically modified organisms (GMOs) liberalised as part of the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership. Since its launch in 2013, TTIP has made scant progress. Proposals like these will make talks yet more difficult.

The EU's attitudes to food safety have often been based on consumers' irrational fears and farmers' naked self-interest. The advice of its own scientists is routinely ignored. One of the first actions of Jean-Claude Juncker as European Commission president was to abolish the post of chief scientific adviser, giving in to pressure from environmental and other lobby groups. Only one bioengineered crop, a strain of maize, is cultivated commercially on any scale in the EU, despite a broad scientific consensus that GMOs pose no significant threat to human health.

The top five agricultural exports from the US - soyabeans, corn, beef, chicken and pork - are kept out of the EU through a variety of wrong-headed objections about GMOs, growth hormones and cleansing processes. The last attempt to seal a US-EU regulatory agreement, the Transatlantic Economic Council created in 2007, soon foundered on the vexed issue of whether the EU would admit chicken meat that had followed the US process of being cleansed with chlorinated water. Amid jurisdictional disputes between commission directorates and fierce opposition from European poultry farmers, and despite EU scientific advice in favour of admitting imports, negotiations collapsed.

Mindful of that unfortunate precedent, the US pressed the EU to change its rules for cleaning beef carcases and transporting live pigs as a prerequisite for launching TTIP. But such gestures have evidently done little to change the European way of thinking.

There is little surprise that GMOs have proved an immensely difficult issue within TTIP. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Karel De Gucht , the EU trade commissioner at its launch, insisted from the beginning that GMOs were not up for discussion. But this week's proposal suggests the EU will permanently entrench an irrational system of policy making when other food hygiene issues come up for negotiation. Its stance may not even survive a legal challenge at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Court of Justice, since it appears to run counter to single market rules.

In the meantime, the US presses on with the Trans-Pacific Partnership deal in the Asia-Pacific, where it finds negotiating partners less capricious. If TTIP grinds to a halt, the EU has only itself to blame. A trading bloc that cannot agree consistent policies within its own ranks will always have difficulty negotiating complex deals with another. The commission's plans have pleased no one. They should be unified and simplified, and should work towards ending the baseless prejudice against GMOs that holds back European agriculture and makes its food needlessly expensive.

The Financial Times Limited (AAIW/EIW)

Congressional Panels Approve Fast Track for Trade Deal, With Conditions

By JONATHAN WEISMAN 

24 April 2015

NYTimes.com Feed

The New York Times Company.

WASHINGTON — House and Senate committees this week agreed easily to give President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Obama fast-track authority to negotiate a sweeping trade accord with Pacific nations, but the package of bills intended to speed completion of the deal also imposes difficult burdens on its negotiators.

Senators demanded tough limits on currency manipulation by trading partners of the United States and placed restrictions on the import of products made with HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"child labor. One provision would prohibit consideration of trade agreements with any country considered a violator of human-trafficking rules, a seemingly noncontroversial addition. But it could knock Malaysia from the deal, a 12-nation accord still being negotiated known as the Trans-Pacific Partnership.

Another provision would preclude trading partners from organizing boycotts, imposing sanctions or pressing divestment on Israel — popular here, less so in the Muslim countries in the deal.

As the trade promotion authority bills head to the House and Senate floors in coming weeks, skeptics and opponents have made it clear they are not finished.

“There’s not been a T.P.A. considered seriously by the House and Senate for 12 years, so this is something we take seriously,” said Senator Sherrod Brown, Democrat of Ohio, who helped win passage of the currency manipulation amendment and promised many more proposals for the Senate floor.

The House Ways and Means Committee on Thursday voted 25-13 on a bill that would give Congress the ability to vote yes or no on trade agreements, but without the ability to make amendments, over the next five years. Representative Paul D. Ryan, Republican from Wisconsin, the committee’s chairman and an ardent trade supporter, kept his party in line and voted down substantive changes to the bill.

Senate Republicans were less successful in defending a delicate fast-track compromise from significant changes. The Senate Finance Committee voted 20-6 for similar legislation late Wednesday night, but only after a bipartisan group of skeptics imposed new demands.

The trade promotion measures already included strict and burdensome demands, including a four-month delay between the completion of a trade accord and consideration by Congress, and a two-month public comment period before the president could finally sign a deal. That delay is likely to push congressional consideration into the next presidential election season, an unappealing prospect for supporters.

But Congress is also poised to raise the bar for negotiators. Treasury Secretary HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Jacob J. Lew maneuvered for months to avoid a requirement that future trade accords include measures to prevent countries from artificially depressing their currencies, which make their exports cheaper and United States imports more expensive.

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Obama administration worries that would backfire on the United States if trading partners objected to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Federal Reserve’s use of currency sales or purchases to spur American economic growth. Administration officials say currency issues should be dealt with delicately, by multilateral organizations like the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Group of 20 largest industrial economic nations.

“The legislation raises questions about consistency with our international obligations, and other countries might pursue retaliatory measures that could hurt our exporters,” Mr. Lew wrote in a letter to Congress on Tuesday.

Senators in both parties disagreed. The Finance Committee voted 18-8 to add a provision to force the Commerce Department to treat currency manipulation as an illegal export subsidy and impose duties to counter it.

The amendment was added to a separate customs enforcement bill moving alongside the trade promotion authority legislation — a victory of sorts for the administration, which beat back a separate currency measure that was to be added to the trade bill. But lawmakers said they would move in coming weeks to merge the customs and trade promotion bills.

“Because China is now stealing from our best industries and hurting us in tech and in pharma — it’s no longer just furniture and clothing, as important as they were — we have to do something,” said Senator Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of New York.

A surprise addition from Senator HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Robert Menendez, Democrat of New Jersey, was an innocuous-sounding “No Fast Track for Human Traffickers” amendment, which would prohibit expedited consideration of trade agreements with any country in the top tier of the State Department’s human trafficking list. Included in that list of 23 nations in Malaysia.

Mr. Menendez said his amendment came up just hours after the Senate approved a new anti-human-trafficking bill 99-0, so administration officials should not have been surprised.

“It’s a very simple proposition: We shouldn’t give fast-track status to countries engaged in human trafficking,” he said. “They still can get involved. They just have to get their act together.”

An administration official involved in the trade talks said the legislation had far to go before it reached the president’s desk. But the official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, made it clear the White House would oppose Mr. Menendez’s amendment.

“Blocking agreements with countries like Malaysia removes an important and effective incentive for them to improve their practices,” she said.

She added that the White House was working with Congress to find “responsible options with objective standards and strong potential remedies” to deal with the currency issue. But the official said the administration remained opposed to the Senate legislation.

The White House has a strong ally in Mr. Ryan. The chairman maintained firm discipline on his committee in a formal drafting session on Thursday that took all day and produced virtually no change to the initial bill. Mr.Ryan, who ran against President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Obama in 2012 as the Republicans’ vice-presidential nominee, found himself defending the president against attacks by his own party.

“This is a strange world we’re in these days,” Mr. Ryan said.

* HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"Deal on Trade Pact Gives Obama Authority but Builds In a Delay

* HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"Deal Reached on Fast-Track Authority for Obama on Trade Accord

The New York Times Company

U.S.-China Trade at a Crossroad

By James Zimmerman 

24 April 2015

The Wall Street Journal Asia

After three decades of breakneck growth, China has reached a critical point in its development, economically and geopolitically. As the dominant power in the global economic system, the U.S. now has important decisions to make about how it wants to engage with China and how it would like China to engage with the world. Washington needs to get this right, because its global leadership and overall trade competitiveness are at stake.

The U.S. has recently been unable to get trade and investment deals over the finish line. This could create a leadership vacuum in Asia that China would happily fill. China has already demonstrated its "Great Power" aspirations with the establishment of the Asia Infrastructure Investment Bank, a $100 billion China-sponsored alternative to existing global and regional lending institutions. It's also pursuing the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership free-trade agreement through the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Association of Southeast Asian Nations. Neither institution would serve America's interests.

Meanwhile, negotiations on two free-trade agreements that do involve the U.S. -- the U.S.-China Bilateral Investment Treaty and the Trans-Pacific Partnership -- have stalled. If successful, these two treaties could be the largest market-liberalization exercises China has undergone since joining the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization in 2001. Making these new trade agreements happen would help maintain America's leadership role on the international-trade agenda and the regional economic architecture in Asia.

With or without these new agreements, China already plays an increasingly important role in the success of the U.S. economy. U.S. companies have more than $70 billion invested in China and many have made China a central plank in their growth plans. Chinese companies are increasingly interested in the U.S. too, investing more than $10 billion each of the past two years. Last year China imported $124 billion of goods and services from the U.S. All of this helps to create jobs and increase the value of American companies. Increased trade liberalization between the two countries would only bring greater benefits.

China is now reaching a delicate stage in the transformation of its economic model, to one based on consumption and services rather than exports and investments. The challenge for China's leadership is to build a system that is more open to trade and investment, that respects the rule of law and that participates as a responsible stakeholder in the global economy. U.S. companies stand to benefit from this transformation, but more than ever they will need all the support they can get in navigating a complicated Chinese policy environment that will be increasingly polarized between reformers and conservatives. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"U.S. government should ensure that China remains fully engaged with the global trade and investment ecosystem, and can achieve this in part by continuing to set the pace of liberalization.

The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) accord is expected to cover a region that represents almost 800 million people and roughly 40% of the world economy. It would create jobs, expand trade and investment, and improve the global rules of international trade. But excluded from the TPP -- at least for now -- is China, the world's second-largest economy, largest exporter and manufacturer, and the holder of the largest cache of foreign reserves. Initially hesitant, China has recently shown a keen interest in joining the TPP and should be welcomed to participate if it agrees to meet the partnership's rigorous trade and investment rules.

The TPP would help reform China's notoriously problematic sectors, such as trade anomalies created by state-owned enterprises and barriers to digital trade and e-commerce. There are those in China who understand that market liberalization would greatly improve economic performance and help move China up the innovation value chain. This is especially important as China's economy slows and faces painful adjustments.

However, in order for any deal to succeed, it needs to be approved by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"U.S. Congress. The only practical way for that to happen is if Congress grants the Obama administration trade-promotion authority (TPA). Without that, America's trading partners would be reluctant to go through lengthy, detailed negotiations knowing that Congress could tinker with the final product. The same goes for the U.S.-China Bilateral Investment Treaty, which could go a long way toward leveling the playing field for U.S. companies operating in China and those currently considering entering.

As TPA legislation now makes its way through the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"U.S. Senate and House, Congress must remember to look beyond parochial interests. Granting the Obama administration trade-promotion authority -- as has been granted to every president for more than 30 years -- would allow President Obama to negotiate strong trade deals that would foster economic growth for U.S. companies and consumers. The alternative is a significant historical setback and a loss of opportunity for U.S. commercial interests.

Mr. Zimmerman is a Beijing-based lawyer and the chairman of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"American Chamber of Commerce in China.

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Dow Jones & Company, Inc.

Pakistan: Govt to implement IT agreement

23 April 2015

The Nation

In order to promote IT trade, Ministry of Information Technology is considering options for the implementation of Information Technology Agreement (ITA), under HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO.

In this regard, Minister of State for Information Technology chaired a meeting on Information Technology Agreement (ITA) with PRIME (policy research institute of market economy) a group of indigenous think tanks, here on Wednesday, said a handout.

Federal Secretary IT Azmat Ali Ranjha, Member (Telecom) HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Mudassar Hussain, member Legal Ms.

Ameena Sohail, MD, PSEB Asim Shehryar, CEO PRIME Ali Salman, Member Advisory Council PRIME Dr.

Manzoor Ahmed and senior officials from MOITT attended the meeting.

The meeting discussed ITA plurilateral trade agreement under HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO which was concluded in December, 1996.

Under this agreement the signatories has to eliminate the tariffs on a list of IT and telecom products.

Pakistan acceded to this agreement in 2001-02 and, thus tariff on IT trade was eliminated but unfortunately, these reforms were revoked after a shorter period of time.

Presently Pakistan is among the five countries which has highest taxes on the imports of the IT products including Custom duties ranging between 10 to 25pc, sales tax 17pc, non-adjustable Income Tax 5.

5pc.

However if Pakistan eliminates the tariff for a list of IT and Telecom products, subsequently trade on IT products would increase manifold, which would bring major economic benefits in the long run.

The volume and the growth of the sector would also be enhanced and our internet users penetration may also increase from 11pc to 33pc.

The Minister informed the delegates that IT ministry is already working on ITA and the main initiative lies with Ministry of Commerce and FBR.

Secretary level meetings have already taken place in this regard and the engagement continues.

Primarily, we have declared current year as a year of Information Technology, and have mandated PSEB to enhance the volume of IT export and to adopt measures for international visibility of Pakistani companies and products and we will make all efforts for the growth and development of IT sector so that it could maximise its contribution in overall GDP of the country under the vision of Prime Minister Muhammad Nawaz Sharif", Minister said.

News Bites Pty Ltd

Terres rares: peu de risque de pénurie en Europe d'ici 2020 (étude)

23 April 2015

Agence France Presse ECOFI

Le risque de pénurie de terres rares en Europe, ces éléments chimiques qui entrent dans la composition de nombreux produits technologiques, est relativement faible d'ici 2020, selon une étude publiée jeudi.

"La crise des terres rares telle qu'elle a été vécue en 2011, où les prix des éléments comme le dysprosium ont été multipliés par vingt, semble écartée (du moins à court terme)", affirme le BRGM (Bureau de recherches géologiques et minières) qui a coordonné cette étude appelée "projet Aster" et visant à quantifier les flux de certaines terres rares en Europe.

En 2011, la Chine, qui concentrait à l'époque 99% et 87% des approvisionnements en terres rares lourdes et légères, a instauré des quotas aux exportations de ces éléments, suscitant une plainte de plusieurs pays devant l'Organisation mondiale du commerce (OMC).

Le reste du monde s'est donc adapté, relève cette étude, cherchant notamment à diversifier ses sources d'approvisionnement. Des projets d'extraction ont démarré (États-Unis, Australie).

En Europe, qui n'extrait aucune terre rare à l'heure actuelle, la Suède a un projet minier à Norra Kärr, dont le gisement est particulièrement riche en terres rares lourdes.

Surtout, selon cette étude, l'Europe pourrait développer la récupération de terres rares via le recyclage des produits qui en contiennent, comme les batteries, les téléphones portables, les aimants permanents ou les lampes fluorescentes.

Pour le néodyme, élément qui se retrouve dans les véhicules électriques et hybrides, des lecteurs de disques durs, les turbines éoliennes, etc., le stock en utilisation en 2010 est d'environ 16.000 tonnes en Europe (70.000 t au niveau mondial).

Enfin, des technologies moins gourmandes en terres rares ont fait leur apparition, comme les lampes LED.

Cela "contribuera également à réduire la tension sur l'équilibre entre offre et demande pour ces substances", estime l'étude, qui nuance toutefois en affirmant qu'"on ne peut pas exclure que de nouvelles tensions apparaissent".

Preuve de cette évolution: début 2015, la Chine a supprimé les quotas à l'exportation de ses terres rares.

mhc/cb/els

Lagarde urge a avanzar liberalización comercial como motor económico global;

23 April 2015

Agencia EFE - Servicio Internacional

AGEINT 

Washington, 23 abr (EFE).- La directora gerente del HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Fondo Monetario Internacional (FMI), Christine Lagarde, aseguró hoy que parte de la "ralentización" mundial se debe a la caída del comercio internacional, por lo que instó a relanzar los programas de liberalización con acuerdos como el Transpacífico (TPP) y el Transatlántico (TTIP).

"Si durante tres décadas el comercio creció al doble de la tasa de la economía global, ahora lo hace a la misma o por debajo", indicó Lagarde en el discurso principal de la asamblea anual del Export-Import Bank de EEUU celebrada en un hotel de Washington.

Durante su intervención, la directora del Fondo recordó que las últimas cifras de la HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Organización Mundial de Comercio (OMC), divulgadas recientemente, apuntan a que 2015 será probablemente el cuarto año consecutivo de un crecimiento en el comercio mundial por debajo de la media.

"En otras palabras, uno de los motores del crecimiento mundial se ha frenado", dijo Lagarde.

La pasada semana, durante la reunión de primavera del FMI y el Banco Mundial (BM), la institución advirtió sobre el "mediocre" desempeño económico mundial y la disminución del crecimiento potencial a medio plazo. EFE

Agencia EFE S.A.

END

 

 

cid:image001.png@01CC55E4.A4F90770

 

Josep Bosch, Information Officer

Information and External Relations Division

+41227395681

 
