HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "Obama's Pacific trade pact revived in U.S. House, heads to Senate
·         HYPERLINK \l "Members Advance Talks On Doha Tariff Cutting Methods, But Progress Lagging
·         HYPERLINK \l "No consensus yet on WTO farm tariff cuts
·         HYPERLINK \l "EGA Negotiators Hope UN Climate Change Talks May Spur Agreement on Trade Benefits
·         HYPERLINK \l "(AE) TRADE: Seventh round of talks for green goods agreement
·         HYPERLINK \l "Officials fear possible farm subsidy dispute with Brazil
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S., Others Slam 'Unpredictable' Indian Tariff Regime At WTO Grilling
·         HYPERLINK \l "China tariff level to stay steady after WTO transitional period
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO Backs Ukraine's Decision Not To Lift Import Surcharge Before 2016
·         HYPERLINK \l "EU calls crisis summit after Athens bailout talks collapse;
·         HYPERLINK \l "Caribbean gathering focuses on joint approach to boost growth
·         HYPERLINK \l "Trade disputes: Torture by tariff
 
Obama's Pacific trade pact revived in U.S. House, heads to Senate 
 
* House of Representatives backs trade bill 218-208
* Passes on second attempt in less than a week
* Senate vote likely next week, Export-Import Bank looms
 
By Krista Hughes and Richard Cowan

WASHINGTON, June 18 (Reuters) - The U.S. House of Representatives on Thursday reversed course, approving "fast-track" legislation central to President Barack Obama's trade deal with Pacific Rim nations and sending it back to the Senate.

The close vote in the House, which last week rejected a related bill, kept alive Obama's goal of bolstering U.S. ties with Asia through a 12-nation Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), the economic element of a foreign policy shift aimed in part at countering the rising influence of China.

The House voted 218-208 to give Obama the fast-track authority to speed trade deals, including the TPP, to conclusion with reduced interference from Congress. The TPP would encompass 40 percent of the global economy and is close to completion.

But the outlook in the Senate for fast-track, seen by Japan as crucial to sealing the deal on TPP, was uncertain.

Senate aides said support among Democrats hinged on another trade issue, the Export-Import Bank, which may have to close at month's end.

The House's vote was its second in less than a week on fast-track, which would restrict lawmakers to a yes-or-no vote on trade deals. Democrats last week blocked it by voting down a companion measure to extend aid for workers hurt by trade.

That was a slap in the face to Obama, who urged his fellow Democrats to support fast-track and the worker assistance program, despite skepticism among Democrats close to labor unions about the impact of trade deals on U.S. jobs.

In an unusual alliance, the president and Republican House Speaker John Boehner turned last Friday's loss into a win by excising the worker aid program that was voted down by the House. That neutralized the ability of some Democrats' to use it to stymie fast-track, and capitalized on support from a bloc of 28 pro-trade Democrats.

Those House Democrats resisted intense pressure from unions, after House and Senate Republicans - who generally oppose the worker support program - promised to attach the worker assistance bill to a separate trade bill.

SENATE BACK IN FOCUS

The trade package still faces three more congressional votes, including two in the Senate, which took nearly two weeks last month to approve fast-track and worker aid.

"The House took the hot potato and threw it back to the Senate," said Lori Wallach of consumer group Public Citizen, which has been campaigning against fast-track.

Many Democrats fear trade deals such as the TPP will cost U.S. jobs as employers chase lower costs in signatory countries.

Republicans, who generally favor trade, do not have the muscle to pass fast-track on their own, especially in the Senate, where a super-majority is needed for major legislation.

Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell took steps to attach the worker aid program to a bill that renews trade benefits for African countries, setting up votes next week. He said there were enough votes to pass the "fast track" and aid bills separately.

Democratic Senator Ron Wyden told Reuters that pro-trade Democrats were determined to pass both fast-track and the worker aid program.

"We're having almost around-the-clock meetings to make sure the process is such that it actually will happen," he said.

Senator Heidi Heitkamp, one of 14 Democrats who backed fast-track in May, said she was waiting to see the path forward for the worker program and a customs bill - and a vote on the Export-Import Bank, known as Ex-Im.

Some Republicans want to close down Ex-Im, which provides support to U.S. exporters and buyers of U.S. goods. Its charter expires at the end of the month. Republicans promised a vote as part of a deal to pass the trade package on its first run through the Senate.

"I'd love to see this as an opportunity to do something to avoid the charter for the Ex-Im Bank to expire," Heitkamp said.

POSITIVE SIGN

The House vote is a positive sign for the TPP, which would harmonize standards on issues such as intellectual property and labor protections, and lower trade barriers among the dozen emerging and developed countries.

The deal, backed by the business community, would open new markets for major U.S. exporters such as Boeing, General Electric, Ford, IBM, Caterpillar, Merck and Cisco, policy analysts said.

Negotiators are under pressure to finish the pact, which is already more than five years in the making, to allow the TPP to clear Congress before the 2016 U.S. presidential election campaigns dominate the agenda.

Some TPP partner countries want fast track in place before making final offers on the trade deal, which economists estimate would boost the global economy by almost $300 billion a year. (Additional reporting by Alex Wilts, David Lawder, Jeff Mason and Susan Cornwell; Editing by Steve Orlofsky and Ken Wills) 
 
 
Members Advance Talks On Doha Tariff Cutting Methods, But Progress Lagging
Inside U.S. Trade - 06/19/2015
 
Members of the World Trade Organization have advanced their efforts to advance the Doha round negotiations in the area of agricultural market access to the point of discussing three tariff-cutting methodologies, but instead of narrowing their disagreements, the discussion seems to reinforce their differences, according to Geneva sources.
 
That is because one of the three is based on the 2008 draft modalities but would entail lesser tariff cuts than originally proposed. The 2008 draft text sets up a tiered formula that cuts higher tariffs more than lower ones. This is backed by developing countries in the G20, G33 and African groups.
 
In a June 16 informal negotiating session of the agriculture committee, several developed countries, including Norway, Canada and the European Union opposed this option, with Canada saying that methodology has "basically been exhausted."
 
At the meeting, the United States said it preferred a simple average tariff cut, but signaled it would be open to discussing an approach that combines a tiered formula with an average cut of tariffs. The EU and Norway are backing that approach, as are most developed countries, possibly because it allows them to protect sensitive items that have the highest tariffs.
 
Canada and Australia said they could consider this approach, but prefer another methodology under discussion that uses a tiered formula coupled with a cut in the overall tariff average. Australia and Canada are supporting this approach, which they consider more ambitious that the second option.
 
The outlined approaches did not address what flexibilities would exist for special or sensitive products, but developing country members have been seeking to maintain or expand those beyond the terms of the 2008 draft modalities.
 
As a result of the uncertainty on these flexibilities, some countries have held off on taking a position on the proposed tariff-cutting methodologies. These include Chile, Colombia, South Africa, Mexico, Philippines, Pakistan, Thailand and Nigeria.
 
Australia, New Zealand, the EU and U.S. have been seeking to reduce the flexibilities in the 2008 draft text with the argument that they are not needed because the overall methodology is likely to cut tariffs to a lesser degree than that draft.
 
At the June 16 meeting, China said flexibilities were an essential part of the negotiations and should not be abandoned just because ambition had been reduced in terms of tariff cuts.
 
Argentina also said that tariff peaks, caps and escalation as well as special agricultural safeguards need to be addressed in market access talks because these issues will have an impact on market access.
 
The WTO Secretariat will begin preparing a background paper that will provide simulations of how each tariff cutting methodology would work and could issue it as early as next week, Geneva sources said.
 
John Adank, the chairman of the WTO agriculture committee, said at the June 16 informal negotiating session that discussions on the different methodologies have "not revealed any clear collective preferences." He said members still have "completely different views on market access."
 
As a result, members are "still a long way from where we should be" to meet a July 31 deadline to agree on a work program to conclude the Doha round, he said.
 
Separately, WTO Director-General Roberto Azevedo also cast doubt that members can meet that deadline for a work program at an informal June 17 Heads of Delegation meeting. He said he sees "very little prospect of delivering the substantive, meaningful work program which we have been aiming towards."
 
Negotiations on the Doha modalities have been hindered by the lack of progress on agricultural market access as well as the deadlock on the talks on cutting domestic agriculture subsidies. Progress in the other two areas of the negotiations -- non-agricultural market access and services -- have been linked to the level of ambition in agriculture, which has led to further stymieing.
 
 
No consensus yet on WTO farm tariff cuts
Amiti Sen 
The Hindu BusinessLine
June 19, 2015
 
India wants tiered formula that will entail steeper cuts for higher tariffs

New Delhi, June 18:   
 
No consensus emerged amongst key World Trade Organisation (WTO) members such as India, the US and EU on the formula for reducing tariffs on farm products at the agriculture committee meeting early this week in Geneva.

Deadline may escape

This raises further doubts about the attainability of the July-end deadline for agreeing on a work programme for the next WTO Ministerial meeting in Nairobi in December and sealing a trade deal there.

“Most developing countries including India supported the draft text of 2008 which suggests a tiered formula for tariff reduction. This means that higher tariffs would be subjected to higher cuts while lower tariffs would be subjected to lower cuts,” a Government official told BusinessLine.

EU, US differ

WTO members had informally agreed on most provisions of a draft text on agriculture at a meeting of trade ministers in 2008, but it could not be formally sealed as negotiations on the overall Doha Round trade pact collapsed because of differences in some other areas including industrial goods. The EU, Norway and Canada, however, want to move completely away from the 2008 text. 
 
The EU said that it wanted a tariff reduction formula similar to the one used in the Uruguay Round negotiations (1986-94). In that formula, members would have to bring down average tariffs by a fixed percentage; but they would will have the flexibility to much make lower cuts on individual items as long as higher cuts on other items maintains the average agreed tariff levels.

“What the EU wants will result in perpetuation of the tariff peaks (unusual high tariffs) for certain agriculture products that are prevailing in developed country markets, although their average tariffs are low. This is what India is fighting against,” the official said. 
 
The US said that it preferred a simple average cut, which means that all tariffs would be subject to the same levels of reduction irrespective of whether they were high or low.

India’s representative at the meeting said that those members who were opposing the tiered formula should come out and specify what they had against it.

Indian subsidies

“The tiered formula is the fairest formula. Cuts in the highest tariff bands should be the most,” the official said. 
 
There has also been no consensus yet on the permanent solution to India’s problem of treating its food procurement subsidies.

WTO members are trying to pick up pieces of the collapsed Doha Round (launched in 2001) to see if a less ambitious trade pact could be reached in the Nairobi meet.

“As things stand I see very little prospect of delivering the substantive, meaningful work programme which we have been aiming towards. That is the reality today. The question is whether we can change this situation by the end of July — and that is up to you,” WTO Director-General Roberto Azevedo said addressing all members in a meeting on Wednesday.

 
EGA Negotiators Hope UN Climate Change Talks May Spur Agreement on Trade Benefits
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, June 19, 2015
 
June 18 — Trade negotiators in Geneva hope the United Nations climate change conference later this year will help them attract support for an agreement targeting lower-priced environmental goods.
 
Participants in the 44-country Environmental Goods Agreement (EGA) this week are discussing the elimination of import tariffs on more than 650 environmental products like solar panels, gas and wind turbines, wastewater filters and catalytic converters. Their goal is to identify goods that have a demonstrably positive impact on the environment and to negotiate specific terms to liberalize trade of such goods in order to increase their production, trade and global consumption.
 
Their effort could receive a serious boost if international negotiators with the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCC), scheduled for Nov. 30-Dec. 11, recognize the impact that low-cost renewable energy products can have on a sustainable environment.
 
WTO Chief Backs EGA
 
Earlier in June, World Trade Organization Director-General Roberto Azevedo said the plurilateral EGA negotiations are important because any agreed upon tariff reductions would be applied for all 161 WTO members. That is, the 17 WTO members negotiating the EGA aim to eliminate import tariffs on a most-favored-nation basis, thus applying them to all members.
 
“The idea is to disseminate technology, to make those goods more affordable so countries would pay less for them than they would otherwise and help to create a stimulus for further investment on environmental goods,” Azevedo told reporters at a recent press conference in Geneva.
 
“We are hopeful that if we have successful outcomes in the climate change negotiations that that is something that may inspire the WTO work as well,” he said.
 
650 Products, 10 Categories
 
The European Union said negotiators' views are “increasingly converging” in areas like the renewable energy sector, however some areas “still require further discussion,” according to a recent press statement.
 
Australia, Canada, China, the European Union, Japan, New Zealand, South Korea, Switzerland and the U.S. have introduced their lists of products for inclusion in the agreement.
 
Their product suggestions are focused on 10 primary categories of environmental goods and services: 
•  solid and hazardous waste management;
•  water waste management and water treatment;
•  air pollution control;
•  renewable energy generation;
•  energy efficiency;
•  environmental remediation and clean-up;
•  noise and vibration abetment;
•  environmental monitoring and analysis;
•  environmentally preferable products; and
•  resource efficiency.

Parties to the negotiations include Australia, Canada, China, Costa Rica, the EU, Hong Kong, Iceland, Israel, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Singapore, South Korea, Switzerland, Taiwan, Turkey and the U.S.
 
Year-End Aspirations
 
The EU said it is “committed to achieve substantial outcome in the negotiations by the end of 2015 in order to contribute to the UN climate negotiations in Paris and 10th WTO Ministerial in Nairobi,” scheduled for Dec. 15-18.
 
One EGA observer described the confluence of the WTO's 10th Ministerial Conference (MC10) and the UNFCC Conference of the Parties as a “very important inflection point” for the EGA.
 
“There's hope that the conversation around the UN framework process will elevate the potential benefits of the EGA,” said Jake Colvin, vice president for global trade issues at the National Foreign Trade Council. “At the same time, the EGA is a trade agreement and those negotiations belong in Geneva.”
 
 
(AE) TRADE: Seventh round of talks for green goods agreement 
18 June 2015
Bulletin Quotidien Europe
 
Brussels, 17/06/2015 (Agence Europe) - The seventh round of talks for a plurilateral environmental goods agreement (EGA) is taking place in Geneva from 15-22 June on the sidelines of the WTO, under Australia's presidency.

The talks are being continued on around 650 pre-selected products (or “nominated” products in the negotiation jargon), which are divided into the ten categories that were defined during the first five rounds of talks: - solid and hazardous waste management; - water waste management and water treatment; - air pollution control; - renewable energy generation; - energy efficiency; - environmental remediation and clean-up; - noise and vibration abatement; - environmental monitoring and analysis; - environmentally preferable products; - and resource efficiency.

The objective of the 17 countries taking part in the EGA talks is to agree on a list of environmental products on which to remove customs duties. The negotiators' points of view are increasingly converging in some areas (like that of renewable energy) - although other areas need further discussion, the European Commission states in a note of 16 June. The negotiations are guided by the principle of “environmental credibility” - products are selected taking into account the end for which they are used rather than their production methods. The negotiators also want to ensure that the list of liberalised products will be easy for customs officials and industry to implement.

The EU supports an ambitious agreement that contributes to environmental protection - clean water, air, soil, good waste management and lower greenhouse gas emissions - as well as jobs and growth. Furthermore, the EU is committed to achieving substantial results in the negotiations by the end of 2015, ahead of two crucial deadlines in December - the UN climate conference (COP 21) in Paris, and the tenth WTO ministerial conference in Nairobi.

During this seventh round of EGA talks, the EU wants to promote a high level of ambition for removing duties on environmental technologies. It also wants to promote the idea of an agreement that will later facilitate the liberalisation of services for companies linked to trade in green goods, that will contain a revision mechanism, and that will cover non-tariff barriers - as European Commissioner for Trade Cecilia Malmström stated at a round table discussion on 3 June (see EUROPE 11328 and 11329).

Following a commitment taken by the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum in 2012 to reduce customs duties on 54 green goods, the EU and 13 other WTO countries (Australia, Canada, China, Costa Rica, Hong Kong, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, South Korea, Switzerland, Singapore, Taiwan and the US) launched this negotiation in July 2014. They have since been joined by Iceland, Israel and Turkey. Once a critical mass of WTO member countries is reached in order to obtain an agreement, the advantages of this plurilateral initiative will be applied to all WTO members according to the most favoured nation (MFN) principle. Ideally, the agreement will be part of the WTO package of agreements so that other members of the organisation might open up their own markets. (Emmanuel Hagry)
 
 
Officials fear possible farm subsidy dispute with Brazil
By Bill Tomson 
POLITICO
6/18/15 5:00 AM EDT
 
Rumblings that Brazil could launch a new challenge against U.S. farm subsidies at the World Trade Organization have reached Capitol Hill, highlighting the possibility that the 2014 farm bill’s changes to the commodity supports have made the subsidies more vulnerable to international complaints, lawmakers say.
Brasilia’s latest “saber rattling,” this time against programs popular with corn and soybean growers, means the U.S. must “defend its farmers in a world where trade manipulation and distortions by foreign governments often come at the expense of America’s farmers,” House Agriculture Committee Chairman Mike Conaway said at a hearing earlier this month.
Congress abolished direct payments — subsidies universally considered to be “green box,” or not trade distorting — and replaced them with the Agricultural Risk Coverage and Price Loss Coverage programs in the 2014 farm bill. The move was a win politically given that the subsidy program was coming under increasing fire for doling out billions to farmers whether they needed the money or not.
But the changes, which now give payments to farmers who show a need, means other countries can argue before the WTO that the subsidies affect the amount of crops farmers plant and therefore could affect international markets, farm lobbyists and U.S. government officials say.
“What will always be the challenge is that your global politics and your domestic politics don’t often run in the same direction,” said Veronica Nigh, an economist with the American Farm Bureau Federation. “Globally, you want to be as least trade distorting as possible, and in order to do that it means you give payments no matter … if the need arises. Domestically that doesn’t play well. Domestically, what plays well is you only give the payments when they are needed, which tends to be more trade distorting.”
Despite concern spreading through Capitol Hill and farm lobbyist circles over a potential challenge, Brasilia has not indicated it is considering a dispute, U.S. government officials told POLITICO. There was some expectation that Brazil would bring up the topic in WTO meetings in Geneva this month, but the country has not done so.
Congress tried to protect the new subsides from potential WTO challenges by basing payments on historical or “base” acreage rather than planted acres. But both programs are tied to farm prices, and that could make them targets of international challenges, said farm lobbyists.
The Congressional Research Service also has noted the vulnerability. The new subsidies, it concluded in April, “can distort planting incentives for program crops and generate large payments during extended periods of low prices.”
But National Farmers Union President Roger Johnson disagrees.
“The direct payments are clearly green box,” he said. “The marketing loan programs are clearly amber box. And the ARC and PLC programs are in between those two. And so then the question is, where they [the new subsidies] are, I think that we will argue that they are non-amber box.”
Still, Johnson acknowledged the new programs make an easier target for would-be challengers — although he said it wouldn’t be a wise move to start a dispute because their subsidies are high, as well.
But Brazil, which was just ahead of the U.S. as the largest soybean exporter in the world in the 2013-14 marketing year, previously challenged U.S. farm subsidies at the WTO and won.
Conaway mentioned the U.S. loss to Brazil in a cotton subsidy dispute in his warning during remarks at this month’s hearing about how the new subsidy programs need to be protected. A WTO panel ruled in 2008 that U.S. cotton support programs violated international trade rules, and as a result, Brazil was entitled to impose $800 million in retaliatory measures.
USDA and USTR negotiators managed to prevent the retaliation by paying Brazil $147 million a year until Congress overhauled commodity support in the 2014 farm bill. Brasilia agreed to drop the case after Congress changed cotton support last year, but only after the U.S. paid an additional $300 million.
USDA officials, speaking on background, said that Brazil would find it much harder to prove the new subsidies are trade distorting. It’s not the amount of the subsidies that go to producers that’s important in the eyes of WTO officials, but rather the effects those subsidies, the USDA officials said.
Brazil succeeded in proving to the WTO that the Upland Cotton Domestic User Marketing Certificate Program — commonly known as Step 2 — was market distorting because payments were made specifically to promote the use of U.S. cotton over foreign supplies. But there are no similarly clear international trade rationale when it comes to the new subsidies, the officials said.
 
 
U.S., Others Slam 'Unpredictable' Indian Tariff Regime At WTO Grilling
Inside U.S. Trade - 06/19/2015
 
The United States joined several other countries earlier this month in criticizing India for what they described as a unpredictable tariff regime and for increasing agricultural subsidies they allege distort the global marketplace.
 
At a grilling of New Delhi's trade policies at the World Trade Organization held June 2 and 4, a U.S. trade official said that India often applies tariffs at levels below its bound rate and complained that New Delhi has used this flexibility to raise applied tariffs without advance warning or any consistency.
 
"Where exceedingly high tariffs do not make importation prohibitive, they foster an unpredictable trading environment inasmuch as India can change the applied tariff rates at a moment's notice," U.S. Deputy Permanent Representative to the WTO Christopher Wilson said at the June 2 session of India's trade policy review.
 
Representatives of South Korea, Indonesia and Singapore each echoed similar complaints about the unpredictable Indian tariff structure during the discussion at the WTO.
 
According to a report on India's trade policy prepared by the WTO secretariat, a variety of duties charged at the Indian border and tariff adjustments made through notifications in the Gazette of India create uncertainty for foreign exporters. These come in the form of both countervailing duties and "special additional" duties that are imposed to counterbalance excise and local government taxes charged to Indian products.
 
For instance, India's actual average duty rate for imported agricultural products was 46.1 percent in fiscal year 2014-2015, although the average applied duty rate on the books for the same category is just 36.4 percent, according to the report. Similarly, the actual average duty rate for non-agricultural products is 25.6 percent, despite the average applied tariff being 9.5 percent, the report said.
 
On top of this, India has also increased its applied tariffs on the books as well, according to the report. Since 2010, the average Indian import tariff across all sectors has gone up from 12 percent to 13 percent. That rise was due primarily to increased tariffs on cereals, oilseeds and fats, and sugars and confectionery goods, which rose 10.5 percent, 14.7 percent, and 7.6 percent, respectively, the WTO secretariat's report said.
 
The report also illustrated just how much of a gap between its bound and applied tariffs. The aggregate bound rate for agricultural tariffs is 119.2 percent, while the average effective rate is 36.4, according to the secretariat report. The large gap between the bound and applied rate allow the Indian government to raise applied tariffs in response to international price changes and domestic pressure, it added.
 
The U.S. also took aim at the large subsidies that India provides to its agricultural producers, which include so-called minimum support prices (MSP), preferential interest rates for farmers and explicit food subsidies. In his statement, Wilson said these subsidies lower the cost of production and have the potential to distort the market, especially for key crops like rice and wheat.
 
"These policies distort domestic market prices and incentivize the over-production of rice and wheat. Given the increasing concerns with food price inflation, and the growing needs of India's food processing industries, India's agricultural trade policy continues to do a disservice to consumers and producers in India," he said.
 
An August 2014 report by the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Foreign Agricultural Service (FAS) said that India's domestic subsidies increased $17 billion from $68 billion to $85 billion from FY2009-10 to FY2013-14 and are expected to reach record levels in FY2014-15. Food subsidies continued to grow in FY2014-15 and account for 51 percent of explicit subsidies, the secretariat report says.
 
The MSP for wheat, one of India's most subsidized crops, has increased 40 percent in that timeframe and has caused wheat production, and subsequently government stock, to substantially increase. The government then releases its stocks into the domestic market, driving down prices and making Indian crops more appealing to importers, according to the FAS report. Additionally, the government will export from its stocks "at prices below acquisition and transport costs," the report said.
 
The U.S. also took issue with Indian regulations on financial credit. These include requiring foreign banks with over 20 branches to reserve 40 percent of their credit for selected "priority sectors," which include agriculture, the secretariat report says.
 
Rick Rossow, a senior fellow at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, said that requirement can dissuade U.S. banks from opening branches in India, and that this could be worsened if the provision is extended to banks with fewer than 20 branches which is being discussed by the Indian government.
 
According to Rossow, banks typically choose large urban areas in India to open their first branches and there is not always a high demand for loans by farmers in those areas, making it difficult for new banks to reach the 40 percent reserve credit minimum.
 
Wilson also charged that India also implements sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) measures "that appear to have no scientific or other justifiable basis under the WTO Agreements." Although he did not refer to it, the U.S. challenged India's ban on U.S. poultry, eggs and other farm products, which the WTO's Appellate Body found violated several provisions in the SPS Agreement (Inside U.S. Trade, Jun 12).
 
Several members, including the U.S., European Union and Japan, also called on India to implement the Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA) ahead of the WTO's tenth ministerial in Nairobi in December. "In light of India's very direct role in shaping TFA, we look forward to hearing India's plans to complete timely ratification of the TFA and also to submit its Category A notifications," Wilson said.
 
Those countries also called on India to work to conclude the post-Bali work program for the conclusion of the stalled Doha round. One of the outstanding issues in those talks is to what extent India and China will reduce their agricultural subsidies. The U.S. has said it will not reduce its subsidies programs, a key demand of many developing members, unless China and India agree to cuts as well (Inside U.S. Trade, June 5).
 
But WTO members also offered India some praise. The U.S. commended India for its "encouraging signs" in respect to advancements made to its intellectual property (IP) regime, although it did not elaborate.
 
One U.S. business source suggested this could be referring to messages from the Indian government that it will not issue compulsory licenses for pharmaceutical products except in cases of public health emergencies. The source also said that the formation of an IP working group between the U.S. and India is proof of progress, because for years the Indian government had refused to participate in a dialogue with the U.S. on how to improve its IP policies.
 
 
China tariff level to stay steady after WTO transitional period 
 
BEIJING, June 18 (Xinhua) -- The general level of China's import tariffs will stay steady once the nation's 15-year World Trade Organization (WTO) transitional period ends, the Ministry of Commerce (MOC) said on Thursday.

Since China's WTO entry in 2001, it has taken concrete steps to lower tariffs. By 2010, China's overall tariff level had dropped to 9.8 percent from 15.3 percent, said MOC spokesperson Shen Danyang.

"This means by 2010 China's tariff reduction commitments had been basically fulfilled," Shen said.

The remarks followed reports that once the transitional period ends in July this year import prices will drop drastically.

China's WTO Accession Protocol in 2001 gave China 15 years to gradually open up its economy.

 
WTO Backs Ukraine's Decision Not To Lift Import Surcharge Before 2016 
Ivan Serhiyenko 
18 June 2015
Ukrainian News
 
Members of the World Trade Organization Committee on Balance-of-Payments Restrictions back Ukraine's decision not to lift the import surcharge before late December 2015, the press service for the Ministry of Economic Development and Trade has announced.

The Committee on Balance-of-Payments Restrictions concluded consultations on Ukraine's import surcharge adopted for balance-of-payments reasons on 11 June.

Since 25 February, Ukraine has been imposing a surcharge of 5% on imports of industrial goods and 10% on imports of agricultural goods to deal with "exceptional conditions" affecting its balance of payments. This measure was notified to the WTO in January 2015.

WTO members will meet on 19 June to adopt the report. In July, the WTO General Council will examine the report for potential recommendations.

Although most members considered Ukraine's measure to be in line with WTO rules, one delegation found that it was not in conformity with WTO rules. A report by the Balance-of-Payments Restrictions Committee will reflect the diverging views expressed.

One member said that several factors, including the devaluation of the hryvnia, have already improved Ukraine's balance-of-payments situation and that WTO members should not take measures to protect a particular industry. The member urged Ukraine to remove the measure because it could not be justified under WTO balance-of-payments provisions.

Members strongly encouraged Ukraine to terminate the measure no later than at the end of this year.

In the course of the consultations Ukraine provided clarifications on its economic and balance-of-payments situation.

Ukraine will consider lifting the measure as soon as the level of reserves exceeds the targets under the IMF programme underway, in particular, when Ukraine's international reserves have achieved a level sufficient to cover three months of import in the future period.

As Ukrainian News earlier reported, the Cabinet of Ministers in February endorsed the decision to impose the 5-10% import surcharge in 2015.
 
 
EU calls crisis summit after Athens bailout talks collapse;
Last-ditch effort to prevent default •Discussions at 'highest political level'
By Peter Spiegel in Luxembourg 
19 June 2015
Financial Times
 
The eurozone's leaders were summoned to an emergency summit in Brussels on Monday in a last-ditch effort to prevent Greece from defaulting on its debts and potentially crashing out of the EU's common currency after finance ministers failed to agree a deal to release desperately needed bailout aid.

Donald Tusk, the European Council president who convened the summit of eurozone heads of government, said the finance ministers' failure yesterday evening meant it was now time to "urgently discuss" the Greek crisis "at the highest political level".

Alexis Tsipras, the Greek prime minister, has long sought to negotiate a deal among his fellow leaders. Some eurozone officials said they remained hopeful Mr Tsipras - who has privately told EU leaders he wants to reach a deal - will agree to creditors' terms on Monday despite four months of resistance.

But after a four-hour meeting of eurozone finance ministers in Luxembourg, Greece's creditors expressed their exasperation in unusually sharp terms and said the two sides were no closer to an agreement. They insisted Athens must become more serious in presenting a credible reform plan to gain access to the €7.2bn in aid remaining in the bailout programme.

"The key emergency is to restore a dialogue with adults in the room," said Christine Lagarde, the International Monetary Fund chief, who attended the session. Although Yanis Varoufakis, the Greek finance minister, presented a new proposal for a "deficit brake" to cut spending automatically across the board if the government's budget went into red, eurozone officials said the plan mimicked existing EU rules and was dismissed by those in the room.

Instead, fellow ministers vented their frustration at Mr Varoufakis for the continuing stalemate. According to two officials present, Benoit Coeuré, the European Central Bank board member responsible for crisis issues, warned that the uncertainty over Greece's future had become so severe that he was unsure Greek banks would be able to open on Monday.

Late yesterday the Greek central bank requested an unscheduled conference call of the ECB governing council today to obtain approval for additional emergency loans to keep Greek banks afloat.

Jeroen Dijsselbloem, the Dutch finance minister who chaired the ministerial gathering in Luxembourg, for the first time acknowledged that time had run out to disburse rescue funds to Athens before the bailout programme expires at the end of the month.

Instead, Mr Dijsselbloem said, any agreement would now need an extension of the programme into July - the third extension in six months - heightening the risk that Greece will default on a €1.5bn loan repayment due to the IMF in less than two weeks.
 
 
Caribbean gathering focuses on joint approach to boost growth 
 
KINGSTON, June 17 (Xinhua) -- Over 200 officials, business leaders, regional and international stakeholders have gathered in St. Lucia for a two-day forum to discuss ways of boosting growth in the Caribbean.

The 3rd Caribbean Growth Forum, which ended on Wednesday, was organized by the World Bank (WB) in collaboration with the Inter-American Development Bank and the Caribbean Development Bank, among other financial institutions.

It aimed to offer the Caribbean countries an opportunity to learn from others' experience, to propose new approaches to ignite growth, and to promote innovation and entrepreneurship throughout the region, according to the organizer.

St. Lucia's Prime Minister Kenny Anthony, addressing the opening ceremony, described the economic development of the Caribbean as "anemic," pointing to the average growth of just 1.1 percent from 2008 to 2013.

Anthony urged his regional counterparts to make joint efforts to reach consensus and find solutions at the regional level.

"These economies may be broken, but I believe we can pick up the pieces. I believe that our historical task is to conceptualize, shape and define an economic model that meets the times and our needs," he said.

The prime minister's comment was echoed by Jorge Familiar, vice president of the World Bank for Latin America and the Caribbean, who stressed that in spite of great diversity, the Caribbean countries are facing many common challenges which require joint efforts.

"The Caribbean region is very diverse in its rich and varied cultures, languages, geographical settings," he said. "Yet we are here together because despite these differences, many of these small economies are facing common challenges."

Familiar found that many Caribbean economies have been trapped in a "vicious cycle of low growth, high debt level and limited fiscal space" due to their small scale, poor productivity and an oil-dependent energy matrix.

"This combination makes it difficult for a country to build enough buffers that can be used in bad times. This decreases their capacity to face external shocks," he said.

In addition, the senior WB official said that the region is exposed to recurrent natural disasters, leaving small economies more vulnerable, as five out of the ten most disaster-prone countries in the world are Caribbean.

"Effectively tackling these issues requires efforts at the regional level, since effective solutions call for either risk pooling or economies of scale," he said.

Familiar said small economies have to choose what kind of industries to rely on to spur growth, calling on the Caribbean countries to take more proactive approaches when drafting growth strategies.

The Caribbean Growth Forum mechanism, launched in 2013, has led to the implementation of over 100 reforms around the region in improving business climate, boosting skills and productivity, and enhancing connectivity and logistics, according to the World Bank.
 
 
Trade disputes: Torture by tariff 
20 June 2015
The Economist
 
Retaliating against unfair trade practices is a calculation in cruelty

SEVEN long years ago Congress passed a law requiring beef and pork sold in America to be labelled with its country of origin. Canada and Mexico, which export lots of meat to America, denounced the measure as protectionism and complained to the World Trade Organisation (WTO). Last month it ruled in their favour, prompting Canada to ask the WTO's permission this week to impose retaliatory tariffs of $2.5 billion on American exports. Mexico plans to submit a similar request soon.

The list of imports Canada intends to hit with a tariff of 100% of their value includes live cows and pigs, as well as fresh and frozen beef and pork. But it is not pure tit-for-tat: cherries, mattresses, wooden office furniture, wine and just about anything containing chocolate also face punitive levies. As one unhappy representative of America's wine industry told a congressional committee, the list was designed to "affect every state in the country, potentially delivering a paralysing blow to US winemakers, other farm and food economies and rural households".

That is the point. Countries in the situation of Canada and Mexico deliberately select a wide range of targets from a variety of states. That, they believe, will maximise the number of congressmen being importuned by victims to repeal the offending law, says John Weekes, a former Canadian ambassador to the WTO who now practises trade law. Canada is America's biggest trade partner in general and the main foreign market for its wine.

Bad memories still linger among America's vintners and pig farmers of the devastation caused when Mexico, in retaliation for American rules that discriminated against Mexican trucking firms, imposed $2.4 billion-worth of tariffs on 89 products from 40 states in 2009. They and other exporters fret that importers in Canada and Mexico are already looking for alternative suppliers. Mexico and Canada are the second- and third-biggest export markets for American pork. The industry cannot afford to have those sales disrupted, says John Weber of the National Pork Producers Council, an industry group. It took seven years for American wine exports to Mexico to return to the level of 2007 ($24m) after they were hobbled in the trucking row and another dispute.

The level of the tariff is another important consideration. Trade officials are trying to create "screaming hostages", who are injured enough to complain vociferously to politicians, but not so badly that they go out of business. "Dead hostages", after all, do not jump up and down. Mr Weekes assumes that the 100% tariff will wipe out America's pork exports to Canada, but that farmers will survive thanks to sales to other countries. Another trick, invented by America but used by Mexico in the trucking dispute, is to change the products subject to retaliatory tariffs from time to time. This "carousel" creates far more screaming hostages.

Sometimes, the threat of retaliation is enough to resolve a dispute. That may yet happen this time: there is a bill before Congress to rescind the labelling rules. Canada also has an incentive to compromise, even though Gerry Ritz, its agriculture minister, insists it "will never be the first to blink." Both he and his American counterpart know that some of the loudest screams will soon be coming from Canadian consumers forced to pay higher prices for American goods.
END
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.