India, China, Indonesia want cap on foodgrain procurement removed
US strengthens trade engagement with India
Obama's visit has put ties on fast track
Obama cranks up trade pitch to Dems
Trade talks are gaining momentum
TPP talks: Japan ready to meet US halfway on beef and pork tariffs
Japan mulls concession on rice in TPP negotiations
EU and US 'very close' to joint text on regulatory barriers
Expert urges U.S.-Cuba trade and investment deals
China’s Self-Destructive Tech Crackdown
 
 
 
India, China, Indonesia want cap on foodgrain procurement removed
31 January 2015
Business Line (The Hindu)
 
WTO kicks off dedicated session on public stockholding and food security. Maintaining its hard posture on food security at the World Trade Organisation (WTO), India has said that Government procurement of foodgrain at non-market prices should be allowed without limits.
 
China, Indonesia and Turkey were some of the other members of the G-33 alliance of developing countries in agriculture which pushed for exclusion of support prices for foodgrain from the list of trade-distorting subsidies.
 
Difference of opinion
 
The proposal, discussed in the first session on finding a “permanent solution” to India’s (as well as some other developing countries) problem of ensuring food security without bending global trade rules was, however, opposed by some such as the US, the EU, Pakistan, Australia, Japan, Argentina and Paraguay.
 
“While India and some other G-33 members argued that unlimited Government food procurement was necessary to ensure food security to poor, those objecting said that without adequate disciplines it could lead to unintended consequences such as hurting the food security of other countries,” a Government official told BusinessLine.
 
WTO members are supposed to find a “permanent solution” by the end of this year as per the agreement reached in the Bali Ministerial meeting in December 2013, which was later re-negotiated by India.
 
New Delhi, meanwhile, has got a short-term solution as part of the Bali deal where members have agreed not to take legal action against it in case subsidy cap is breached. Since the reprieve granted to India is subject to a number of conditions including sharing of numerous data and details, India wants a simple ‘permanent solution’ to the problem as soon as possible.
 
“India and the G-33 want that on account of public stockholding, whatever amounts of subsidy go beyond de minimis (the subsidy cap fixed at 10 per cent of total production), it should be excluded from the aggregate measurement of support (actionable subsidies),” the official said.
 
The G-33 proposal, made in 2012, also talks about alternative solutions which includes calculating procurement subsidies by changing the base year from 1986-88 and making it more recent, or by indexing it to inflation.
 
“We are flexible in our approach. We don’t intend to just stick to one proposal, but are ready to discuss the alternatives suggested in G-33’s earlier proposal,” the official said.
 
India runs the risk of breaching the agriculture subsidy cap, at least in rice, in a few years’ time once it fully implements its food security legislation.
 
In Bali, it agreed to give its approval to an agreement on trade facilitation that places obligations on all members to upgrade their customs infrastructure only on the condition that the rules on food procurement subsidies are changed.
 
 
 
US strengthens trade engagement with India
Business Standard
31 January 2015
 
The US says it strengthened engagement with India through the US-India Trade Policy Forum and secured the historic Trade Facilitation Agreement at the WTO after overcoming an impasse with India.
 
"In November, the United States with India and other WTO Members overcame an impasse in the Bali Package to allow the full implementation of a Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA)," the US Trade Representative said in its yearend review.
 
"The TFA is the first multilateral trade agreement in the WTO's 20 year history, and will reform global customs practices and substantially reduce the costs and time associated with goods crossing borders," it noted
 
"The efficiencies generated by customs reforms in the TFA will significantly reduce the costs of trading for WTO Members, developed and developing countries alike," the review said
 
Some estimates, it noted, suggest the global economic value of the new WTO deal could be worth $1 trillion.
 
The US had also strengthened engagement with India through the TPF, the premier bilateral forum for discussion and resolution of US and India trade and investment issues.
 
In November, USTR Michael Froman led a US delegation to the TPF in Mumbai, the review noted.
 
Earlier, in February, the US challenged before WTO India's domestic content requirements for it National Solar Mission affecting US solar product exports.
 
In addition to the WTO consultations, the US has engaged India on its concerns regarding the NSM over the last three years, including in bilateral fora such as the TPF and the US-India Energy Dialogue, and at the WTO in various committees, it said.
 
The review said it had also prevailed on numerous Indian challenges to US countervailing duties to address what it called India's "unfair steel subsidies."
 
In December, the WTO Appellate Body rejected the vast majority of India's appeals seeking additional findings on US regulations and determinations, it said.
 
The US had in October also prevailed against Indian ban on US agriculture products - such as poultry meat, eggs, and live pigs - allegedly to protect against avian influenza.
 
The US poultry industry, which directly employs over 350,000 workers and consists of nearly 50,000 family farms - had been particularly affected by India's restrictions, the review said.
 
The WTO has agreed the panel report will be adopted or appealed in January 2015.
 
The review noted USTR had concluded an Out-of-Cycle Review of India to evaluate progress toward achieving meaningful, sustained and effective engagement on IP issues.
 
India, it said had made useful commitments, including to institutionalise high-level engagement on IP issues, to pursue a specific work programme and to deepen cooperation and information exchange with the US on IP-related issues under the TPF.
 
The US, the review said, looks forward to the 2015 Special 301 Review process, which will provide the next formal opportunity for a thorough review of India's environment for IP protection and enforcement.
 
 
 
Obama's visit has put ties on fast track
30 January 2015
MintAsia
 
It does not help India to be distant or too close to the US. In either case, India's interests are not served. Our challenge is to cooperate to mutual advantage in the areas of high technology, science, health, education, energy, agriculture, trade, investment and so on, where the US can offer us much. At the same time, our strategic partnership should not become a point of pressure to support those US policies that are contrary to our interests, whether in West Asia, towards Iran and, now Russia, or on issues of climate change or World Trade Organization (WTO) negotiations. 
 
The success of our US policy will depend on how we can balance these two factors. Prime Minister Narendra Modi has taken the initiative to give a decisive boost to India-US relations by inviting President Barak Obama to Republic Day celebrations. The visit has been a great success for Modi, whose personal rapport with Obama has been evident from physical embraces and first-name familiarity.
 
His demeanour has been that of a confident and self-assured leader dealing with the leader of the world's foremost power as an equal. Beyond building his own personal stature by his style of engagement, Modi builds his country's stature, too, as a rising India infused with a new dynamism. The breakthrough understandings reached on the liability issues and administrative arrangements for operationalizing the nuclear deal is the biggest takeaway from the visit. 
 
Whatever the nature of the compromise reached, Modi has done well to shift the issue from the government to the commercial arena. The larger issue of the technical and commercial viability of US-supplied nuclear plants remains. The defence cooperation framework agreement has been renewed for another 10 years. Expectations of some significant announcements under the defence technology and trade initiative have been belied, as four pathfinder projects involving low-complexity technologies have been identified for in principle co-development and co-production. The importance of this as the first step need not be minimized, but caution is the watch word, clearly. 
 
The joint statement speaks of making the US-India partnership in the area of counter-terrorism a defining relationship for the 21st century. This suggests an almost complete understanding of the challenges that both countries face and the strategies to tackle them. That the US has sanctioned three D-company affiliates is satisfying, but doubts remain whether the US would fully share actionable intelligence on terrorist threats to India from Pakistani soil because the logical thing then would be to ask the Pakistani side to neutralize such threats from the root. What is less satisfying is the exclusion of the Taliban from the list of entities to target, which suggests India and the US are not on the same page on this group and its links to Pakistan's ambitions in Afghanistan at India's cost. 
 
On trade, investment and intellectual property rights (IPR) issues, our engagement with the US will continue. The US wants a high-standard bilateral investment treaty, but this involves many policy, legal and regulatory issues. In a tentatively worded text, it has been agreed that the two sides will assess the prospects for moving forward. The hazy language on the totalization agreement offers little promise for us. On IPRs, negotiations will continue in 2015 under the high-level working group. 
 
The higher education agenda finds only passing mention in the joint statement. Difficulties in accessing certain dual-use technology from the US have been noted. Nothing of substance has been said on the controversial Internet governance issue. On climate change, we have agreed to work together during the year to achieve a successful agreement at the UN conference in Paris. In the joint press conference, Modi denied the US-China agreement put any pressure on India, but accepted that all countries were under pressure for the sake of posterity. This clever line gives him freedom to calibrate his cooperation with the US, even as he steers the US towards greater participation in our solar energy programme. 
 
On hydrofluorocarbons, we seem to moving towards the US position. The separate document on the US-India joint strategic vision for the Asia-Pacific and Indian Ocean region is most significant geopolitically. We clearly intend to work closely with the US and other potential partners in the region, such as Japan and Australia, to counter China's assertiveness in Asia-Pacific, and, by extension, in the Indian Ocean. This is a big change from our past deference to Chinese sensitivities. 
 
This document amplifies the joint statement's affirmation that India's Act East policy and US rebalance towards Asia provide opportunities for both countries and other Asia-Pacific countries to work closely to strengthen regional ties. On the whole, Obama's visit has put India-US relations on the fast track. Now, any derailing has to be avoided.
 
 
 
Obama cranks up trade pitch to Dems
Politico 
31 January 2015
 
President Barack Obama, Vice President Joe Biden and a phalanx of top administration officials are making the sales pitch to congressional Democrats for fast-track authority on trade deals.

Obama and Biden each made that plea during their appearances at this week’s House Democratic retreat in Philadelphia, which ended Friday. Top White House economic adviser Jeffrey Zients, Treasury Secretary Jack Lew, Commerce Secretary Penny Pritzker and Labor Secretary Tom Perez have also joined the effort to sway House and Senate Democrats, as well as some skeptical Republicans.
 
The administration hopes to secure the 30 to 50 Democratic yes votes in the House that might be needed to push a trade bill over the top.

But sources have said the White House is still only informally counting votes, and Obama was careful to soften the hard sell during a closed-door meeting with lawmakers here Thursday night. He said the White House “will make [a] substantive case” for a trade deal but won’t “go after folks” or make the vote a “litmus test” for Democrats, according to sources in the room.

“We share same values and are looking out for the same people,” Obama said in response to a question from Washington Rep. Derek Kilmer, who said he was still undecided despite his state’s dependence on trade.

Obama also pledged to work with House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.) so that members have better access to the “substance of the agreements,” sources said. Biden also gave a forceful pitch for trade during his closed-door appearance at the retreat Friday.

The legislation also has support from the New Democrat Coalition, an alliance of pro-business lawmakers. The group estimates that roughly 30 of its members will ultimately support the fast-track measure, according to a private memo obtained by POLITICO.

The coalition isn’t creating a whip team to lobby on-the-fence Democrats, though the group’s chairman, Wisconsin Rep. Ron Kind, said he’s been discussing the merits of trade one-on-one. But a memo circulated by coalition staffers said the group has been urging freshman lawmakers to hold off on signing anti-trade letters from Democratic Reps. Ruben Gallego of Arizona and Rosa DeLauro of Connecticut, two leading critics of the proposed deals.

“Working with the White House and business community, we were able to keep about half of the Dems (including 4 out of the 5 New Dems) to commit to stay off the letter and give the President a chance to make his case,” the memo said.

The “trade promotion authority” legislation would expedite the passage of trade deals by letting Obama submit the final agreements to Congress for an up-or-down vote, without amendments. That authority is viewed as key to wrapping up two giant agreements — the Trans-Pacific Partnership with 11 Asia-Pacific countries, and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership with the 28 nations of the European Union — because other nations would have the assurance that Congress won’t undo any concessions included in the deals.

The trade pacts have drawn opposition from liberal groups concerned about their effect on U.S. jobs and wages, labor rights, the environment and intellectual property protections. And House Democrats are deeply divided on giving Obama — or any president — authority to negotiate trade packages without letting Congress amend the terms.

Any legislation from Senate Finance Chairman Orrin Hatch (R-Utah), top committee Democrat Ron Wyden of Oregon, and House Ways and Means Chairman Paul Ryan (R-Wis.) will probably be unveiled in late February. The Finance Committee is expected to first.

Hatch said Friday that the fast-track legislation is the country’s “most important tool to open markets.”
 
“The U.S. needs to lead on trade,” Hatch said in a speech to the American Enterprise Institute. “We need to establish rules that hold other nations accountable for their unfair trade practices. And we need to tear down barriers that block our goods from foreign markets. We can only do that if we renew TPA and do so soon.”

Both opponents and supporters base much of their case on potential growth for the middle class — an issue central to the House Democrats’ de-facto messaging strategy. Supporters argue that the middle class can’t expand without the economic growth that comes with free trade, while opponents say wages will drop and jobs go overseas if trade deals don’t offer strong protections.

“I’m not saying trade is the middle-class issue, but it’s one of the middle-class issues,” said Michigan Rep. Sander Levin, the top Democrat on Ways and Means. He added that members showed “a lot of interest” in fast-track authority during the retreat, following months of discussions in Washington. “This is now the main thing going on,” he said.

The debate over trade started early during the retreat. AFL-CIO President Richard Trumka railed against the proposals during his headline speech to members Wednesday, and lawmakers held an early-morning panel with DeLauro on trade Thursday.

“[The trade proposals are] nothing but a license to continue the same failed trade policies that have emptied America of jobs,” Trumka said, according to sources in the room. “Trade can raise working people up or it can drive us down.”

DeLauro’s closed-door panel brought nearly 30 members to debate currency, labor and environmental concerns. A source said the bulk of the lawmakers who spoke expressed support for the administration’s trade proposal.

And lawmakers will be hearing more soon. Kind said Lew will head to the Capitol in coming weeks to brief members on trade, following the nearly two years of meetings they’ve had with Pritzker, Perez and U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman.

Some lawmakers have complained that the administration’s outreach efforts have been superficial. Levin said administration officials have stopped congressional staff from taking notes on the trade proposals, and lawmakers have been barred from taking paperwork from briefings. Some members also criticized an administration email blast that went out after Obama’s State of the Union address, saying it was too low-key for such a controversial policy.

“I wanted to be sure you … saw the latest from the White House — both the State of the Union excerpt and the fact sheet — on the importance of trade agreements to our global competitiveness and economic growth,” an administration official wrote in the email, which was shared with POLITICO. “The President sees these agreements as essential for the U.S. — not China — to set the rules of the road and lead the way by establishing strong environmental, workplace and labor standards.”

Kind said Democrats have to make the case that without a strong U.S. presence in the global trade markets, the world economy could turn toward nations like China.

“We only have one of three options,” Kind said. “Continue the status quo; have a global trading world with a China rule; or us being at the head of the table. That’s all we got.”

He added that no country is willing to risk signing onto a trade deal that is subject to changes from 435 “independent contractors,” and that it’s in Democrats’ interest to keep Republicans from playing politics with Obama-forged deals.

“You can complain about TPA all you want, but if you allow a Republican Congress to amend and change … you’re going to end up in a worse position than what you started with,” Kind said. “It doesn’t make sense for a Democratic member to oppose it.”

But another Democratic lawmaker who is widely seen as pro-business said he
hasn’t been convinced either way on trade. The member said it is hard to stomach accepting trade deals that might benefit large corporations that oppose Democratic priorities.

“I try to keep an open mind, at least giving them a chance,” the lawmaker said. “[I’ve had] a few meetings at the White House, and labor has put a lot of pressure on folks, but the other part of it is, it’s tough when you have the Chamber of Commerce and these big companies who are perceived to be benefiting from it who won’t even raise the minimum wage.”

The Democratic caucus’ anti-trade leaders are searching for moderates to peel away from the White House. DeLauro approaches New Democrat Coalition members each day Congress is in session to ask where they stand and lobby against the deals, multiple members said.

DeLauro said the central argument against the deals is that giving U.S. employers easier access to cheap labor markets could drive down American wages. Speaking after her briefing during the retreat, DeLauro said the party’s focus on “middle-class economics” for the 2016 elections will make it hard to sell lawmakers on accepting trade packages that could hurt U.S. workers.

“Congress can no longer give this administration — or any future one — the benefit of the doubt, especially given the scope of this particular deal,” DeLauro said in a statement with Rep. Louise Slaughter (D-N.Y.) earlier this week. “America’s trade policy has not improved the lives of the middle class and leading economists overwhelmingly agree that trade has contributed to the rise in income inequality.”

House Democratic leaders say they’re keeping an opening mind but that lawmakers will pay close attention to how wage protections are included in any proposal.

Pelosi said Friday that she is searching for a “path to yes.”

“I don’t know if that possible,” she said. “[But] I think people are open to listening because we are a party of trade and we understand the global economy. … We will make a judgment based on what impact it has on wages.”

The anti-trade caucus is bolstered by conservative Republicans who have no intention of handing Obama even more executive authority. Twenty-two Republicans previously signed a letter circulated by Rep. Walter Jones (R-N.C.) that decried the fast-track option as unconstitutional, and while some have since left Congress, the number of GOP lawmakers skeptical of White House overreach has grown. Many Republican lawmakers have said they first need to see the proposal from the Senate and House committees.
 

 
Trade talks are gaining momentum
30 January 2015
The Washington Post
 
As the Obama administration pushes toward a major new trade agreement in Asia this spring, it is developing two unlikely allies: Chinese officials abroad, who are signaling that they want in, and Republicans in Congress, who appear willing to support what would be one of President Obama's biggest successes.
 
The Trans-Pacific Partnership, or TPP, is down to its final haggling. This week, negotiators from 12 countries met in New York to resolve the remaining issues, which have been narrowed from more than 2,000. The toughest matters left, ironically, are agricultural disputes with Japan and dairy and poultry disagreements with Canada.
 
U.S. negotiators hope they can close out the TPP deal by the summer and get it approved by Congress - thanks to Republican votes promised by House Speaker John Boehner (Ohio) and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (Ky.). Republicans like trade even more than they dislike Obama, evidently. It's a jobs bill that doesn't cost any money. The Peterson Institute for International Economics estimates that the market- opening features of the TPP will boost U.S. exports by about $123 billion annually by 2025 and add 600,000 jobs.
 
What's fascinating is that China seems to be catching TPP fever as the trade negotiations accelerate. Four years ago, when the talks began, Beijing was dismissive. Chinese leaders argued that the recession showed that the United States wasn't competent to lead the global economy, and that the TPP was just another scheme to encircle and contain the fast-growing Chinese economy.
 
You don't hear that kind of carping now. Chinese Prime Minister Li Keqiang sounded supportive last week at the World Economic Forum in Davos, where he said: "We need to act along the trend of our time, firmly advance free trade, resolutely reject protectionism, and actively expand regional economic cooperation."
 
Chinese officials go further in private, recent conversations in Beijing and Washington. They have said that China wants to negotiate membership in the TPP and, indeed, would like to join in the process of setting its rules. The Chinese are more cautious in talking with U.S. trade officials, asking instead how the process might work. But the message is clear: China sees this train leaving the station and wants eventually to be onboard.
 
U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman is said to have cautioned the Chinese that it will take a while for their economy to match the openness that the TPP would require. But in the meantime, the United States and China are negotiating a bilateral investment treaty that front-loads some of the toughest TPP issues. Chinese President Xi Jinping personally decided last year to embrace the investment treaty. The two sides are bargaining now over the "negative list" of industries or products that would be excluded from the pact; everything else would be included - a big jump for Beijing.
 
The Chinese seem to realize that they have to live in a TPP world. Other Asian countries that stayed out of this round, such as South Korea and the Philippines, have signaled that they want in. As a trading nation, China either joins its neighbors or risks losing a share of the expanding global market.
 
"The current situation for China is unsustainable," argues retired Adm. Dennis Blair, a former director of national intelligence who's now head of the Sasakawa Peace Foundation USA. He contends that unless China joins the U.S.- Japan led TPP consensus, accepting rules that will limit theft of intellectual property, its trade relations "will drop back to a conventional, transactional basis, without an overarching framework."
 
The TPP demonstration effect isn't lost on Europe, either. After dithering for much of last year about a similar agreement known in trade-speak as the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, or TTIP, Europeans have held three negotiating meetings since November and will launch another round next week.
 
For a battered Europe veering back toward recession, the trade agreement offers the potential for export-led growth, especially as the euro sinks against the dollar and European exports become cheaper in world markets. The transatlantic solidarity represented by the TTIP is more welcome now, too, as Europeans and Americans contemplate the reckless behavior of Russian President Vladimir Putin. The moment when Europeans seemed ready to walk away from TTIP because of a snit over National Security Agency surveillance seems long past.
 
What's driving these political- economic realignments? Simply put, the U.S. economy is stronger than analysts expected a year ago, the Chinese and European economies are weaker and the Russian economy is much weaker. Even Republicans in Congress seem ready to let Obama harvest the fruits.
 
 
 
 
TPP talks: Japan ready to meet US halfway on beef and pork tariffs
30 January 2015
Nikkei Report
 
Japan and the U.S. are inching closer to an agreement on import tariffs on U.S. agricultural products as part of the ongoing Trans-Pacific Partnership free trade talks.
 
An agreement between the two countries is crucial as failure to strike a deal among the member countries by spring could derail the entire process. Washington has been calling for an elimination of all tariffs.
 
Japan has been trying to buy as much time as it can for lowering tariffs on agricultural products. In Japan, agricultural production has been declining in value over the years due in large part to an aging farming population and an increase in abandoned farmland. As such, concern has been growing over the impact on the domestic agricultural industry if Japan were to allow a flood of cheaper foreign imports in a short period of time.
 
Given the concerns, the Japanese government wants to be able to lower its tariffs on key agricultural products, such as beef and pork, over 10 years. The government hopes that will allow it to respond to domestic opposition and ease concerns among agricultural producers.
 
The Japanese government is willing to make significant cuts to beef and pork. It is widely expected to cut the 38.5% tariff on U.S. beef to about 10% over time and lower the 482 yen ($4.04) per kilogram levy on cheap U.S. pork to under 100 yen.
 
The U.S. National Pork Producers Council said "significant progress has been made with respect to Japan's market access offer on pork."
 
Import influx concerns
 
Japan and the U.S. will now shift their focus to conditions for safeguard measures that are designed to raise tariffs if imports increase sharply. Japan wants to make it easier to implement safeguard measures so that it can prevent a large influx of U.S. agricultural imports. However, the U.S. wants to raise the bar for applying safeguard measures in the hope of boosting its imports.
 
For Japan, the biggest hurdle is its negotiations with the U.S. But to conclude the overall TPP free trade talks, Tokyo needs to speed up and wrap up negotiations with other TPP member nations as well.
 
On Sunday, chief negotiators of the 12 TPP member countries met in New York to resolve pending issues. Japan's TPP chief negotiator Koji Tsuruoka is holding bilateral talks with his counterparts, particularly those from Canada and New Zealand. Negotiations with these two countries have been moving rather slowly. On Wednesday, Hiroshi Oe, Japan's acting chief negotiator in charge of tariff negotiations arrived in New York for talks with officials from TPP countries with which Japan is making slow progress.
 
So far, Japan has more or less reached agreements on import tariffs with both Brunei and Singapore. Plywood and other timber products have been a contentious issue between Japan and Malaysia, but the two countries are expected to reach a deal soon. With Australia, Japan is waiting to see how Canberra is going to coordinate domestic opinions. Some progress has been made on negotiations with Mexico, Chile and Peru. Japan has concluded economic partnership agreements with these countries and so the government has been making smooth headway in TPP negotiations with them.
 
More hurdles
 
Japan has suffered a setback in talks with Vietnam, New Zealand and Canada. Even though its EPA with Vietnam is already in force, the two countries have yet to hammer out an agreement on rice and automobile import tariffs. However, a Japanese government official close to the negotiation said "we will make a significant progress in this round."
 
New Zealand has made a strong case about eliminating Japan's import tariffs. The country is calling on Japan to open its market to cheese and other dairy products from New Zealand. Japan intends to apply lower-tariff or tax-free status to such products, but the two countries have yet to resolve their differences.
 
Dairy products have also been a sticking point in Japan's negotiations with Canada. Canada has had delays in talks not just with Japan but with other TPP member nations. Observers are raising concerns over Canada's possible withdrawal from TPP talks, which could threaten to derail the negotiation overall.
 
 
 
Japan mulls concession on rice in TPP negotiations
30 January 2015
Kyodo News
 
Japan has offered to import more rice from the United States in response to strident calls from Washington to make a concession toward concluding Pacific Rim free trade talks, negotiation sources said Friday.
 
During bilateral talks, Japan has proposed a plan to increase annual rice imports from the United States by some 50,000 tons as part of its quota for an emergency stockpile under the envisioned Trans-Pacific Partnership initiative, the sources said.
 
Japan has sought to protect its key farm products -- rice, wheat, beef and pork, dairy and sugar -- as exceptions to the tariff-abolishing TPP. As rice, the staple part of the Japanese diet, is especially regarded as off-limits, agricultural lobbyists and lawmakers with close ties to farmers could react sharply against Tokyo's plan.
 
Japan and the United States have been at odds over the issue of market access for farm products and autos, which have held up the broad 12-country negotiations. But trade officials from both sides recently said gaps are narrowing. U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman has expressed hope to conclude a deal in a "small number of months."
 
Japan currently imposes 778 percent tariffs on rice to protect rice farmers, but it imports around 770,000 tons of rice annually without tariffs under so-called "minimum access" quotas. Some 360,000 tons of that is from the United States.
 
In the Uruguay Round of global trade talks under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade framework through 1994, Japan accepted the minimum access quotas for rice in exchange for receiving preferential treatment on rice tariffication, although consumption was already dwindling. Before that, Japan had imported little rice from abroad.
 
The decision was not well received by Japanese rice farmers and the latest plan for further expanding rice imports under the TPP could also come under fire, trade observers say.
 
 
 
EU and US 'very close' to joint text on regulatory barriers
30 January 2015
Deutsche Presse-Agentur   
 
EU officials have ambitious goals for a proposed free trade deal with the US although progress in the talks has been slow. Now the two sides may be close to a text on overarching regulatory issues, according to a Commission source.
 
European Commission negotiators are hoping for rapid progress with US officials next week on regulatory issues in the controversial transatlantic free trade agreement, according to an EU source. "We are very close to the point when we will have a consolidated text on all three pillars of the horizontal regulatory barriers," the Commission official close to the talks said, adding that such a consolidated text, meaning a joint EU-US proposal, could be ready shortly after the negotiation round.
 
These so-called horizontal issues, which cut across economic sectors, include technical barriers to trade (TBT), sanitary and phytosanitary issues (SPS, concerning animals and plants), and a chapter on regulatory cooperation. The latter would aim to promote continuous talks between EU and US regulators and convergence of laws affecting trade after the agreement is in place. "This is a European proposal on which the United States has not formally reacted," the source added on the regulatory cooperation idea.
 
The possible agreement, known as the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP), would create the largest free trade area in the world and eliminate tariffs and market access barriers in services and public procurement.
 
Specific sectors will also be discussed, with hopes that mutual recognition of legislation, harmonisation of rules or other measures could help companies do business more easily on both sides of the Atlantic. "Nearly all the topics are going to be discussed," the official said.
 
Other topics that will be discussed include cars, machinery and engineering, pharmaceuticals, medical devices, cosmetics, information and communication technologies, pesticides, geographical indicators for agriculture, energy and public procurement.
 
The round will not include discussion of competition issues or investment protection, which has been put on hold by the Commission for internal discussions due to public opposition.
 
Differences persist amid hopes of restart
 
The TTIP talks, to take place between February 2 and 6 in Brussels, will be the eighth round and the first since the new Commission under President Jean-Claude Juncker took office in November. EU officials are hoping for a "fresh start" in the negotiations as they also follow the US congressional elections which saw the conservative Republicans gain a majority in the Senate and tighten their hold of the House of Representatives. There had been lackluster progress in the talks as each side refused to budge on a number of red lines.
 
The Republicans have been positive on completing a trade deal, but are opposed to the EU's geographical indicators for agricultural products, which they consider discriminatory, and strongly support controversial provisions for Investor-State Dispute Settlement (ISDS), which would allow foreign companies to sue governments before transnational courts for alleged violation of investor rights.
 
The Commission for its part is still pushing the US to commit to give up protectionist measures such as limiting public procurement to native companies through 'Buy America' legislation and the 1920 Jones Act's requirement that US maritime shipping be done by American-made boats. "For the time being the United States has made very clear that it is a huge political sensitivity attached to the Jones Act," the EU source said. He added that public procurement was "one of our top market access priorities" and "the most sensitive issue in the United States."
 
EU officials are also pushing for a specific chapter on energy and raw materials, aimed in particular at liberalising US oil and gas exports to EU. "The United States is not yet convinced on that," the Commission official said.
 
Follow-up rounds have yet to be scheduled, although the official suggested the next could take place in the US in April and the following one in Brussels before the summer break.
 
 
 
Expert urges U.S.-Cuba trade and investment deals
30 January 2015
Xinhua News Agency
 
The United States should strike trade and investment deals with Cuba as the two countries are moving toward the normalization of relations, a leading U.S. trade expert said Thursday.
 
"I think the U.S. strategic goal should be trade and investment agreements with Cuba," said Gary Clyde Hufbauer at a panel discussion about next steps in U.S.-Cuba economic relations.
 
"Very tough and very prolonged sanctions do not guarantee political change," Hufbauer said when noting the key lessons learned from U.S. embargo against Cuba for over 50 years. "But with carefully designed carrots, we may slowly nudge Cuba ... step-by-step toward a market economy."
 
While Cuba is "not nearly ready for" a free trade agreement, the United States could have a bilateral trade agreement and a bilateral investment treaty with Cuba, said Hufbauer, who co-authored a book on the normalization of economic ties between the United States and Cuba.
 
The Obama administration earlier this month decided to loosen restrictions on travel, trade and financial transactions with Cuba, following the announcement of commitment by the two governments to restoring diplomatic ties in December.
 
Experts say the restoration of diplomatic relations could open a lot of business opportunities, but it will take a long time for the United States and Cuba to restore economic ties to something close to normal.
 
On the one hand, U.S. Congress is unlikely to lift economic embargo against Cuba soon, with many Republicans still opposed to any change in current policy. On the other hand, Cuba is not ready to open its market to the outside world.
 
"We predict the winds of change may blow slowly," said Barbara Kotschwar, a colleague of Hufbauer who co-authored the book.
 
"More U.S. companies can now sell to Cuba, but the ban on financing remains in place," Kotschwar said, adding that U.S. officials should begin economic negotiations with Cuba.
 
U.S. companies are eager to do business in Cuba. MasterCard last week became the first major U.S. credit card company to say it would start handling U.S. card transactions in Cuba.
 
Analysts say it's very hard to predict what future economic relations will look like between the two countries, as U.S.-Cuba normalization may hit a number of roadblocks. But lifting the economic embargo would be significant economically for both countries.
 
Economists at the Peterson Institute for International Economics estimated that U.S. exports of goods to Cuba could eventually reach 4.3 billion U.S. dollars annually, and Cuban exports of goods to the United States could reach 5.8 billion dollars annually, if the embargo had been lifted.
 
The stock of direct investment from all foreign countries in Cuba might eventually reach 17 billion dollars, up from less than 1 billion dollars today, they added.
 
 
 
China’s Self-Destructive Tech Crackdown 
New York Times
31 January 2015
 
Under the guise of improving security, the Chinese government is clamping down on technology companies and further limiting the access its citizens have to information that is not sanitized by the Communist Party. These moves will hurt the Chinese economy and create a major rift between China and the rest of the world.

The government of President Xi Jinping has taken a series of steps recently that have unnerved businesses, human rights organizations and governments around the world. This week, for example, American and other foreign business groups sent a letter to Mr. Xi protesting new policies that require companies that sell computer equipment to Chinese banks to turn over their source code to the government and to create ways for security officials to monitor and control those devices. Industry executives expect similar policies to be enacted for other sectors of the Chinese economy, making it increasingly difficult, if not impossible, for foreign technology vendors to sell their products to Chinese customers.
 
Chinese officials have also proposed a law, purportedly to fight terrorism, that would require technology companies to provide the government with the means to monitor all communications over their systems in China, including those that are encrypted. And in recent weeks, the authorities have made it nearly impossible for Internet users to employ virtual private networks that allow people to evade the government filters and restrictions collectively known as the Great Firewall. Dissidents, researchers, businesses and professionals have long used V.P.N.s to access information beyond China’s borders, and the government previously seemed to tolerate the practice.
 
With these new moves, Chinese leaders are trying to increase government control over communications in order to suppress dissent. And they are trying to promote Chinese technology businesses at the expense of foreign companies. That is not entirely surprising. Mr. Xi has previously made clear that he considers the free flow of information on the Internet a threat to the Communist Party. And he has said that he considers domestic control over technology a matter of “national economic security, defense security and other aspects of security.”
 
But this push for greater control could cost China dearly. The country’s businesses and professionals say it has become increasingly difficult for them to communicate with customers and suppliers abroad or to obtain scientific data and research from the rest of the world. Executives at Chinese banks are reportedly worried that they will have to rely on substandard domestic computer equipment that could make their systems more vulnerable to hacking by criminals, foreign rivals and others.
 
Foreign businesses and governments are rightly saying these new policies amount to protectionism. The changes also seem to make a joke of China’s commitment to abide by global trading rules established by the World Trade Organization and of its stated desire to deepen trade and investment ties with the United States and other countries. Officials from China and the United States are negotiating a bilateral investment treaty that is supposed to make it easier for companies from each country to do business in the other nation. American officials should use those talks to put China on notice that its latest security policies are wrongheaded and unacceptable.
 
Mr. Xi cannot expect the United States or any other country to engage in negotiations to liberalize trade and investment with his country while his government is actively making it impossible for foreign businesses to survive there.
