Trade Ministers Give Green Light to Kick-start Stalled WTO Global Trade Talks
WTO ministers in Davos back efforts to conclude Doha Round negotiations
Trade Leaders Urge WTO to Seize ‘Critical Moment’ in Doha Negotiations
Indonesia Urges Bali Package to be Implemented at WTO
Amina urges WTO members to complete domestic processes
India, US to enhance engagement on IPR
Ukraine crisis: Obama threatens more Russia sanctions
 
 
Trade Ministers Give Green Light to Kick-start Stalled WTO Global Trade Talks
By JOHN ZAROCOSTAS
wwd business news
January 25, 2015
 
DAVOS, Switzerland — Trade ministers and senior officials from 21 countries including the U.S. the European Union, Japan, and China agreed Saturday to inject a sense of urgency in their attempts to kick start the stalled Doha round of global trade  talks.
 
Ministers underlined their readiness to engage towards "a realistic"  blueprint by July on the remaining unresolved issues in the talks — agriculture, industrial goods and services — to try to conclude the round, which was launched in 2001 , Swiss economy minister Johann N. Schneider-Amman said.
 
The Swiss official, who chaired the two days of talks held on the sidelines of the 2015 World Economic Forum, said ministers held "good and open discussions"
 
This marks the first time since the talks dramatically collapsed  in summer 2008 that a concerted political push has been given to jump-start them. The talks, sponsored by the World Trade Organization, broke down mainly because of differences between the US and EU and emerging powers such as China and India.
 
"We were encouraged by the consensus on the need for a more honest and realistic discussion on the Doha talks in Geneva," Michael Punke, deputy U.S. Trade Representative, who attended the meeting along with U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman, told WWD.  
 
Cecilia Malstrom, EU trade commissioner, said, " it was a good meeting, but there's still a lot to be done to try and define a road map to move” ahead.
 
The objective is to come up with a blueprint by July on how to slash tariffs and other barriers to trade on industrial goods, agriculture and services.
 
Tim Groser, New Zealand's trade minister, said, "There is a high level of understanding we need to re-calibrate" the level of ambition, but noted it should not be meaningless because some negotiations on regional agreements are producing real substance.
 
Groser said ministers also strongly backed WTO chief Roberto Azevedo’s attempts to intensify discussions. "He can't do it by himself, he needs major developed and developing countries to get behind him," said Groser.
 
Azevedo, who attended the talks, said negotiators need to be "creative and open-minded."
 
"We decided we needed to change the conversation," Azevedo said, adding the world economy is in need of good news.
 
Schneider-Amman said what matters is "to achieve results " by the WTO trade ministerial conference to be held in Nairobi in December.
 
 
WTO ministers in Davos back efforts to conclude Doha Round negotiations 
25 January 2015
Middle East North Africa Financial Network (MENAFN)
 
(MENAFN - Kuwait News Agency (KUNA)) Ministers in charge of WTO affairs and WTO Director General Roberto Azevedo met on Saturday in Davos, at the invitation of Swiss minister of economic Johann Schneider-Ammann.

"The purpose of the informal gathering was to discuss the negotiating agenda for 2015 in view of a conclusion of the Doha Round," said Schneider-Ammman in a press conference.

Some 21 WTO members, represented at the ministerial level, attended the meeting on the fringes of the WEF Annual Meeting in Davos.

Ministers stressed the importance of achieving progress on the "Doha Development Agenda," issues that had remained unsolved at the Bali Ministerial Conference in December 2013, notably in the areas of agriculture, industrial products and services, he added.

Schneider-Ammann noted that ministers underlined their readiness to engage constructively towards a realistic and clearly defined "work programme" by July, framing the negotiations on the remaining Doha issues.

"In this context, they recalled the central development dimension of the Round and its particular focus on issues relevant for least developed countries." Furthermore, ministers welcomed the hosting by Kenya of the 10th WTO Ministerial Conference in Nairobi in December 2015.

"Twenty years after the Organization's establishment, the ministers shared an understanding that very important objectives are on the WTO's agenda in 2015, and we expressed our confidence that Members will succeed in meeting these objectives in a timely way," he added.

They also reiterated their commitment to implementing all decisions taken at the Ninth WTO Ministerial Conference in Bali, including on public stockholdings for food security purposes as amended in November 2014.

A sense of urgency must be instilled to the work in Geneva. Intensive efforts will be required in the three main areas of negotiations - agriculture, non-agricultural market access (NAMA) and services - but also in other fields.

Furthermore, the development dimension, and in particular aspects relevant to least developed countries, will have to remain at the centre.

The key issues will need to be identified rapidly and addressed in a transparent and inclusive way. We should be aware of each other's interests and constraints, focus on what is doable, consider new ways of engaging in order to move ahead more efficiently, and be prepared to review longstanding negotiating positions.

The ministers welcomed the process set in motion in Geneva towards reaching these objectives and concurred that this shift in gear has to be sustained by a high level of engagement by all Members, also in capitals.

Some of them also mentioned the importance of delivering concrete outcomes in plurilateral initiatives, on a most favoured nation (MFN) basis, such as the amendment of the Information Technology Agreement.

 
Trade Leaders Urge WTO to Seize ‘Critical Moment’ in Doha Negotiations
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, January 26, 2015
 
Jan. 23 — International trade negotiators must take a fresh look at the 2001 Doha Round and be realistic about what needs to be achieved, World Trade Organization Director-General Roberto Azevedo said.
 
“We cannot just resume this conversation by getting the old discussions, dusting the books and reading the old positions—the world has changed,” Azevedo said during a Jan. 23 panel discussion at the annual meeting of the World Economic Forum (WEF).
 
If WTO members are able to agree to a detailed work program by July 31, “we will be well positioned to conclude the [Doha] round in a short period of time,” he said.
 
On Jan. 24, Azevedo will meet with 30 WTO members at a “mini-ministerial” meeting in Davos, Switzerland, aimed at resolving the remaining elements of the 2013 Bali Ministerial agreement and the Doha Round.
 
‘Honest, Frank Discussion.’
 
The WTO is facing a “critical moment” where members need to have an “honest, frank discussion” about what they are able to agree to, U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman said in his WEF panel remarks.
 
“Members need to evaluate the state of the Doha Round of trade negotiations and decide whether they will take into account the changes that have taken place over the past decade or two,” he said.
 
Froman's comments echo his recent blog post that called on WTO members to coalesce around common principles in the Doha Development Agenda or risk unraveling the multilateral trade liberalization effort (15 WTO, 1/23/15).
 
Froman said that no one should be able to block the goal of trade liberalization as long as there are willing partners.
 
The U.S. is simultaneously negotiating broad free trade agreements like the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) that could provide for many of the goals of the Doha Round. The conclusion of these deals may accelerate if Congress grants President Barack Obama increased trade promotion authority via legislation.
 
Plurilateral Prospects
 
Azevedo said that the WTO is not threatened by regional and mega-regional trade agreements like the TPP and the TTIP. “They complement, not substitute what we do,” he said.
 
“The real threat to the WTO system is the WTO itself,” Azevedo said. “We have to begin to deliver results that are meaningful and have significance to all members.”
 
As for the Doha Round, members need to be realistic about what can be achieved, Azevedo said.
 
“If at the end of the conversation if members agree this is unachievable then they have to handle that and they have to decide what do we do.”
 
Core Disagreements
 
“The problem with the WTO is the number of countries—160 is tough,” said Mustapa Mohamed, Malaysia's minister of International Trade and Industry.
 
Mohamed said that members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations are becoming anxious and will continue to seek plurilateral trade deals in the absence of a broad multilateral accord.
 
“We have been stuck in Doha for 10 years,” he said. “We don't want to be stuck forever.”
 
Azevedo said that the size of the WTO's membership is not an obstacle to deal-making. “If there were 12 members, it would be same,” he said. “There are deep differences in the core group. If you help resolve the differences in the core group, you could help multilateral trade liberalization.”
 
U.S. Accepts TFA
 
Froman subsequently presented Azevedo with the U.S. letter of acceptance for the Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA) in a press conference following the WEF panel.
 
The TFA aims to simplify customs procedures by streamlining customs formalities and issuing advanced custom duties rulings, which proponents claim will provide a nearly $1 trillion boost to the global economy.
 
The U.S. becomes the third WTO member to ratify the TFA, following Singapore and Hong Kong. The TFA will enter into force after two-thirds of the WTO's 160 members ratify the deal.
 
Although members would like to see full TFA ratification before the end of 2015, U.S. and European Union officials previously said that it could take up to five years to reach the two-thirds threshold.
 
 
Indonesia Urges Bali Package to be Implemented at WTO 
25 January 2015
Tempo
 
TEMPO.CO, Jakarta - Indonesia has urged the World Trade Organization (WTO) members to implement the Bali Package, discussed at the 2013 summit, as the basis of Doha Development Round or Doha Development Agenda (DDA) that has been in a deadlock for over 14 years.

"There is no need to immediately lower the ambition and try to conclude the Doha Development Agenda in December 2015," Trade Minister Rachmat Gobel said after an informal meeting with WTO members in Davos, Switzerland, on Saturday, January 24, 2015, as quoted by Antara News.

Rachmat said some of the member countries were giving an impression to conclude the Doha Development Round at the 10<sup>th</sup> WTO Ministerial Conference in Nairoby, Kenya, in December 2015. Meanwhile, Rachmat added, other countries wanted to focus the attention on post-Bali working program.

"We pointed out that the Bali Package should not be left out. All of its elements must be implemented to maintain trust," Rachmat said.

Rachmat claimed that the Bali Package was a win-win solution for developed and developing countries after the Doha Round was in a deadlock in 2001.

The trade agreement, set forth in the Bali Package, covers three sectors, namely trade, agriculture and less developed countries capacity (LDC).

Indonesian Ambassador to the WTO, Iman Pambagio, added that one of the reasons for insisting on the Bali Package was that there was a new confidence to continue the world trade system initiated by the WTO.

"The Bali Package that was urged to be implemented accounts only 7-8 percent of the issues at the Doha Development Round," he said.
 
 
Amina urges WTO members to complete domestic processes
Written by CORRESPONDENT // January 26, 2015 // 0
Capitalfm
 
NAIROBI, Kenya, Jan 26 – Foreign Affairs and International Trade Cabinet Secretary Amina Mohamed has urged World Trade Organisation member countries to ratify the Trade Facilitation Agreement in order to pave way for the enforcement of the protocol before the organisation’s ministerial conference that will be held in Nairobi in December this year.

The CS says ratification of the agreement will be an important step in setting the stage for a successful conference in Nairobi.

“By the time of MC10, Kenya and Africa would like to see that members of the WTO have completed their domestic ratification processes and deposited their instruments of ratification with the WTO Director-General,” she stated.

“As host of the WTO Conference, I will communicate personally and directly with all WTO members, and reach out to African ministers in particular, with an appeal that they ratify before Nairobi.”

To facilitate the delivery of substantive outcomes during the 10th ministerial conference in Nairobi, the Cabinet Secretary stressed the need for consensus on a broad-based, balanced Post-Bali work programme that responds to the imperatives of the global economy by July.

The Cabinet Secretary was speaking in Davos, Switzerland, during the WTO informal mini-ministerial meeting hosted by the Swiss Federal Chancellor, Schneider Amman, and WTO Director, General Roberto Azevêdo.

She assured trade ministers attending the meeting that preparations are on top gear for the MC10 in Nairobi saying that all relevant government departments are fully engaged in order to ensure a successful conference.

“Our Mission in Geneva is fully engaged with other African missions and is working in full coordination with the WTO Secretariat Team – some of whom will be in Nairobi very soon – to engage with the Kenyan MC10 taskforce in the capital,” she said.
 
 
India, US to enhance engagement on IPR 
 
New Delhi, Jan 25 (PTI) India and the US today agreed to enhance their engagement on intellectual property rights, a vexed issue between the two countries.

Visiting US President Barack Obama and Prime Minister Narendra Modi also reaffirmed the importance of providing transparent and predictable policy environment for fostering innovation.

"Both countries reiterated their interest in sharing information and best practices on IPR issues, and reaffirmed their commitment to stakeholders' consultations on policy matters concerning intellectual property protection," a joint statement issued after the meeting of the two leaders said.

Recognising the progress made in constructive engagement on intellectual property under the last round of the India-US Trade Policy Forum held in November last year, the two sides also looked forward to enhance "engagement on IPR in 2015 under the High Level Working Group on IP, to the mutual benefit of both the countries," the statement said.

The statement assumes significance as the US companies have alleged that India's IPR regime is discriminatory, particularly for pharmaceutical industry.

India has consistently maintained its stand that its laws are compliant with global and WTO norms.

India is also in the process of formulating a comprehensive policy on IPR. A six-member think tank has already submitted the first draft report on that.

Under the Trade Policy Forum, India and the US have set up a high-level working group on intellectual property. The TPF is the principal trade dialogue body between the countries.

It has five focus groups: Agriculture, Investment, Innovation and Creativity, Services, and Tariff and Non-Tariff Barriers.

On April 30, the US had brought out the Special 301 report, an annual review of the global state of IPR protection and enforcement, in which it has classified India as a 'priority watch list country'.

On the report, India had said that the Special 301 process is a unilateral measure taken by the US under their Trade Act, 1974 to create pressure on countries to increase IPR protection beyond the TRIPS agreement.

Earlier, the US industry had also raised the matter of India's rejection of patents for Bristol-Myers Squibb's Sprycel and Novartis AG's Glivec. It expressed concerns over issuance of a single compulsory license (CL) by India.

The concern identified in the USA's report are based on the inputs provided by the American industry on their perception of the level of protection provided by India to Intellectual Property.

Issues that have been flagged in the report include, concerns over the provision of section 3(d) of the Patent Act, CL, inclusion of a statement relating to CL for green technologies in India's National Manufacturing Policy and challenges relating to enforcement of IP Rights.

Section 3(d) of the Indian Patent Act 1970 does not allow patent to be granted to inventions involving new forms of a known substance unless it differs significantly in properties with regard to efficacy. PTI RR NKD MR
 
 
Ukraine crisis: Obama threatens more Russia sanctions
Roman Olearchyk in Kiev and Victor Mallet in New Delhi 
Financial Times
January 25, 2015 4:47 pm
 
President Barack Obama has signalled that he was prepared to significantly increase US sanctions against the Kremlin, saying Saturday’s attack by separatist rebels on the southeastern Ukrainian city of Mariupol was clearly backed, equipped and financed by Russia.

Mr Obama’s statement, made on Sunday at a news conference in New Delhi with Indian prime minister Narendra Modi, came as Petro Poroshenko, Ukraine’s president, met his security council in Kiev and urged the international community to increase pressure on Russia. 
 
Mr Obama said the US was “deeply concerned” about the latest break in the ceasefire and the separatists had received “Russian backing, Russian equipment, Russian financing, Russian training and Russian troops”.

He added: “I will look at all additional options that are available to us short of military confrontation and try to address this issue.” 
 
Despite the strong rhetoric from the White House, it was unclear whether the EU — the Obama administration’s most important ally on Russia policy — was prepared to follow suit. 
 
According to EU diplomats, capitals were divided over whether to pursue more sanctions. Federica Mogherini, the high representative, has called an emergency meeting of foreign ministers for Thursday.

Some diplomats had balked at the idea of convening an earlier meeting for fear it would result in little more than a further condemnation of the Mariupol attack. “To call it just to adopt another statement makes no sense,” said a Polish diplomat.

Among those reluctant to call a quick meeting without “deliverables” was Donald Tusk, the European Council president, who said on Twitter that Mariupol showed that “appeasement encourages the aggressor”.

Still, the feverish diplomacy over whether to move towards new sanctions reflected a shift in tenor for the west, particularly in Europe, where some leaders had started the year openly discussing lifting sanctions on Russia because of the crumbling Russian economy, which had been brought low by tumbling oil prices and value of the rouble. 
 
“We have no interest in seeing Russia weakened or its economy in a shambles,” Mr Obama said. “We have a profound interest, as I believe every country does, in promoting a core principle, which is: large countries don’t bully smaller countries, they don’t encroach on their territorial integrity, they don’t encroach on their sovereignty. And that’s what’s at stake in Ukraine.”

 
The attack on Mariupol included multiple salvos of rocket fire by pro-Russia separatists, which pounded civilian neighbourhoods in the Ukrainian-controlled port city, killing 30 and injuring nearly 100.

The assault has heightened fears that Russia, through separatist proxies, aims to secure a land bridge stretching along the Azov Sea to Crimea, which it annexed early last year.
 
Pro-Moscow separatists in eastern Ukraine have escalated the political turmoil that threatens to tear the country apart
 
Further reading

The attack came a day after a senior separatist leader ruled out further ceasefire talks and vowed to recapture additional cities in Ukraine’s industrial east. The escalated fighting along the entire perimeter of separatist-held territory in past weeks threatens to plunge the 10-month conflict that has claimed more than 5,000 lives back into full-scale warfare.

On Sunday, Russia showed no sign of backing down. In statements put out by the Kremlin after Sergei Lavrov, the foreign minister, spoke with his US and EU counterparts, Moscow pinned blame for the heightened violence on Kiev for refusing to engage directly with separatist leadership.

The Russian foreign ministry accused Kiev of violating the September Minsk ceasefire agreements and of pursuing a “course towards further militarisation”.

In addition to Mr Obama publicly citing Russian involvement in the Mariupol attack, security chiefs in Kiev claimed to hold evidence implicating Russian operatives in the rocket fusillade.
