Headlines:
Paralysis within WTO is easing, says its chief
WTO COOL tariff decision expected in November
WTO Sets Up Panel on S. Korean Import Ban on Japan Fishery Products
Anti-Russian sanctions illegal, temporary, not critical for Russia - Putin
Japan Vows to Strengthen Competitive Farm Sectors Ahead of TPP Meet 
TPP deadlock on dairy, autos: National politics put trade talks under pressure
TPP talks: Japan could concede 50,000 tons on rice to placate US
India to host 53 African trade ministers
India's Manufacturers want safeguard levy
India seeks funds, technology to combat climate change
Time to start thinking of a 'New Bretton Woods'?
Argentina's Trade with Brazil plunges 16% this year
 
Details:
Paralysis within WTO is easing, says its chief
By Shawn Donnan, World Trade Editor 
29 September 2015
Financial Times
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevêdo has spent most of his two years at the head of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation warning of "paralysis" and even "existential crisis" at the body as many of its biggest members, including the US, pursue their most ambitious trade liberalisation efforts outside of its confines.
But these days the Brazilian is ready to declare the crisis over.
"I think we are doing [well] with the therapy," he tells the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Financial Times in an interview, even if such crises are not always entirely unhealthy for big multilateral institutions, he adds. "An organisation that wants to be relevant globally always has to be questioning itself."
Although the now 14-year-old Doha round remains stalled, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO has been able to deliver an agreement to remove red tape at borders that by some measures would do more to help the free flow of goods around the world than removing all of the tariffs on the planet, he says.
It is also in the final stages of negotiating an update to an agreement governing the growing $3tn annual trade in high-tech goods. Such smaller agreements ought to be promising signs for the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO, even if they are not equal in scope to the Doha round.
"That is a much more flexible, much more dynamic state than we had before," Mr Azevêdo says.
But he is also conscious that the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO still needs to find a way either to deliver the Doha round or move beyond it, especially as its 161 members prepare to gather in Nairobi in December for a biennial ministerial summit.
Mr Azevêdo says members are now zeroing in on a potential deal that would set new limits on export subsidies for agricultural goods. But the deal is at this point unlikely to tackle much more contentious issues such as other forms of domestic subsidies for farmers.
There is, he says, a "growing consensus" among members around a three-pronged mini package that could be ready for the Nairobi meeting. It would include reforms to subsidies meant to encourage agricultural exports, a new push for transparency of member policies and measures to aid the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's poorest members.
Such a package would be a "very significant" step forward for the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO. However, without progress on two other areas - domestic agricultural subsidies and market access for industrial goods - he says there is little chance of claiming victory in the Doha round.
One of the current contributors to the deadlock is a disagreement between the US and China over how farm subsidies in emerging economies should be treated. The US argues that China ought now to be treated more like a developed economy than an emerging one given all the economic progress it has made since the round was launched in 2001.
The impasse is a blow to Mr Azevêdo, who has spent two years trying to find new ways to break the stalemate that Doha has been stuck in since 2008 when negotiations between the US and developing countries broke down. His strategy since then has been to focus on reducing the Doha round's ambitions and focusing on what can be delivered.
Mr Azevêdo hopes that by delivering something that could be credibly dubbed the Doha round the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO could move on and focus on a growing pile of new issues. Among them, he says, are the need for rules governing digital trade and ecommerce, investment and the role of state-owned entities.
All have been piling up in the shadow of Doha and all were starting to be dealt with in other regional trade negotiations such as the 12-country Trans-Pacific Partnership and the EU-US Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership.
"The world is moving and if we don't begin to tackle these important issues they will be tackled somewhere else," he says.
But for the moment at least he is prepared to claim that is no longer an existential matter for the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO. The Financial Times Limited (AAIW/EIW) 
WTO COOL tariff decision expected in November
By P. Scott Shearer, Bockorny Group, Washington, D.C. 
28 September 2015
National Hog Farmer
A HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization arbitration panel will issue a final decision on Nov. 27 concerning the amount of annual retaliatory tariffs Canada and Mexico can impose on U.S imports as a result of country-of-origin labelling.
Earlier this month, Canada and Mexico defended their proposed tariffs before a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO hearing with Canada requesting $2.5 billion in retaliatory tariffs and Mexico asking for $713 million annually. The United States argued the level of tariffs for Canada and Mexico should be approximately $90 million combined.
Earlier this year, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO ruled for a fourth and final time that COOL violates the U.S.’s international trade obligations and illegally discriminates against imported livestock from Canada and Mexico. Unless Congress changes the COOL statute, Canada and Mexico will be authorized to impose tariffs after the November decision.
The House of Representatives has passed legislation to repeal COOL. The Senate has two bills regarding COOL – one to repeal COOL and one to replace COOL with a voluntary program. Canada and Mexico have stated that repeal of COOL is the only way to stop the proposed retaliatory tariffs.
Penton Business Media
WTO Sets Up Panel on S. Korean Import Ban on Japan Fishery Products
28 September 2015
Jiji Press English News Service
Tokyo, Sept. 28 (Jiji Press)--The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization decided Monday to set up a panel to discuss Japan's complaint about South Korea's ban on imports of fishery products from eight Japanese prefectures, according to the Japanese Fisheries Agency.
Following Japan's request for the panel, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO made the decision at a meeting in Geneva.
The panel will begin to examine the Japan-South Korea case after its members are selected.
South Korea banned imports of some fishery products from the eight north-eastern and eastern Japan prefectures--Aomori, Iwate, Miyagi, Fukushima, Ibaraki, Gunma, Tochigi and Chiba--following the March 2011 reactor meltdown accident at the Fukushima No. 1 nuclear power station.
In September 2013, the import ban was expanded to cover all fishery goods from the prefectures.
Claiming that the South Korean embargo lacks scientific grounds, Japan filed for launching talks with South Korea under the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO dispute settlement procedures in May this year.
As the two countries have been unable to settle the case in the bilateral talks, Japan has asked the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO to set up a panel on the matter. Jiji Press Limited
Anti-Russian sanctions illegal, temporary, not critical for Russia - Putin
29 September 2015
ITAR-TASS World Service
MOSCOW, September 29.  Russian President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Vladimir Putin has said he does not doubt Russia will overcome negative consequences of Russian sanctions though there are not critical.
"If somebody prefers to work by means of sanctions, he is welcome to do so. But sanctions are a temporary measure," Putin told US journalist Charlie Rose in an interview with HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" CBS and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" PBS.
Anti-Russian sanctions "contradict the international law", the president stressed. "The sanctions, as I said, are illegal actions, destroying the principles of the international global economy, the principles of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO [HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization] and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN. The sanctions may be imposed only by the decision of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN Security Council. A unilateral imposition of sanctions is a violation of international law," he noted.
"Secondly, tell me where this policy of sanctions proved to be effective. The answer is nowhere; and sanctions against such country as Russia are unlikely to be effective," Putin said.
"Of course, they [sanctions] do damage, but they are not the main reason for the slowdown in the growth rates of the Russian economy or other problems related to inflation," the Russian leader noted. "For us, the main reason is, of course, the decrease in prices in the world markets of our traditional export goods, first, of oil and, consequently, of gas, and some other products. This is the core factor. Sanctions, of course, have a certain impact, but they are not of crucial and fundamental importance to our economy," he continued.
Answering a question on whether Russia will survive sanctions, Putin said: "Naturally, beyond any doubts, it is even out of discussion."
The president added that sanctions even have a certain advantage. "The advantage is that previously we used to buy many goods, especially in the area of high technology, with petrodollars. Today, amid the sanctions, we cannot buy or we are afraid that we will be denied access to hi-tech goods, and we had to deploy large-scale programs to develop our own high-tech economy, industry, manufacturing and science," he explained.
"In fact, we would have to do this anyway, but we found it difficult as our own domestic markets were filled with foreign products, and we found it very difficult to support our local manufacturers within the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO regulations. Now, with the sanctions imposed and our partners having left our market voluntarily, we have an opportunity to develop," the Russian president concluded. --ITAR-TASS Information Telegraph Agency of Russia
Japan Vows to Strengthen Competitive Farm Sectors Ahead of TPP Meet 
29 September 2015
Dow Jones Newswires Chinese (English)
Japan vows to make its agricultural sector more competitive ahead of the latest talks over a 12-nation Trans-Pacific Partnership free trade pact, signalling its commitment to bring about a deal. "We will strengthen farm sectors that are competitive, and provide safeguards for those that need them," Japan's farm minister Yoshimasa Hayashi said Tuesday. Minister-level talks among TPP member states will take place in Atlanta from Wednesday. Concern is growing among Japanese farmers about the deal, which is likely to sharply curtail tariff protection for farm products. Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Shinzo Abe has made the TPP a centrepiece of his Abenomics economic revitalization program, but a deal could stoke discontent among farmers in the build-up to an upper house election to be held in the next 10 months. Dow Jones & Company, Inc. 
TPP deadlock on dairy, autos: National politics put trade talks under pressure
29 September 2015
Nikkei Report
RYOHEI YASOSHIMA, Nikkei staff writer
ATLANTA -- While domestic political schedules are making it imperative for the U.S., Japan and Canada to wrap up a historic trans-Pacific trade pact, New Zealand and Mexico appear intent on prolonging the talks to extract the best concessions possible.
The 12 nations taking part in the Trans-Pacific Partnership are accelerating preparations for ministerial talks starting here Wednesday in hopes of striking a final deal.
U.S. President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Barack Obama is making direct appeals, phoning Mexican and Peruvian leaders last week. Obama and Chilean President Michelle Bachelet agreed in a Sunday phone call "on the need for further progress in resolving remaining issues" related to the TPP, the White House said.
Electoral obstacles
The looming 2016 presidential election cycle is pushing the U.S. to achieve an agreement quickly. Many think major trade negotiations will be impossible after the beginning of next year. Eager to build a robust legacy, Obama wants to see ministers wrap up the talks in the upcoming meeting.
In Canada, the Oct. 19 election poses a far more immediate threat. Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Stephen Harper's government looks to fare poorly, fueling leaders' urgency to conclude TPP negotiations before the vote.
Yet Australia and New Zealand remain pitted against the North American neighbors in key areas. The U.S. wants the protection period for data on new pharmaceuticals to be as lengthy as possible, while Australia and New Zealand wish to keep that period short to speed the development of generic drugs.
New Zealand also is holding firm on its demands for expanded dairy exports to Canada, the U.S. and others -- its stance unchanged from the last round of talks in Hawaii at the end of July. Trade Minister Tim Groser will attend the Atlanta talks only "if negotiators make sufficient progress resolving outstanding issues, including dairy market access, to warrant ministerial engagement," the government has said.
Dairy products comprise some 30% of New Zealand's exports, many of which go to China. Fears that the industry could be hurt by China's slowing economy are contributing to New Zealand's hard-line push for more open dairy markets in the 12 TPP nations.
Pushing toward a conclusion
Japan will pursue a broad agreement at the ministerial talks "with unwavering resolve," Chief Cabinet Secretary Yoshihide Suga told reporters Monday. As domestic politics in many nations threaten to side-line the TPP, fears are growing in Japanese government circles that "if this round of talks does not end in broad agreement, negotiations could slip away," a political leader said.
Yet Japan, too, faces deadlock with Mexico over place-of-origin rules involving cars. Many U.S., European and other automakers build vehicles in Mexico, giving them easy export access to the U.S. under the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" North American Free Trade Agreement. But Mexico fears that increased auto exports from Japan under the TPP could eat into that business, and therefore seeks rules to prevent vehicles consisting largely of components made in Thailand and other non-TPP nations from qualifying for reduced tariffs.
As elections loom, the U.S., Canada and Japan find themselves lacking the political will to make compromises during negotiations. In Japan, members of the dominant Liberal Democratic Party with ties to agriculture are particularly leery of the agreement.
If a deal is reached at this round of meetings, a bill for ratification and debate over related domestic policy changes likely will hit the Diet next spring or later. Many worry that discussion on the contentious trade pact could sway upper-house elections slated for summer. Some members have said they wish negotiations could be halted until after the elections.
The window for a deal is closing as the U.S. and Canadian election campaigns and other pressures emerge, Australian Trade Minister Andrew Robb said. But those factors "notwithstanding, a conclusion remains within imminent reach," he added. "There are unresolved issues, but hopefully these aren't intractable." Nikkei Digital Media Inc. 
TPP talks: Japan could concede 50,000 tons on rice to placate US
29 September 2015
Nikkei Report
TOKYO -- Japan may use a system set in a previous trade agreement to add up to 50,000 tons of tariff-free U.S. rice imports to the pot as the two nations seek to close the gap on rice in Trans-Pacific Partnership talks.
Japan has proposed a duty-free import quota of 70,000 tons of U.S. rice per year, with the current tariff of 341 yen ($2.81) per kilogram applied to imports over that amount. The U.S. is holding firm to demands for a quota of 175,000 tons.
While Japan is set against raising the TPP quota itself, the government is considering allocating 50,000 more tons of an existing 770,000-ton duty-free rice quota to medium-grain and other varieties of rice that the U.S. agricultural sector produces particularly well. The quota was established at the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, and accounts for total rice imports from all countries worldwide.
The additional 50,000 tons would not, in theory, go exclusively to the U.S. But the country would likely account for the majority of the rice imported under the system. No alteration would be made to the 770,000-ton limit overall, effectively reducing other countries' shares in favor of the U.S.
The two countries have already effectively agreed that Japan will cut the tariff on U.S. beef from 38.5% to 9% over 15 years. But the period over which the U.S. will remove the tariff on Japanese autos is not yet decided. The U.S. wants to maintain a tariff for as long as possible, while Japan wants the tax removed in short order. Nikkei Digital Media Inc.
India to host 53 African trade ministers
Asit Ranjan Mishra 
29 September 2015
Mint
New Delhi, Sept. 29 -- With an eye to boost its trade relationship with African countries and fast-track long-pending trade agreements with groupings from that continent, India will host a meeting of 53 African trade ministers, the largest such congregation, in New Delhi next month ahead of the India-Africa Forum Summit.
The fourth India-Africa trade ministers' meeting will be held on 23 October prior to the summit scheduled for 26-30 October. The industry department will also host the India-Africa business council meeting the same day. "It will be the largest meeting of trade ministers in India. It will give us an opportunity to review our status trade relation and take our engagement forward," a government official said under condition of anonymity.
On 26 October, India will host senior officials of the 54 countries, while on 27 October, foreign minister Sushma Swaraj will host her African counterparts. The summit between the Indian government and African heads of state will take place on 29 October, with 30 October set aside for bilateral meetings between visiting heads of state and Prime Minister Narenda Modi.
India is currently engaged with various African groupings such as the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Southern African Customs Union (SACU), the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Economic Community of West African States (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" ECOWAS) and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" COMESA) for preferential trade agreements.
"As far as SACU and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" COMESA are concerned, negotiations are already in progress, but both the groupings are taking time to decide how to proceed further, while on HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" ECOWAS, India has to make a move," the official said. He added that progress on all these agreements will be reviewed during the meeting.
Established in 1910, SACU is the oldest customs union, comprising South Africa, Namibia, Botswana, Lesotho and Swaziland. India and SACU started negotiations on a preferential trade agreement in 2005 following the India-South Africa Joint Ministerial Commission. A so-called memorandum of understanding was signed between the two in 2008 to facilitate the negotiations. While India sought a tariff reduction in 30-50% of goods, the grouping is ready to offer only 10% of total traded goods.
The official said India considers the tripartite free trade agreement (TFTA) recently signed in June as an important milestone and is keenly watching the development. "We will keep ourselves engaged with the larger community that is emerging," he added.
TFTA is a proposed free trade agreement between HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" COMESA, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Southern African Development Community and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" East African Community, representing 26 African countries, worth $1 trillion and 600 million people.
Africa is considered the next growth frontier and is already an important trade partner for India. Trade with Africa increased from $39 billion in 2009-10 to $71.4 billion in 2014-15, with exports rising faster than imports.
India's key export interests are in processed petroleum products, drugs and pharmaceuticals, and motor vehicles. Crude petroleum is the biggest imported item from Africa, followed by gold, coal and other mining products.
The official said India is already encouraging its industry to intensify its engagement with African nations. "We have supported several trade events for market access and market development initiatives. In 2015-16, 20 such events have been supported by the government in African countries," he added.
The official said that all countries of Africa have their unique trade baskets and India is currently examining which countries are more important from its export perspective. "There is tremendous potential for India in engineering, textiles, pharmaceuticals, automobiles, processed food and vegetable products," he added.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Biswajit Dhar, a professor of economics at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Jawaharlal Nehru University, said India should engage with African nations at the bilateral and multilateral levels. "While we can push for the LDC (least developed country) agenda at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO), we can help individual African countries in capacity-building to help them export more," he added.
India became the first developing country to extend a duty-free, quota-free facility to LDCs, which will benefit 21 such countries from Africa. It has also announced to provide preferential treatment in services trade to LDCs ahead of the Nairobi ministerial meet of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO countries in December where the decision is expected to be notified.  HT Media Limited
India's Manufacturers want safeguard levy
DILASHA SETH 
New Delhi 
29 September 2015
Business Standard
Indian industry is queuing for action against cheap imports after the government’s swift action to protect steel producers.
Producers of solar panels and cells, tyres, rubber, aluminium foil and metallurgical coke have made representations to the government for safeguard duties against imports. 
“There has been a surge in applications after the imposition of the safeguard duty on steel imports this month. Representations were made in the last two weeks from diverse sectors. We will examine these cases,” said a finance ministry official.
Safeguard duties are measures to protect the local industry from a sudden surge in imports. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation does not allow such duties to be imposed for more than four years at a stretch.
Finance Minister Arun Jaitley announced a 20 per cent safeguard duty on imported hot-rolled steel to protect domestic producers struggling against cheap imports from China and countries with which India has free trade agreements. The duty has been imposed for 200 days, after which the director-general of safeguards will issue a report on whether the tax should continue.
India has rarely used trade safeguards, mainly because the domestic industry was unaware of them. Unlike the anti-dumping duty, which the government can initiate on its own, a safeguards investigation can only be initiated on complaints from local producers.
“A mere investigation can create ripples. Before we start an investigation, we have to be sure there is an injury. We cannot act unless there is serious injury. There are conflicting interests of producers and the users in many cases,” another official pointed out.
The Indian Solar Manufacturers’ Association has filed an application with the Directorate General of Safeguards for investigating the import of solar cells and panels. Their representation comes a year after the commerce department’s proposal for an anti-dumping duty on solar cells shipments from China, the US and Malaysia was turned down by finance ministry, to favour solar power producers.
Recently, India lost a case filed by the US at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO on favouring the domestic industry for the Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission.
So far Directorate General of Safeguards has investigated 25 cases. Safeguard duties have been imposed on seamless pipes and tubes, sodium citrate and fatty alcohols at the rate of 10 per cent, 20 per cent and 18 per cent, respectively.
“We want the domestic industry to look beyond anti-dumping measures. The anti-dumping duty can be imposed only if goods are imported at dumping prices. The safeguard duty can be imposed if goods enter in increased quantities,” a government official said.
Even though the government hiked the import duty on rubber from 20 to 25 per cent in the budget in February, it has not helped contain imports. Rubber growers associations have sought safeguard duties.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Automotive Tyre Manufacturers' Association, too, has sought safeguard tariffs on car tyre imports from China and South Korea. Business Standard Limited (India) 
India seeks funds, technology to combat climate change
Varghese K. George 
29 September 2015
The Hindu
Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Narendra Modi, who met President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Barack Obama on the sidelines of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" U.N. General Assembly here on Monday, sought U.S. support to complete United Nations reforms within a fixed time-frame and cooperation for India’s early membership of the Asia Pacific Economic Community, but climate change dominated their hour-long conversation.
“Much of our discussion today focused on the upcoming climate conference in Paris,” Mr. Obama said, adding: “We agree that this is a critical issue for the world, and all of us have responsibilities. We are encouraged by the aggressive nature of Mr. Modi’s commitment to clean energy.”
“President and I share an uncompromising commitment on climate change, without affecting our ability to meet the development aspirations of humanity. We have set ambitious national agendas,” Mr. Modi said, adding that both leaders looked forward to a “comprehensive and concrete outcome in Paris with a positive agenda,” which will ensure “access to finance and technology for the developing world.” The progress on meeting these objectives will be the crucial test for bilateral relations in the coming months. “What I said is, that I really believe that India’s leadership at this conference will set the tone not just for today, but for decades to come,” Mr Obama said.
Ministry of External Affairs spokesperson Vikas Swarup said Mr Modi brought up the “climate of negativism” that surrounds climate change negotiations and sought to turn the debate into a positive format that will nudge developing countries to adapt cleaner development models by providing them access to technology and capital.
While Mr. Modi said the India-U.S. partnership was driven by economic ties, Mr. Obama said: “We also had a chance to talk about trade and investment,” adding that Mr. Modi was hoping that Indian Americans would contribute to India’s growth.
Mr. Obama had, during his India visit in January, declared his support for India’s admission into HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" APEC, and that will be a key, tangible milestone for bilateral ties. Mr. Modi and Mr. Obama reviewed progress on the issue and Mr. Modi said: “To further increase our strategic engagement in the region, I look forward to working with the U.S. for India’s early membership of the Asian Pacific Economic Community.”
Both countries were keen on emphasising India’s HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" APEC membership as part of the Joint Strategic Vision on Asia, Pacific and Indian Ocean Regions. Mr.Modi also underscored the importance of joint engagement with regional partners like Japan. “This will also strengthen our maritime security cooperation,” he said. After the Obama-Modi bilateral meet in September 2014, both countries had decided to promote joint consultations with Japan to the ministerial level, and the first one will take place in New York next week.
Mr. Swarup termed the back-to-back meeting that Mr. Modi had with his British counterpart HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" David Cameron and French President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" François Hollande as “power Monday,” and said climate change was on the agenda of all three meetings.
Cooperation in combating terrorism, particularly, in concluding the pending Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism, and India’s long-pending demand for membership of four global export control regimes also figured in Mr Modi’s conversation with Mr. Obama. Mr. Swarup said the “take-away from the meeting was the continuing and increasing personal chemistry between the leaders who address each other by first name.” “So, we very much appreciate his friendship and his partnership,” Mr. Obama said.
Support for India
PTI reports:
Meanwhile, the U.S., Britain and France reaffirmed their support to India’s permanent membership of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN Security Council as text-based negotiations to expand the most powerful wing of the world body begins in November.
I really believe that India’s leadership at this conference will set the tone not just for today, but for decades to come". Kasturi & Sons Ltd
Time to start thinking of a 'New Bretton Woods'?
Pradumna B. Rana 
29 September 2015
China Daily-Hong Kong Edition
A key decision in making US-led and China-led institutions complementary rests with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" US Congress. Without the Congress ratifying the 2010 HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" International Monetary Fund governance reforms to give greater voice to emerging markets, that will not happen. And as this is unlikely to happen any time soon, we perhaps need to start thinking of a "New Bretton Woods".
In the three-round match between the US and China to have influence in the Asian regional architecture, Round 2, which took place several months ago, went in China's favor. Countries like the United Kingdom, the Republic of Korea and Australia broke ranks with the US, and 57 countries from across the world, including Germany, France, Iran, the United Arab Emirates and Nepal, applied to be the founding members of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank. Japan has so far stuck to the US but it has indicated that it remains interested in joining the AIIB, which can be seen as the financing arm of China's Belt and Road Initiative.
Initially, the US attempted to dissuade potential applicants by citing poor governance and due diligence at the proposed AIIB. But it made a dramatic turnaround later.
Less well known is Round 1 after the Asian financial crisis of 1997-1998 when the US and the US-led HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF shot down proposals to establish the Asian Monetary Fund (AMF). At that time, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF surveillance had failed to adequately identify the risks posed by the uneven pace of capital account liberalization in the region and the extent of the banking sector's weaknesses.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF had, therefore, initially misdiagnosed the Asian financial crisis and prescribed inappropriate policies which exacerbated the impacts of the crisis and led to a free-fall of currencies, fanned the contagion, and pushed the region into sharp recession. This led countries in the region to initiate regional "self help" measures to take things under their control.
Although the AMF was stillborn, the region established a $240-billion crisis management fund called the Chiang Mai Initiative Multilateralization (CMIM) and the ASEAN+3 Macroeconomic Research Office, which is the "independent surveillance unit" for the CMIM. But the idea of the AMF has not been entirely forgotten and keeps coming up every now and then.
Round 3 of the China-US game is now being played in the field of international trade. We have the US-led Trans-Pacific Partnership that has kept China out, and the ASEAN-led (and China-led) Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership that excludes the US.
Round 3, hangs in the balance. This is because unless the negotiators can conclude a deal soon, it will be impossible to get it ratified by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" US Congress this year. By that stage the US presidential election is likely to overshadow trade talks and TPP approval may have to wait until the next presidential term. If TPP disappoints or, worse still, it is not concluded at all, it will be another major setback for the US in Asia as it is the economic arm of US President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Barack Obama's "pivot" to Asia.
Although in a game of baseball, three strikes means "out", this is not the case in global and regional diplomacy. It only means that the US' clout in the region will weaken and the sparring between Beijing and Washington will continue in the future. China-led institutions in Asia will not pose a threat to the well-established HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF or the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Bank. They will, however, complicate global economic governance and make it more complex.
If US-led and China-led institutions cannot take joint decisions and work with each other in a complementary manner, 70 years after the original Bretton Woods agreement, we will need a "New Bretton Woods" agreement led by a select group from the truly "systemically important countries" of the world, not the motley group comprising the G20.
The author is associate professor and coordinator of the International Political Economy Programme in the Centre for Multilateralism Studies at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. China Daily Information Company
Argentina's Trade with Brazil plunges 16% this year
28 September 2015
Buenos Aires Herald
Argentine Chamber of Commerce says decline is mostly due to drop in Brazil's economy
The plunge in foreign trade with Brazil is mainly due to the decline of the neighbour's economy rather than the devaluation of its currency, the Argentine Chamber of Commerce (CAC) said yesterday in a report.
Trade between the two biggest Mercosur economies has fallen by 16.3 percent in the first eight months of 2015, with fewer sales to Brazil that was also accompanied by fewer imports.
While the fall in exports is reater than that of imports, the drop in commerce cannot be attributed to Brazil's devaluation of the real, even if some are worried that it might make Argentine products vying for that market less competitive.
The CAC said yesterday that “the main cause of reduced bilateral exchange is the decline in Brazil's economy,” backing its words with data correlating Argentina's exports in the last twelve years and Brazil's economic performance.
“Analyzing the evolution of commerce in the last years it can be deduced that bilateral exchange rate competitiveness is not the most influential factor, and that flows are instead essentially determined by the levels of economic output,” CAC argued.
The group's statistics showed that exports to Brazil also fell in 2009, while the global financial crisis affected the neighbouring giant's Gross Domestic Product (GDP).
Since 2014, both exports and Brazil's economy have been falling again, even though the correlation is not as tight as it was in 2009, with sales abroad falling at a higher pace than Brazil's output.
CAC's report was based on statistics coming from the Indec statistics bureau, the Economy Ministry and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Brazil's Central Bank.
Exports suffer more
The decline in Argentine exports explains most of the drop in commerce between both countries since 2014.
Only 4.9 of the 16.3 percentage points lost in commerce since January were explained by reduced imports, with the remaining 11.4 points caused by a drop in sales to Brazil.
The latest figures available from last month show an even more marked contrast: while Argentine exports plunged 23.5 percent in August, on the year, imports from Brazil were comparatively stable, gaining 0.9 percent when measured in dollars.
This is explained by the fact that the Argentine economy has been growing while Brazil's hasn't, CAC said.
“Brazil's economy contracted by 2.1 percent in the first semester, with both consumption and investment going down, while the Argentine economy grew by 2.2 percent in the same period. This disparity in the evolution of both countries could explain the differences in flows between the two countries in the first eight months of the year,” CAC said.
Although the exchange rates of neighbouring countries' currencies are a concern for the country's competitiveness too, other analysts have also argued in the past that, from Argentina's point of view, a devaluation in Brazil is not the most important factor to determine the future of bilateral trade with its neighbour.
“Historically, the flow of bilateral trade has mostly been dominated by the evolution of demand and the level of activity level more than by the exchange rate,” Roberto Bouzas, an expert on Brazil-Argentina relations who teaches at San Andrés University, told the Herald earlier this year.
The real has depreciated more than 30 percent this year, making it the worst performer among 152 currencies according to data tracked by Reuters, raising worries among Argentine businessmen and specialists as the country's peso remains much more stable.
But that hasn't been the only problem Brazil has faced, as its economy is also expected to be in recession until at least 2016, while the state's finances are also suffering despite austerity measures aimed at fixing its deficit, which have made consumption and employment plunge.
“When Brazil expands, it demands more Argentine products,” CAC said yesterday.
Commerce employees
The usual September 26 celebrations for the commerce employee day were moved from Saturday to today, CAC said.
That might cause some shops to be closed today, although CAC said most retail outlets should not be affected. Heraldo de Buenos Aires Ltd
END
 
Josep Bosch, Information Officer
Information and External Relations Division
+41227395681
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.