HEADLINES:
India: Anti-dumping duty on 4 Chinese items
India to defend farmers' interest against developed countries at WTO
Commodity boost for India
Russian doubts pre-court settlement of Ukraine’s claim to WTO against Russia 
The Great Train Robbery? Ukraine Sues Russia for not Buying Carriages
Six NGOs urge Obama to extend pharma transition period
Russia doubts whether TTIP will comply with WTO norms - deputy foreign minister
Rare earth demand to increase 50% by 2020
US 'erred in leaving China on side-lines'
The silk roads rise again
 
Details:
India: Anti-dumping duty on 4 Chinese items
23 October 2015
The Times of India
NEW DELHI: The impact of excess capacity in China following an economic slowdown is showing in India with the government rushing in to impose anti-dumping duty on at least four products from across the border as well as some other countries.
Although India is among the most prominent users of the anti-dumping tool -allowed by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO as a check against a flood of cheap imports that hurt the domestic industry - it is not very common that the government notifies levies on four pro ducts on the same day.
In recent weeks, it has been forced to take defensive measures, such as the safeguard duty on some steel products, and revenue secretary Hasmukh Adhia went to the extent of publicly stating that industry should explore protection through these measures instead of rushing to the government seeking an increase in import duty. Anti-dumping and safeguard duties are imposed following an enquiry by independent directorates. Based on the findings of the Directorate General of Anti-dumping and Allied Duties, the finance ministry notified anti-dumping duty on the four products from Wednesday .
Definitive anti-dumping duty has been levied on imports of "plain medium density fibre board of thickness 6 mm and above" originating in or exported from China, Malaysia, Thailand and Sri Lanka. A similar levy has been imposed on "front axle beam and steering knuckles meant for heavy and medium commercial vehicles" shipped from China.
Then, definitive anti-dumping duty has been levied on imports of "hexamine" from China and the UAE as well as on "all fully drawn or fully oriented yarnspin drawn yarnflat yarn of polyester (non-textured and non-POY)" originating in or exported from China and Thailand. The duties would be valid for five years, an official statement said.
Bennett, Coleman & Co., Ltd. 
India to defend farmers' interest against developed countries at WTO
Timsy Jaipuria
23 October 2015
Hindustan Times
New Delhi, Oct. 23 -- In a power-packed meeting chaired by Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Narendra Modi, India has decided to stay firm when it comes to protecting the interest of the farmers of the country.
According to sources, the meeting was called to review India's position at upcoming HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's Nairobi ministerial in December. Finance minister Arun Jaitley, commerce minister Nirmala Sitharaman and senior bureaucrats, including principle secretary to the PM Nripendra Misra, commerce secretary Rita Teaotia and chief economic adviser HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Arvind Subramanian, were among those present.
"PM Modi clearly pointed out that India should stand firm against the developed economies such as United States, which continues to oppose credible and developmental outcomes," a source familiar with the developments said. India has been pressing hard at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO for a special safeguard mechanism and a permanent solution for public stockholding programmes for food security.
"PM wants India to fight the pitch of developed nations that wants to kill the DDA (Doha Development Agenda) while pursuing unresolved issues in agriculture and areas outside the DDA. If allowed this would imply that India would have to phase out the agriculture input subsidies such as fertiliser, power etc and also not to set a minimum support price. PM is strongly opposing any such approach," another senior official from commerce ministry said.
Published by HT Syndication with permission from Hindustan Times.
Commodity boost for India
Rajesh Bhayani Mumbai
23 October 2015
Business Standard
India remains a net gainer from the slump in international commodities, even as exports take a knock
A fall in global commodities prices and slowdown in China have changed growth equations, capital flows and foreign trade globally. India is no exception.
India will be a net gainer, even as lower commodity prices have shrunk exports. It is also likely to attract a greater pie of the shrinking global capital flows.
In the first half of FY16, the average price of Brent crude oil was down 47 per cent year-on-year (Y-o-Y) and steel lost 30 per cent. India’s merchandise exports in FY15 are likely to be the lowest in the past five years. Export of agro commodities, including basmati rice and buffalo meat, were also down in the first five months of FY16. A sharp fall in export of gems & jewellery, cotton and apparel, and steel was either due to unviable prices or lower demand.
Aditya Narain, equity strategist, Citigroup Global Markets, says, “India looks to be a net gainer in the current commodity rout. The fall in trade deficit and a corresponding decline in fuel subsidy collectively provides a fiscal cushion and a flexibility for monetary policy. It hits metal producers and its relative effect seems to be percolating to the banking system to that extent — the overall gains outweigh cost.”
Retail inflation has come down. In August, it fell to 3.7 per cent and rose marginally to 4.4 per cent in September, largely due to higher prices of pulses, but remains comfortable.
Lower inflation provided room to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Reserve Bank of India, which cut its policy rate by 50 basis points and there was a fresh inflow in the debt market.
On the downside, foreign portfolio investors have sold Indian equities this year in line with a global risk aversion towards emerging market (EM) assets. This has put some pressure on the rupee but it has fared better than its EM peers.
“The overall foreign investment pie has shrunk but within that, India is getting a bigger share due to its relatively better performance. A relatively stable Indian currency is also attracting lots of fixed income money in Indian debt,” adds Narain.
The benefits of lower commodity prices could start reflecting in the stock markets as well. Outflows have stopped and the analysts have turned bullish.
Adds Narain, “The worst for the corporate sector and, hence, the markets is over. Corporate earnings could start showing improvements as early as the next quarter. We see eight per cent earnings growth in the current financial year and 16-17 per cent in FY17.”
Falling exports seem to be the only dampener and one that will take time to correct. Asia, including oil-producing West Asia, buy nearly half our goods exports. West Asia has been hit by a slump in crude oil prices. The Trans-Pacific Partnership, a trade agreement signed by Southeast Asian countries and involving 12 countries and including the US, may hit exports. “India’s exports may be hit due to the treaty, as there will be a significant diversion of trade, as well as foreign investments from Indian markets. In FY15, a quarter of Indian merchandise exports worth $75 billion went to TPP member-countries,” says Nirav Sheth, analyst, Edelweiss Securities.
Business Standard Limited (India) 
Russian doubts pre-court settlement of Ukraine’s claim to WTO against Russia 
22 October 2015
ITAR-TASS World Service
MOSCOW, October 22. /TASS/. Russia’s Economic Development doubts pre-court settlement of Ukraine’s claim to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization /WTO/ against Russia, First Deputy Minister of Economic Development Alexey Likhachev said on Thursday.
"Is pre-court settlement or counteraction possible? It’s not right to file counteractions. And I doubt pre-court settlement of the issue," he said.
ITAR-TASS Information Telegraph Agency of Russia
The Great Train Robbery? Ukraine Sues Russia for not Buying Carriages
22 October 2015
Sputnik News Service
Russia's alleged refusal to purchase Ukrainian-made railcars and railroad switches has prompted Kiev to file a lawsuit against Russia with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization, Ukrainian media reported.
"The first lawsuit against Russia has been submitted to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO in connection with the restrictions that were imposed on the purchase of Ukrainian railcars and switch layouts," Ukrainian Deputy Economic Development Minister Natalya Mykolskaya said.
She claimed that since 2013, Russia has "unjustifiably" been refusing to buy railcars and railroad switches made by the Kryukov carriage-building plant and the Dnepropetrovsk switch-building plant, respectively, among other companies.
According to her, Russia has repeatedly cancelled or revoked certificates for these products.
Mykolskaya also complained that due to the restrictions, Ukraine's railcar and switch exports have fallen from 1.7 billion dollars to 51 million dollars over the past few years. Russia had been Ukraine's primary foreign market for railway stock as both countries share the 1520 gauge railway network originally introduced by the Russian empire and expanded during the Soviet era; aside from the Baltic countries and Finland, all of Ukraine's new partners under the EU-Ukraine Association Agreement use railways with different gauges.
At the moment, Ukraine reportedly hopes to settle a dispute in the course of preliminary consultations in the next 30 days. Earlier, Ukrainian Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk threatened to file a lawsuit against Russia over its unwillingness to write off Ukraine's debts.
Rossiya Segodnya International Information Agency
Six NGOs urge Obama to extend pharma transition period
Sheikh Shahariar Zaman
23 October 2015
Dhaka Tribune
Six international non-government organisations have urged US President Barack Obama to extend the pharmaceutical transition period for the least developed countries.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Oxfam America, Health Gap, Knowledge Ecology International, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Public Citizen, Union for Affordable Cancer Treatment and Young Professionals Chronic Disease Network have sent a letter to Obama this week to consider the issue for the LDCs.
“We strongly urge the US to take immediate steps to express its full and unconditional support for the LDC Group's request for a pharmaceutical transition period for as long as they remain LDCs,” the letter said.
The NGOs said in the letter that they believed the LDCs' request for a pharmaceutical transition period for as long as they remain as LDCs will receive unconditional support from WTO members.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union has publicly supported the LDCs' request and the UN and international agencies including WHO, UNITAID, UNAIDS and UNDP, suppliers of generic medicines to LDCs, and civil society organisations from across the world have unequivocally supported the LDCs' request, it said.
“We fail to understand why the US alone continues to oppose LDCs' demand - a legally sound and justified request for a pharmaceutical transition period for as long as they remain LDCs,” the letter said.
LDCs are the most vulnerable and poorest segment of the international community.
According to the United Nations, more than 70% of the LDC population lives on less than $2 per day and an estimated 252 million people live in hunger.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Bank data from 2014 reports that only 36% of the least developed countries have access to improved sanitation facilities while 68% have access to improved drinking water source.
As of 2012, two thirds of people in LDCs lacked access to electricity.
In 2014, Gross National Income per capita for LDCs was $915 compared to $55,200 for the United States.
In 2001, the Doha Declaration on The Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) and Public health which exempted LDCs from pharmaceutical product patenting until January 1, 2016, had a hugely positive impact in improving access to affordable treatment.
It enabled LDC governments, donors and the international community to treat more HIV/AIDs patients. However the treatment gap continues to be massive, as 63% of the 10.7 million people living with HIV in LDCs do not have access to antiretroviral (ARV).
Non-communicable disease is another growing challenge for LDCs as its prevalence increases and treatments are simply unaffordable, especially as most of the medical expenses in LDCs are borne “out-of-pocket.”
Dhaka Tribune
Russia doubts whether TTIP will comply with WTO norms - deputy foreign minister
22 October 2015
ITAR-TASS World Service
VERONA, October 22. /TASS/. Russia has reservations about compliance of Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) between US and EU with the norms of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO), Deputy Foreign Minister Alexey Meshkov told TASS on Thursday.
"It is very hard to think about something being done in secret, not only from us but also from the European society. There is one very serious question on how HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO norms will be in line with such deep regional agreements that are being created in Asia and Europe. We would not want our economic interests to be harmed," Meshkov said on the side-lines of the Eurasian Economic Forum in Verona.
Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership envisages establishment of a free-trade zone between United States and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union. The start of talks to reach the agreement on TTIP was announced in June 2013. 
ITAR-TASS Information Telegraph Agency of Russia
Rare earth demand to increase 50% by 2020
Peter Cole, Special to Financial Post
22 October 2015
Postmedia Breaking News
According to Chen Zhanheng, vice-secretary general of the Association of China Rare Earth Industry, Chinese rare earth demand will increase 50% in the next five years, putting pressure on China to eliminate production quotas.
China currently produces 90% of global rare earth supplies, while consuming 80%. In 2015, China will export 30,000 tonnes through official channels. The fractured rare earth industry is consolidating production into six government controlled conglomerates.
The demand for rare earths outside China is growing faster than supply.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Medallion Resources has an innovative first-mover strategy highly differentiated from the standard rare-earth-exploration approach. The company believes that future global supply shortages will not be met through hard-rock deposits.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Medallion Resources rare earth production is focused on monazite-a by-product of heavy mineral sand mining. The monazite is relatively easy to access, and the metallurgy is well established, although Medallion is developing proprietary techniques to optimize existing processes.
"What differentiates Medallion resources from other rare earth juniors is that we avoid high risk, time-consuming, expensive activities like exploration, drilling and inventing brand new metallurgy," stated Medallion President & CEO HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Don Lay in an exclusive interview.
Mineral sands are beaches with special geology that nature has worked over for millions of years. The biggest production regions are in Southern Africa, India and Australia. Beaches at Cancun and Waikiki contain about 1% of heavy mineral content. Remote industrially mined beaches are typically 5-10% heavy minerals. Monazite, which is more than 50% rare-earth content, is mined and concentrated with the rest of the heavy minerals.
"There are mineral sand miners around the world interested in selling their monazite to 3(rd) party processors," stated Lay. "Often the board will tell the operations people, 'We're in the titanium and zircon business-if you can make money selling monazite for the rare-earths go ahead."
But thorium-a slightly radioactive element-is present in monazite and presents a challenge. Rare-earth operators are required to safely handle and dispose of radioactive elements. However, an internationally recognized nuclear consultancy has issued a positive radiological and environmental report for Medallion's proposed monazite processing facility.
Lay is talking to large players about securing supplies of monazite.
"In 2010, China told the rest of the world, 'We want you to develop your own rare earth resources,'" stated Lay, "and they clamped down on domestic producers with export taxes and export quotas. But China is part of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) and they were forbidden to do this. So the Chinese have adapted with production taxes and production quotas."
In the next 12 months Medallion intends to advance a pilot plant in preparation to launching a commercial one. Lay is also working on finding a location for the plant, likely within the central part of North America.
Medallion recently completed bench-scale metallurgical testing of its rare-earth extraction process. These tests confirmed that a caustic-process approach yielded a high-purity rare-earth concentrate suitable for standard rare-earth refineries or separation plants. Concentrate samples will soon be sent to interested refineries for further testing.
Lay and his team were pleased to discover that there was also an economically viable calcium phosphate by-product. Typically monazite contains around 35% phosphate. Medallion's extraction process liberates the phosphate and converts it to calcium phosphate-a commonly used animal feed supplement.
The global market for feed phosphates is estimated to be over $4.5 billion per year. Current prices for calcium phosphate in North America are about $400 per tonne.
Medallion estimates a capital cost of about $50 million to construct a rare-earth extraction plant capable of producing 10,000 tonnes of rare-earth oxides annually.
"The Medallion model eliminates the long lead-time for producing rare earths," stated Jon Hykawy in an exclusive interview. "Instead of permitting and building a mine, Medallion plans to use someone else's waste as the feedstock for a chemical operation which requires a specialised skillset, which they excel at. This approach allows Medallion to focus on the money making part of the business."
Industrial corporations outside China are searching for rare-earth supply. Medallion is investigating sales opportunities with American, European, Japanese and Korean entities.
"Medallion is searching aggressively to secure a good source of high grade monazite," confirmed Luisa Moreno, Senior Analyst and Partner of Tahuti Global. "Unlike their peers they do not have to spend money securing and exploring a deposit. Mineral monazite usually contains about 60-65% rare earths, so Medallion should end up with a high grade source feed."
Many of the existing mines have reserves of over a billion tonnes of mineral sands-about 30 years of production. Monazite remains in the waste stream and is discarded during the heavy mineral sands processing flow.
Heavy mineral sand miners have shown a lack of interest in processing monazite, which has created an opportunity for Medallion to enter the production chain at an advanced stage and build a cash-positive business with low risk investment.
This story was provided by Market One Media for commercial purposes. Postmedia had no involvement in the creation of this content.
Canwest News Service
US 'erred in leaving China on side-lines'
Fu Jing
23 October 2015
China Daily-Africa Weekly
Dutch writer faults Obama's decision-making over new bank and new trade agreement
Fokke Obbema, a Dutch journalist and author of China and the West, has criticized United States President Barack Obama for trying to contain China, which he believes has been fulfilling its global responsibilities appropriately.
The first mistake, says Obbema, was that the US tried and failed to discourage some countries from supporting the China-led HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, an institution intended to boost connectivity in Eurasia.
A second error came early this month, when Obama said that "countries like China" should not be allowed to write the rules of the global economy. "We should write those rules," the president said in a statement, "opening new markets to American products while setting high standards for protecting workers and preserving our environment." He made the remarks after the US, Japan and 10 other countries had concluded an historic trade deal, the Trans-Pacific Partnership.
"To be honest, I was also a little shocked by these words, and I thought they were really harsh," says Obbema, speaking to China Daily from South Korea. "And it was a bit unlike him... advocating enemy-thinking."
Obbema visited China in 2008, the year the Olympics was held in Beijing. The dynamism, energy and rapid changes in Beijing and Shanghai fascinated him. It was a shock to the system and a contrast from the clichés and reports about the fast-developing country. The experience inspired him to write a book about China.
In 2009, when the world was in the grip of a financial crisis and recession, China came under fire following the United Nations climate summit in Copenhagen. Such intense events drove Obbema, a senior journalist at the Dutch daily newspaper de Volkskrant, to find out more about China's transformation.
After extensive interviews, with hundreds of people from all walks of life, Obbema published the Dutch version of China and the West: Hope and Fear in the Age of Asia. The English language version, which is also available, has a special chapter dedicated to President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xi Jinping, who visited the Netherlands last year. Obbema attended the banquet, giving him the opportunity to make first-hand observations on the Chinese leader.
"On his personality, I think you can say that he surprised all the China-watchers in the Western world by being a very confident and not a risk-averse type of leader," says Obbema.
Obbema says Xi has demonstrated admirable qualities in the ongoing anti-corruption campaign. "And we have also seen this on the global stage," he adds. "We have seen that in the AIIB, of course."
He says Brussels and Washington have asked Beijing to be a responsible stakeholder and that Beijing has responded positively, especially by offering to set up and lead on the AIIB. "Many European countries have welcomed it, but the US has failed to understand the importance of the AIIB."
Obbema, referring to Washington's decision to exclude China from the TPP, says: "To be honest I think that it's the same case as with the AIIB. The US made a mistake in not including China, because it can easily be seen as a move to contain China."
He presents two models of the China-US relationship: the G2 or the Cold War 2.0. "And I'm afraid that this move, by putting China aside, is more moving toward what I call Cold War 2.0 than I would have liked," he says.
It is a bad strategy by Washington, which should give leeway to the Chinese because they have legitimate cause for wanting to have a greater say in their backyard. The Dutch journalist also says Obama's words after the TPP announcement show a certain level of frustration from Washington toward the balance of power in Asia-Pacific.
He says that if China's policy makers view the US as an opponent then they, too, could fall into the trap of enemy-thinking logic. "I think that should be avoided at all costs. It is very unhealthy if the most important relationship in the world is not going in the right direction."
There are other ties that need nurturing, though. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union is China's biggest trading partner, with more than $1.3 billion of goods trading between the two on a daily basis. Obemma suggests that China avoid solely focusing on the UK when it comes to European trade and investment because a strong Europe is in China's interests.
"I think China could help us a little by taking Brussels more seriously and that would be my wish for Chinese strategy."
Xi is the first Chinese president to have visited Brussels, with a key function of the March 2014 trip being to improve business relations. His three-day schedule included a meeting with Belgian royalty, and meetings with European Council President Herman Van Rompuy, European Commission President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Jose Manuel Barroso, and European Parliament President Martin Schulz.
Obemma sees the trip as just the beginning. "Leaving politics aside and just focusing on economic cooperation, I think a lot could happen between China and Europe," he says.
There is a crucial opportunities for progress in November, says Obemma, when the EU and China meet for the eighth round of bilateral investment treaty talks. China accounts for less than 5 percent of European investments abroad and foreign direct investment from China is less than 3 percent of the total FDI inflow to the EU, according to a report from the Beijing-based law firm King & Wood Mallesons. Both the EU and China hope a comprehensive bilateral investment treaty will narrow the gap between trade and investment levels.
Obemma says Europe is in a very difficult position because of the refugee and euro crises and that the only solution to both problems is to strengthen Europe on an institutional level in Brussels. "And if China takes Brussels more seriously than at least that is some kind of help; I don't expect China to solve our euro crisis - we have to do it ourselves."
He says there are other ways that China can expand its presence on the world stage, especially when it comes to global security and the fight against HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Islamic State terrorists. "These are barbarians that the international community has to fight, and I think, when we're talking about behaving responsibly on an international level, everybody should join this fight. As a superpower, China should do it as well."
It does not mean China should neglect its domestic challenges. Obemma has become well versed in the country's priorities, namely fighting corruption, income inequality and dealing with pollution, after meeting and talking to hundreds of Chinese.
He says that China has faced these three challenges for years and that there is a clear need to overcome them. "In my view, when it comes to China on a domestic front, I think the biggest problem is the environment," he says.
The second priority is the anti-corruption campaign. "The third one for me would be for me the gap between the rich and poor," says Obbema, adding that his big wish for China is that the leadership takes the opportunity in the coming five years to build a social safety net.
In an opinion piece for The Independent in London, published in August, he wrote: "It is important to note that China still has the largest number of poor people in the world, after India, despite decades of growth." Economic woes, such as slower growth and turbulent markets, will have an impact on income inequality. Improved welfare measures will benefit the country.
"It is really necessary for China to make the transition to a consumption-led economy," Obbema says.
Fokke Obbema
The silk roads rise again
Peter Frankopan
New Statesman
22 October 2015
New Statesman
The ancient network across central Asia shaped trade and culture for centuries. Now, as its economy slows, China is building a new bridge from east to west.
On 6 September 2013, the Chinese president, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xi Jinping, left the G20 summit of major economies in St Petersburg and began a tour of central Asia. His first stop was Astana, in Kazakhstan. On arrival, he told his counterpart, Nursultan Nazar­bayev, that both countries had benefited from good friendship – they were “as close as lips and teeth” – and that he looked forward to discussing “major international and regional issues of mutual interest”.
What these issues were, and their geo­political significance, became clear the following day in a speech at Nazarbayev University. The time had arrived, Xi announced, for China and the nations of central Asia to reflect on their long, shared past and to formulate plans to intensify economic co-operation, facilitate trade and remove barriers. It was time, he said, to build a “New Silk Road”.
With that statement of intent – soon backed by action – from the leader of the world’s second-biggest economy, it was evident that the axis on which the globe spins was slowly turning back to where it lay for millennia. Scholars, artists and merchants once flocked to cities such as Bukhara and Samarkand (in modern Uzbekistan), to cosmopolitan centres such as Baghdad and Basra (modern Iraq), Tabriz and Isfahan (Iran), or to Merv, a city in what is now Turkmenistan and which in the 10th century Arab and Persian geographers described as “the mother of the world”.
This network of countries, stretching from the Black Sea and eastern Mediterranean to the mountain ranges of the Himalaya, Tian Shan and Pamir, is rich is commodities that help power and feed the world: oil and gas, rare-earth minerals, wheat and corn. Yet it remains a region we pay scant attention to and know little about. If we are to make sense of the past, the present and the future, we should be looking less to the West and the East and much more to the bridge that links the two. The Silk Roads once dominated global trade and cultural exchange. Now they are rising again.
The term “Silk Roads”, or Seidenstraßen, was coined in 1877 by the German geographer Ferdinand von Richthofen. It denoted the mesh of cities, oases and routes criss-crossing Asia, linking the Pacific with the Mediterranean, and the Red Sea, Persian Gulf and Indian Ocean with Russia, Scandinavia and Europe. Along these networks the world’s great religions rose and spread. Competition was intense, requiring architectural statements to support claims of divine connection – as with the now destroyed statues of the Buddha at Bamiyan in Afghanistan, or the 40 Buddhist monasteries that ringed Kabul, one of which had pavements made of onyx, marble walls, golden doors and floors of solid silver, “while in the hallway there was a golden idol as beautiful as the moon, seated on a magnificent bejewelled throne”, as one observer wrote.
Joining the evangelists on these routes across Asia were military leaders, merchants and learned men. Modern Chinese words derived from Persian and Arabic, such as bosi, meaning a precious object (literally “from Persia”), are evidence of the booming markets and wealth in the Muslim world in the early Middle Ages, as vast tax revenues flowed towards Baghdad and the great cities of Mesopotamia and central Asia. Scholars were drawn by systems of patronage that gathered the best minds to work on pure and applied mathematics, science, optics and medicine, while great craftsmen found an insatiable demand for their wares. A place such as Rayy, not far from modern Tehran, was so glorious as to be considered “the bridegroom of the earth”. Cities, strung like pearls across the spine of Asia, flourished long after the discovery of the Americas: the moment usually presumed to have marked the true start of the ascent of the West.
In fact, the expeditions that crossed the Atlantic from the end of the 15th century, coupled with the rounding of the Cape of Good Hope by the Portuguese explorer Vasco da Gama at roughly the same time, served to strengthen rather than weaken the Silk Roads. Precious metals taken from the Aztecs and Incas were moved through Europe and then on to trading stations such as Manila, in the Philippines, to pay for luxuries of all kinds – from ceramics and textiles to pearls and curios, such as the capes that were brought back from the East for the Medici dukes in Florence.
Europe’s golden age was mirrored, initially, by a flourishing across the Silk Roads, as China, India, Persia and central Asia reaped the benefits of trade. Descendants of the great central Asian warlord Tamberlane became empire-builders, expanding south from the Ferghana Valley (at the crossroads of modern-day Uzbekistan, Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan) through Afghanistan and into India. Monuments were constructed by the new central Asian “Mughal” overlords in the classic central Asian style, such as Humayun’s tomb in Delhi and the Taj Mahal at Agra.
Europe’s efforts to take control of the Silk Roads networks led to a change in attitudes to those in the East, who went from being trading partners to people who could be divided, exploited and dominated. The likes of the East India Company established and expanded their trading positions jealously and ruthlessly, making obscene fortunes for their officers. The interests of those who ran and owned the business were everything; those who got in the way were of no consequence. In the early 1770s famine ravaged Bengal, killing millions after the East India Company sharply raised land taxes and cleared fields to make way for the cultivation of opium poppies. When Robert Clive, a leading figure in the East India Company, was called to answer questions in parliament, he spoke like the chief executive of a distressed bank: his priorities had been to protect the interests of shareholders, not those of the local population; surely he deserved no criticism for doing his job.
That the European traders had thought only of enriching themselves as the local population starved to death made a strong impression on those living in colonies elsewhere, above all in North America. Leaflets distributed in Pennsylvania described the East India Company as an institution “well versed in Tyranny, Plunder, Oppression, and Bloodshed”, a symbol of all that was wrong with Britain itself. If Bengalis could starve to death, why not those living in the colonies? It was not hard for the Founding Fathers to conclude that it was time to go it alone. Events on one side of the globe had an effect on the other.
Anxieties about control of the Silk Road region helped shape the geopolitics of the 19th and early 20th centuries. Keeping India secure and protecting the strong trading position that had been built up in China became central strands of British foreign policy. In the hundred years after 1815 and the Battle of Waterloo, it was Russian ambitions in Asia that London feared most. The tsar’s frontiers rolled ever further southwards and eastwards, swallowing up territory that threatened the Persian Gulf and advancing deep into central Asia. This set nerves on edge in London and Delhi. Suddenly Russia was at the gates of India, with the protective buffer of independent khanates reduced to what Lord Curzon called “the thinness of a wafer”.
The answer was to divert Russian attention to its western flank, where relations with a strident and ambitious Germany were sacrificed. Any improvement in relations with the Kaiser were out of the question, noted the foreign secretary, Sir Edward Grey, in 1910, if they came at the expense of Russia. The consequences of a hostile Russia, another senior British official noted, were far worse than an unfriendly Germany. As Europe drifted to war in 1914, it was the fear of what would happen in the East that haunted British diplomats. If we fail to stand by Russia, Sir George Clerk cabled from Constantinople, as the tsar’s troops began to mobilise on the border with Austria-Hungary, “our very existence as an Empire will be at stake”.
It was not just India that was at risk; so was trade with China, four-fifths of which was carried on British ships at the turn of the 20th century. The importance of Persia, too, as a central point along the Silk Roads networks was magnified by the discovery of oil in 1908 by a British firm, the Anglo-Persian Oil Company, which eventually became HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" BP. Historical attention usually focuses on the war in Europe, but the British authorities at the time kept close tabs on events thousands of miles away. According to the cabinet secretary, gaining control of Persia’s oil, and the suspected abundant supply in neighbouring Mesopotamia, was nothing less than “a first-class war aim”.
Thus began a century of astonishing short-sightedness as countries of Europe, and then the US and the USSR, pursued economic interests and geopolitical ideals at the expense of local populations. Reactions to heavy-handed interference became increasingly aggressive and violent, with anti-western rhetoric a consistent theme: from the furious rejection of the West by Ayatollah Khomeini and his successors to the anger of the former Afghan president HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Hamid Karzai, who now talks of the western intervention in Afghanistan as “a betrayal”, and on to the grotesque violence of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Islamic State and al-Qaeda. The defiance of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Vladimir Putin, too, whether regarding the deployment of troops in Ukraine, the annexation of Crimea or in the recent military intervention in Syria; likewise, the point-blank refusal of China as well as many of the states in central Asia to engage in dialogue about human rights stands as a rejection of the “enlightened” western way of doing things. Across the Silk Roads, from east to west, north to south, the message is the same: the West should disengage from ill-thought-through attempts to spread views that it treats as objective truths; it should forget its mantra of liberation and democratisation – and mind its own business.
While governments in North America and Europe attempt to respond to events as they happen, from the Arab spring to the refugee crises, China has been thinking about the long game. In a series of important public statements, backed by action on the ground, the Chinese leadership has begun to build friendships, cement alliances and secure resources that will be crucial for its growth, which has slowed in recent years from 10 per cent to less than 7 per cent. This marks an important change of attitudes, following a century characterised by upheaval, introspection and long periods of self-imposed isolation. As Xi Jingping signalled in Kazakhstan two years ago, China is becoming intensely keen on emphasising the historical, economic and cultural links with its neighbours, evoking a common heritage in central as well as south-east Asia.
Speaking in Astana, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xi Jinping noted that the peoples who live in the region that connects east and west have co-operated, coexisted and flourished despite “differences in race, belief and cultural background” for 2,000 years. It is a “foreign policy priority”, he said, “for China to develop friendly co-operative relations with the central Asian countries”.
To do that, China is committing formidable resources to infrastructure investments in a web that resembles the Silk Roads of old and is known in China as “One Road, One Belt”. With Chinese energy demands alone forecast to triple by 2030, signing large contracts to buy oil from Russian producers has been a priority, as has been winning the rights to develop wells in Afghanistan and in the Afghan-Tajik basin, believed to contain 1.8 billion barrels of crude. Chinese miners have been pursuing concessions for copper, bauxite and rare-earth mines across the heart of Asia. Networks of pipelines, railways and deep-water ports – as at Bandar Abbas in Pakistan – designed to transport these resources have been built or are under construction.
To secure deals, the Chinese have used a soft touch, committing to share profits and fund educational projects. Companies such as ZTE and Huawei have set up telecommunication networks, bringing 3G to the steppes and superfast broadband to the cities of the Silk Roads – at prices that western corporations decry as being commercially uncompetitive, but which win goodwill in the region.
As minerals, fossil fuels and other commodities flow in one direction, so hard currency flows in the other. This brings challenges in a region of autocratic, often repressive regimes where power and assets are in the hands of the few. In Turkmenistan gleaming new tourist facilities at Avaza, on the eastern coast of the Caspian Sea, built at a reported cost of $2bn, stand almost empty, while new airports, presidential palaces and winter sports arenas that are part of a construction programme worth ten times as much bring little benefit to the 60 per cent of the population that is unemployed.
Yet something profound is happening. China’s own centre of gravity has begun to swing westwards, to Xinjiang, a large autonomous region in the north-west that borders Russia, Mongolia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Afghanistan, India and Pakistan. Economic growth there has recently outstripped the rest of China, and tourism to cities such as Zhangye, in Gansu Province, has risen elevenfold in the past four years alone.
One reason for this is the huge investment into railway lines fanning out along the Silk Roads to connect to the Indian subcontinent, the Caspian, the heart of Russia, and on to a rail freight terminal at Duisburg in Germany. A recent report in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" New York Times noted that although only 2,500 containers were shipped by rail from China to Europe in 2012, 7.5 million are expected to travel along that route by 2020. The speed and cost of getting Chinese-made goods to market has convinced companies such as Foxconn, an electronics manufacturer that is a crucial part of Apple’s supply chain, and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Hewlett-Packard to move from the Pacific coast of China to Chengdu and Chongqing, which are closer to China’s western border and to the Silk Roads.
It was no accident that George Osborne visited Xinjiang on his recent trade mission, nor that he was congratulated by Chinese state media for his “diplomatic etiquette” for not “raising the human rights issue”. As Jim O’Neill, the former HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Goldman Sachs economist who coined the term “Brics” and who now advises George Osborne, told the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Financial Times: “We shouldn’t go round the world saying, ‘Oi, you should do exactly what we think.’ Because it might not be right and, guess what, if you do that you won’t be very successful in your commercial objectives.”
To many people, the Silk Roads countries, especially those of central Asia, are perceived as a sort of “Wild East”, full of sinister characters. In Turkmenistan, a giant golden statue of the former president Saparmurat Niyazov revolves to face the direction of the sun. In Kazakhstan, President Nazarbayev was re-elected in 2011 after winning nearly 96 per cent of the vote. The family of his counterpart in Azerbaijan, Ilham Aliyev, was privately compared by US diplomats with “the Corleones of Godfather fame” in leaked diplomatic cables.
And yet, there are good reasons why we must engage with these nations. For one thing, the energy resources of countries across central Asia are large enough to affect global oil and gas prices (it is estimated that there is more oil under the Caspian Sea than off the North American continental shelf). Then there are the rare-earth minerals that are essential for components in satellites, iPhones, laptops and cancer screening machines. Even the wheat fields that run across southern Russia, Ukraine and the steppes from the Black Sea as far as Mongolia have an importance far beyond the region: during the crisis in Ukraine in 2014, the global price of wheat shot up.
Luxury hotel groups have opened up all over the region, from Erbil in Iraqi Kurdistan to Baku in Azerbaijan and Urumqi in China, where HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Hilton Hotels & Resorts has just opened its first property. As the ink was drying on a putative agreement between Tehran and Washington on nuclear issues (energy and weapons), HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" McDonald’s advertised for potential franchisees in Iran. British private schools, too, have set up satellite operations in the Gulf, China and Kazakhstan, where there is a choice of two campuses of Haileybury College alone. Tony Blair has been offering advice and public words of support there (in return for a reported fee of £8m a year).
In this new era, the West’s influence is waning, as is its credibility. The disastrous military interventions in Afghanistan and Iraq, coupled with the confused and ineffective response to the civil war in Syria, are bad enough. Barriers being erected – in some cases literally – at the frontiers of Europe provide a powerful indication of the passing of an age, one in which foreigners and outsiders are less welcome, in which tolerance and compassion are replaced by fear, anxiety and seclusion.
Yet, to the East, the world is slowly opening up again, as it did in the glory days of the old Silk Roads.
Peter Frankopan’s book “The Silk Roads: a New History of the World”, is published by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Bloomsbury
New Statesman
END
 
Josep Bosch, Information Officer
Information and External Relations Division
+41227395681
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.