Negotiators near accord on TPP trade deal
Nearing accord on farm products: Japan agrees to slash pork, beef tariffs
Pacific trade ministers vow to reach deal but extra time needed
U.S. News: Rift Over Drug Protections Complicates Trade Talks
China, US rate hike loom over global finance summit
US, India trade battle at WTO to escalate
Former WTO chief says important areas of co-operation between Russia, Europe remain 
Regional Free Trade Deals May Create Legal Mess Within WTO Framework 
Commission: Russia's import ban on Estonian fish products is unjustified
WTO rules against country on services
Stop the complacency: Britain could sleepwalk out of the EU
 
Negotiators near accord on TPP trade deal
David Nakamura
2 October 2015
The Washington Post
ATLANTA - U.S. negotiators on Thursday closed in on a final agreement on an expansive Asia-Pacific trade deal, but congressional leaders cautioned that the accord should not be rushed to completion over fears that a subpar deal could lose support among lawmakers.
The Obama administration is hoping to cap a week of negotiations between the United States and 11 other nations with an announcement Friday that they have reached consensus on the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), the largest free-trade and regulatory deal in a generation.
Touring a local mattress factory Thursday morning, U.S. Trade Representative Michael B. Froman said the trade accord would lower tariffs for U.S. exporters and help small- and medium-sized businesses hire more workers and pay them better wages.
"We want to focus on eliminating barriers," said Froman, flanked by Atlanta Mayor Kasim Reed and the mayors of three other Southern cities. "There's a lot at stake and we are not the only party out there. The Asia-Pacific region is home to 3 billion middle-class consumers over the next 15 years, so it's important that the rules of the road in that region are defined in a way that plays to the interests and values of the United States."
The negotiations, however, remained complicated by several sticking points, including differences over the length of copyright protections on pharmaceutical drugs, market access for dairy and sugar products and rules governing where automobiles are manufactured. And a new flash point emerged Thursday over an Obama administration proposal to restrict the ability of tobacco companies to access a proposed international dispute settlement panel.
Dozens of protesters, including some from Canada and Japan, rallied in a public park in downtown Atlanta, banging drums and holding signs reading "Stop the TPP." They denounced the deal as secretive and non-democratic before marching three blocks to the Westin hotel, where the trade talks are taking place.
Industry lobbyists from several nations milled about the hotel. More than 140 journalists applied for credentials to cover the talks, according to organizers, though the negotiations are taking place behind closed doors.
President Obama has called the TPP a top economic and foreign policy priority, and his administration has been engaged in the talks for years. Administration officials are hoping to close the deal to capitalize on the momentum from the spring, when Obama won new "fast-track" trade powers from Congress that would help him get the deal ratified.
Under the terms of that legislation, Obama could sign a final TPP agreement within 90 days of the deal being concluded and then send it to Congress for a vote that cannot be subject to a filibuster.
Lawmakers warned Thursday that U.S. trade negotiators risked losing critical support for the accord if they capitulate on thorny issues in the final days of talks just to close the deal.
"The substance of the negotiations must determine their timing and eventual conclusion," a bipartisan group of Senate and House leaders wrote to Froman. The letter was signed by Sens. Orrin G. Hatch (R-Utah) and Ron Wyden (D-Ore.), and Reps. Paul Ryan (R-Wis.) and Sander M. Levin (D-Mich.).
"We share the same deep concern that significant issues remain outstanding in the TPP negotiations that must be resolved so that TPP has sufficient support in Congress," the lawmakers wrote.
Already, there were signs of eroding support. Republican Sens. Thom Tillis and Richard Burr of North Carolina on Thursday denounced published reports that U.S. negotiators had formally proposed exempting the tobacco industry from an international dispute settlement mechanism contained in the TPP that would allow corporations to sue nations over policies that damage their profits.
"The Obama administration is discriminating against an entire agricultural commodity, setting a dangerous precedent for future trade agreements," Tillis said. "Trade agreements should not be laboratories for setting partisan policies and picking winners and losers. If any carve-out is ultimately included in the TPP, I will work hard to help defeat its ratification."
Under the provision, the cases are heard by an international tribunal that rules outside of domestic legal systems. But opponents of such a mechanism, including Sen. Elizabeth Warren (D-Mass.), have pointed to cases in which tobacco companies have attempted to sue countries that have changed their smoking laws, potentially exposing taxpayers to large settlements.
Wyden sent a letter to Froman supporting the exemption of the tobacco industry, saying the industry has fought public health efforts around the world. "The Administration should not spend a dime of negotiating capital protecting tobacco companies," Wyden wrote.
On Thursday, Froman reiterated his pledge that the accord would represent a balanced agreement with protections for workers and the environment.
"We're focused on making sure we have an open, rules-based system with strong enforcement, raising standards for labor and environment," he said at the mattress factory.
The TPP includes nations that account for a combined 40 percent of the world's gross domestic product. Among them are Japan, Australia, Mexico and Canada. The pact would lower tariffs on beef, dairy products and automobiles, while setting up new regulatory provisions on pharmaceuticals, financial services and online commerce.
But it faces fierce opposition from liberal Democrats, as well as labor and environmental groups.
Although the Obama administration emerged victorious in its push for fast-track trade powers, the prospects of a final TPP accord coming to a congressional vote during the 2016 election season presents another daunting task. Some presidential candidates from both parties have denounced U.S. trade policies, saying they have contributed to the loss of manufacturing jobs, and all House members will be up for re-election.
"They are under a great amount of pressure," said Ilana Solomon, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" the Sierra Club's director of responsible trade, whose organization has concerns over sections of the TPP deal that govern environmental regulations. "They know that it's not a shoo-in in Congress. Fast-track was incredibly difficult and they won on a thin majority. In an election season, if the policies do not make sense, representatives will not be happy, and that will put them in a bad space."
Washington Post
Nearing accord on farm products: Japan agrees to slash pork, beef tariffs
2 October 2015
Nikkei Report
MASAKUNI OSHIRABE, Nikkei staff writer
ATLANTA -- Japan has largely agreed to reduce tariffs on pork, beef and other items under the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade agreement, leaving dairy products and rice as the final sticking points in the agricultural products area.
The 4.3% tariff on high-priced pork will likely be eliminated 10 years after the TPP comes into effect, and the tariff on low-priced pork will be cut from the current 482 yen ($3.99) yen per kilogram to 50 yen per kilogram over the same period.
The U.S. is the largest exporter of pork to Japan. Though tariffs on the meat will be phased out, the two countries have, in a nod to Japanese producers, settled on a safeguard allowing a temporary return to high tariffs should imports spike.
Japan will likely reduce its current 38.5% duty on beef imports to 27.5% when the TPP comes into effect, further lowering it to 9% over 15 years. A tariff on wheat looks to be left as is, though the government markup on wholesale prices of the imported crop will be slashed 45%. Tariffs on poultry, now 8.5% to 11.9%, will be gradually phased out. The wine import duty of 15% or 125 yen per liter will be eliminated over seven years.
A deal on rice imports from the U.S. is still awaiting final negotiations. Japan has proposed an initial duty-free import quota of 50,000 tons a year. That level would be raised 2,000 tons annually starting the fourth year after the agreement to a final size of 70,000 tons. Tokyo is also considering prioritizing under an existing import quota system another 50,000 tons of rice in varieties favored by U.S. growers to bring the country on board.
Talks with New Zealand remain a sticking point in dairy products. Japan has proposed an import quota equivalent to 70,000 tons of raw milk for items from New Zealand, the U.S. and Australia. Around 32,000 tons would be allotted to New Zealand. But the country is demanding a quota of around 75,000 tons, and the two sides remain far apart.
Trade ministers from the 12 TPP countries have been meeting here since Wednesday to seek a broad agreement on all areas of the pact. Discussions are focused on a small number of contentious points, including dairy products, an exclusivity period for pharmaceutical data, and place-of-origin rules governing duty-free automobile imports. The gathering was initially set to run through Thursday, though an extension is looking more likely.
Japan and the U.S. will enter into final bilateral tariff talks once an overall agreement seems likely to come together, a negotiator said. Nikkei Digital Media Inc.
Document NKRP000020151002eba200014
Pacific trade ministers vow to reach deal but extra time needed
2 October 2015
Reuters News
ATLANTA, Oct 1 (Reuters) - Trade ministers from a dozen Pacific nations meeting in Atlanta extended talks on a sweeping trade deal until Saturday in a bid to get a final agreement on the most ambitious trade pact in a generation.
Officials extended talks originally scheduled to wrap up on Thursday in a determined effort to produce a breakthrough on the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which would liberalize trade in 40 percent of the world economy for a region stretching from Vietnam to Canada.
"No one wants to leave without an agreement," Mexican Economy Minister Ildefonso Guajardo told Reuters after a second plenary session of top officials from all 12 nations. "The good news is that we will not leave here without one."
Observers pointed to progress on autos, Canada's pledge to compensate farmers hurt by imports and signs of a possible compromise on patent protection for new drugs as evidence of advancement - although that remained a key sticking point.
"We are starting to see the path to an agreement and have agreed to make final efforts," Japanese Economy Minister Akira Amari told reporters.
Several officials said a final deal could come quickly depending on the outcome of bilateral talks on intellectual property protection for medicines and trade in dairy and autos.
Amari said the monopoly period for biologic drugs, which are made from living cells, was the most difficult issue remaining. TPP countries have protection periods ranging from 12 years in the United States to five years in countries including Australia and Chile.
A deal would be a legacy-defining achievement for U.S. President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Barack Obama. But the trade deal is seen as a threat by an array of interest groups from Mexican auto workers to Quebec dairy farmers to cancer patients who worry that it could push the cost of new therapies out of reach.
CONGRESSIONAL CONCERNS
In a reassertion of concern in Congress, a group of U.S. lawmakers from both parties sent a letter to U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman and Treasury Secretary Jack Lew on Wednesday.
"We urge you to take the time necessary to get the best deal possible for the United States, working closely with us," said the letter signed by House Ways and Means Committee Chairman HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Paul Ryan and Senate Finance Committee Chairman Orrin Hatch as well as the senior Democrats on those two committees.
Several Republicans attacked a new U.S. proposal to ensure governments would be free to enact anti-smoking measures without fear of legal action by tobacco companies.
That could prevent companies like HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Philip Morris and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Japan Tobacco Inc from using rules to protect foreign investors to challenge public health measures but falls short of the sweeping measure anti-smoking groups had hoped for.
Guajardo said talks on auto trade had progressed but were not over yet.
The auto issue is crucial for Japan, whose automakers, led by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Toyota Motor Corp, depend on sales to the U.S. market and want flexibility on sourcing auto parts.
But Mexico, which has experienced a boom in auto-related investment over the last two decades, wants to protect its manufacturers against increased competition from Asia. 
Thomson Reuters (Markets) LLC
U.S. News: Rift Over Drug Protections Complicates Trade Talks
By William Mauldin
2 October 2015
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
A fight over how long to protect certain high-end drugs from lower-cost imitators has emerged as the leading obstacle to negotiations aimed at completing a 12-nation trade agreement spanning the Pacific.
While officials from the U.S. and other counties cite some progress on two other thorny issues, the drug debate continues to divide Australia and other countries from America in the high-level talks that began Wednesday in Atlanta.
Backed by key lawmakers and pharmaceutical companies such as HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Pfizer Inc. and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Amgen Inc., U.S. negotiators are seeking an intellectual-property rule in the pact that would grant brand-name biologic drugs a period of exclusivity of as many as 12 years, during which they would be protected from generic imitations, consistent with U.S. law. Japan is also backing a long period of protection for biologic drugs.
Biologic drugs are complex medicines made from living cells, blood components and tissue, in contrast to the "small molecules" that scientists use to produce traditional drugs.
Countries such as Australia and New Zealand are pushing for five years of exclusivity, worried that a longer period of protection could slow the arrival of generic imitators and add significantly to the budgets of their national health systems.
On Wednesday, Australian Trade Minister Andrew Robb told Mike Froman, the U.S. trade representative, at a bilateral meeting that longer periods of exclusivity are unacceptable, according to an Australian official. Australia currently has five years of standard protection with one additional year of effective protection in its domestic law.
Mr. Robb has pushed back against a compromise proposal floated in the talks that would require countries in the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade agreement to give biologic drugs at least five years of basic exclusivity, plus an additional three years of protection while regulators monitor the drug's safety, the official said.
Governments protect drug makers' exclusivity in several ways for biologics, including by preventing imitators from using data from the original drug's trials for a certain period, as well as temporarily blocking market entry for imitations, known as biosimilars, under certain conditions.
The Pacific pact is meant to lower trade barriers across 12 countries, including the U.S., Japan, Australia, Mexico and Canada. Outside the Atlanta hotel where the U.S. is hosting the talks, protesters said Washington's position would raise the price of lifesaving medicine overseas and slow the introduction of generic alternatives.
"The policies they promote are supposed to represent the interests of the people of the U.S., not just the short-term greed of the giant pharmaceutical companies," said Zahara Heckscher, 51, a breast-cancer patient who said she has taken three biologic drugs.
A spokesman for Mr. Froman said the TPP would "help ensure that lifesaving medicines are more widely available, while at the same time creating incentives for the development of new treatments and cures." U.S. officials declined to discuss the latest negotiating positions.
The drug fight underscores the multiple challenges Mr. Froman faces in finding balances that are acceptable both to the 11 other countries in the talks as well as the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" U.S. Congress, where a majority vote is still needed to enact a TPP deal.
Sen. Orrin Hatch (R., Utah), the chairman of the Senate committee that oversees trade, has championed 12 years of protection for biologics and said Tuesday that it would be better to continue the talks than accept a "less-than-optimal result for our country."
Many House Democrats, who are largely opposed to the TPP, want any agreement the U.S. signs to allow generic versions to come to market more quickly.
Big pharmaceutical companies say they need protection because it costs well over $1 billion to bring a drug to market.
"We will evaluate the agreement, when and if it is reached, but we are very clear that our position is that the U.S. law should be the standard for trans-Pacific partners," said HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" John Castellani, president of the industry group HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" PhRMA. Dow Jones & Company, Inc.
China, US rate hike loom over global finance summit
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Jérémy Tordjman
2 October 2015
Agence France Presse
The global finance summit next week in Lima will try to scatter the clouds over the economy, beset by a slowing China and the prospect of higher US interest rates.
"On the economic front, there is... reason to be concerned," the head of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" International Monetary Fund, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Christine Lagarde, said Wednesday, in a speech ahead of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Bank annual meetings in the Peruvian capital that gather the world's central bankers and finance ministers.
"The prospect of rising interest rates in the United States and China's slowdown are contributing to uncertainty and higher market volatility," Lagarde said.
The new HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF global economic forecasts, which will be published Tuesday, and the statement from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Group of 20 finance chiefs, expected Friday, likely will reflect the gloom hovering most of all over the emerging-market economies -- China at the forefront -- upstaging the Greek and Ukrainian crises.
Already shaken by market turmoil, China, the world's second-largest economy, likely will have its weakest growth in 25 years this year, a downdraft threatening to pull many other countries in its wake.
China's slowdown has hammered prices on commodities such as oil and copper, eroding the financial resources of the countries that export them.
The result: Economies closely linked with China have fallen into recession, like Brazil, or been pushed to its brink, like South Africa.
"It is difficult to gauge the possible negative confidence effects on the other emerging-market economies and the global economy as a whole," said HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Andreas Dombret, a member of the executive board of the Bundesbank, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Germany's central bank.
Coupled with the woes in Russia, the bottom line appears clear: After driving growth in the global economy during the 2008-2009 crisis, the major emerging economies, with the exception of India, are sputtering.
That was the conclusion of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development when it slightly lowered its forecasts for global growth in mid-September.
"Economic recovery is progressing in the world's advanced economies, but stagnating world trade and deteriorating conditions in financial markets are curbing growth prospects in many of the major emerging economies," the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD said.
Emerging economies also appear in the line of fire from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Federal Reserve's plan to raise interest rates for the first time since 2006, an issue expected to be discussed at length at the Peruvian pow-wow.
The rate rise, on the Fed's radar for this year despite HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF objections, could drive investors to pull funds from emerging countries into the United States and further strengthen the strong dollar, the currency on which the debt of many companies is based.
Companies in emerging economies, where corporate debt has quadrupled in the past 10 years, according to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF, could pay a steep price, forced into bankruptcies that hit banks and public finances. "A vicious cycle," Lagarde said.
"They would do well to buckle their seat belts in case the ride gets bumpy," the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Bank recently warned.
Despite the dark clouds, the globe's finance leaders may have some reasons to find comfort in Peru, the first South American country to host the annual IMF-World Bank meetings in nearly 50 years.
The United States, the largest economy, seems to be doing modestly well, while two major international issues could see advances during the 188-nation meetings on October 9-11, which will include multiple forums, conferences and news conferences.
Two months ahead of the Paris global climate summit, the finance chiefs may provide details on their $100 billion annual contribution, pledged in Copenhagen in 2009, to fight against global warming.
"Has that pledge been met and how is that calculated, that will be a big topic," said Jennifer Morgan, director of the climate program at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Resources Institute, a nongovernmental organization.
In Lima, the G20 finance officials also are expected to approve a broad action plan aimed at battling multinationals' strategies to reduce their tax burdens and shelter profits in tax havens.
These tax dodges are "a form of corruption that hurts the poor" by depriving their countries of public revenues, World Bank President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Jim Yong Kim said Thursday.
The G20 agreement would be finalized in November in Turkey at a summit of the leaders of the major advanced and emerging economies. Agence France-Presse
US, India trade battle at WTO to escalate
D. Ravi Kanth
2 October 2015
Mint
Geneva, Oct. 2 -- The US has signalled its intention to escalate its ongoing trade battle with India at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO).
Participating in a meeting of trade envoys in Geneva, the US representative indicated that Washington would press ahead with the differentiation move that would deny India trade concessions accorded to developing countries under the umbrella of special and differential treatment architecture of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO, the global organization dealing with the rules of trade between nations.
Under the differentiation strategy, the US wants to deny the flexibilities accorded to India as a developing country on a "subjective" basis. This would mean New Delhi having to undertake so-called "blood for blood" commitments in bringing down its industrial or import tariff bounds to applied levels and ending its farm subsidy programs to millions of poor farmers.
At a closed-door meeting of trade envoys from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Group of Seven major industrialized and developing economies on Monday, the US revealed its intention to pursue "differentiation" after the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's 10th ministerial meeting in Nairobi scheduled to begin on 15 December, according to people familiar with discussions at the meeting who did not want to be identified.
The US, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union (EU), China, India, Brazil, Australia and Japan took part in the meeting.
The US said China and India will be removed from the list of developing countries that are accorded special and differential treatment (S&DT) flexibilities. Protesting the US stance, India argued that a developing country cannot be denied S&DT benefits without an "objective" criteria. India argued that it has millions of people below the poverty line and also a per capita income lower than Vanuatu and Angola, the people cited above said.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO rules allow developing countries to fix the upper bound for import tariffs but actually implement a much lower rate-applied tariff. So effectively import tariffs can be raised if a country fears a particular domestic sector, for instance automobiles, is threatened by imports. If implemented, India will have to forego this concession or policy space.
WTO director general HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevedo attended the meeting convened to discuss the possible "deliverables" for the Nairobi meeting and a road map for all unresolved issues of the Doha Development Agenda (DDA) negotiations.
During the meeting, the US and India clashed on several issues, particularly over Washington's insistence on a small package of deliverable outcomes for the Nairobi meeting without addressing New Delhi's core demands and the issue of differentiation. They also differed on the post-Nairobi work programme, according to the people cited above.
The small package of deliverables being pushed by the US, Japan, Australia and the EU include farm export subsidies, some issues for the least-developed countries and transparency in existing provisions.
India demanded that these countries should, as required under the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO negotiation rules, also disclose their proposals.
In response, the US said: "We will put nothing on the table and we don't want anything from the negotiations," according to the people familiar with the discussions.
India made it clear that it wants credible and comprehensive outcomes, particularly a permanent solution for public stockholding programs for food security and the special safeguard mechanism to protect its resource-poor farmers from import surges.
The US also opposed India's suggestion that the post-Nairobi work programme include an explicit statement reaffirming that the Doha trade negotiations will be continued in order to address all unresolved issues.
The US said there should be "zero illusion" on any explicit statement for continuing the negotiations to address unresolved DDA issues. The US maintained that issues in agriculture and market access for industrial products will be discussed outside the DDA after members return from the Nairobi meeting in January 2016.
Both Brazil and China disagreed with the US over its attempts to terminate the DDA negotiations in Nairobi. China, for example, said the DDA will be an ongoing process after the Nairobi meeting and that the negotiations will be terminated only if there was consensus among HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members. Similarly, Brazil said it would need certainty about the post-Nairobi road map, particularly a statement signalling that it is not the end of the Doha Round.
Given the deadlock in the Goup of Seven, the director general suggested that the best option is not to declare in the final statement that the Doha Round will either continue or die, according to the people cited above.
HT Media Limited

 
Former WTO chief says important areas of co-operation between Russia, Europe remain
1 October 2015
Interfax: Russia & CIS General Newswire
MOSCOW. Oct 1 (Interfax) - Former WTO Director-General Pascal Lamy hopes that if the Minsk agreements are implemented in full, anti-Russia sanctions will be reviewed and then removed.
"The European position on it is very clear: the sanctions are there until 31 of January. If the Minsk agreements are properly implemented these sanctions will be reviewed. This is a process which will hopefully lead to removing the sanctions," Lamy said in an interview with Interfax when asked whether it is time to lift the sanctions.
"I am hopeful that the Minsk Agreements will be implemented," he said.
"Bilateral relations, as you know, have been damaged by what had happened in Ukraine, whether the annexation of Crimea or destabilization in Donbas," Lamy said, referring to Russia-France relations.
However, Lamy said, "this does not mean that we cannot cooperate on a range of other issues. We've had a fruitful relationship on Iran. The Iran deal would not have been closed without Russian and European convergence."
In his view, there also exists co-operation between the countries on such matters as the fight against drug trafficking and terrorism. "There is probably an area where we can do more in the future together on Syria, which is a serious problem for all of us," Lamy added.
"Ukraine remains an issue as long as the Minsk agreements are not fully implemented, thus leading to sanctions removal," Lamy said. Interfax Information Services, B.V. 
Regional Free Trade Deals May Create Legal Mess Within WTO Framework 
1 October 2015
Sputnik News Service
GENEVA, October 1 (Sputnik) - New regional mega-agreements on free trade between the United States, Europe, Pacific Rim nations and some HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) members will create numerous legal problems within the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO framework, a panelist at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO Public Forum session on legal affairs warned on Thursday.
The TTIP, TPP and TiSA deals are controversial free trade agreements currently being negotiated in unusual secrecy by several HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO member states.
"The more we have free trade agreements that really go 'HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO plus,' the more we will see regional trade disputes as well," Joost Pauwelyn, a professor of international law at the Graduate Institute in Geneva, said at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO legal panel.
Ongoing negotiations for the TTIP, TPP and TiSA deals bypass the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO multilateral format, seeking to create trade zones that overlap with existing alignments, such as the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" North American Free Trade Agreement (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" NAFTA).
"We already have so many regional trade agreements, and we also have an increasing number of double 'free trade agreements.' In other words, if TPP gets concluded, and we take for example the US-Mexico relations, we would have HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" NAFTA on top of the TPP," Pauwelyn said.
"So we will have huge legal problems on how we read different regional trade agreements between the same countries in a consistent manner," he observed.
The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) are wide-ranging deals currently in negotiation between Washington and 11 Pacific nations, and Europe, respectively. The deals could see the creation a huge protectionist trade market. TISA is currently being negotiated by 24 HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members, including the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union.
All three hotly-debated deals have raised concerns due to the secretive nature of the ongoing talks and the lack of access to treaty terms. Rossiya Segodnya International Information Agency
Commission: Russia's import ban on Estonian fish products is unjustified
1 October 2015
Baltic Business Daily
TALLINN, Oct 01, BNS – The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Commission considers unfounded the ban on the imports of Estonian fish products to Russia and being not in accordance with regulations of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO).
Health and Food Safety Commissioner Vytenis Andriukaitis told in answer to an interpellation made by MEP Urmas Paet that the Commission has contacted Russian institutions, drawn their attention to the disproportionality of the ban, and expressed serious concern in connection with the incompatibility of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO regulations and the ban.
"The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Commission applied for the ban to be annulled and expressed its readiness to discuss alternative measures in connection with safety problems that the Russian side might experience," Andriukaitis said in his answer. He added that more than a month has passed since the Commission sent its address and Russia has not answered.
Paet drew attention to the fact that the Estonian fish processing enterprises inspected by Russia in May correspond with all EU regulations. He added that the import ban on Estonia and some other EU states is clearly discriminative and has nothing to do with the quality of products.
According to Andriukaitis Russia often uses sanitary measures unfoundedly and disproportionately to hide its real motives for implementing trade restrictions and this case is one example.
According to the commissioner the Commission will keep in touch with the member states impacted by the ban regarding future steps. "The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Commission will also use all available opportunities for bringing up the subject to end the situation where trade measures are used for political and protectionist goals," he added. 
Baltic News Service
WTO rules against country on services
1 October 2015
Buenos Aires Herald
GENEVA — Argentina was wrong to use tax, registration, foreign exchange and financial measures to discriminate against the service suppliers of certain countries, a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization dispute panel said yesterday, upholding a complaint by Panama.
WTO member countries are not allowed to offer different terms to different suppliers, but Panama said in 2012 that Argentina discriminated in eight ways against countries that did not exchange information with Argentina for the purposes of fiscal transparency. Either side can now appeal the ruling.
“Panama has demonstrated that there is trade in services and that the eight measures at issue in the present dispute are measures affecting trade in services,” the ruling said, listing measures used by Argentina such as foreign exchange authorization requirements, withholding tax on payments of interest and requirements of access to the country's capital market and for the registration of branches.
The WTO panel rejected many of the other points in Panama's complaint and also called on Argentina to adjust the way it establishes if a country is a fiscal haven to the international parameters set by the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS), the WTO treaty on trade.
All countries that haven't signed a fiscal information exchange agreement with Argentina are considered by the government to be “uncooperative,” according to a decree issued last year. The list can be reviewed online and currently has 87 countries, including Panama.
Despite the WTO's negative ruling, Argentina's Foreign ministry said it was “satisfied” with it and described it as a “resounding endorsement” for the country,” highlighting the claims of Panama that were rejected. The measures used by the country against Panama are “justified in its rationality and design,” the ministry said in a press release.
“Argentina is satisfied with the results obtained in this legal dispute. The panel ruled in favour of Argentina in practically all the claims filed by Panama,” the Foreign ministry said. “The panel considered that the anti-abuse measures implemented by Argentina to prevent the negative effects caused by uncooperative countries on fiscal information exchange are justified in its rationality and design.” Herald with Reuters. Heraldo de Buenos Aires Ltd
Stop the complacency: Britain could sleepwalk out of the EU
Denis MacShane
2 October 2015
City AM
THERE must have been something in the water at Number 11 Downing Street in the 1970s and 1980s: two of the most famous post-war chancellors have now said they will vote Out in HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" David Cameron's forthcoming EU referendum.
Denis Healey told the New Statesman some time ago that he would vote to quit Europe if a referendum was held. And now his successor, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Nigel Lawson, still the most admired post-war chancellor for Tory activists, has announced that he is forming a group to campaign for an Out vote.
Neither are doing the Prime Minister the courtesy of waiting for his famous renegotiation, when he arrives back from Europe waving a piece of paper in his hand to announce he has done the deal that keeps us in the EU.
But Lawson's announcement reflects the hardening of opinion against Europe. The three latest opinion polls by YouGov, Survation and ICM all showing narrow majorities for an Out vote.
The CBI's HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" John Cridland spoke at a Policy Network fringe meeting at the Labour Party conference this week and repeated the CBI mantra that British business is in favour of staying in the EU but - and the 'but' is important - on condition that it is a "reformed" EU.
Curiously, the new Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn says much the same thing. He, like Cridland, want a reformed EU. But his desired reforms go in the opposite direction to the CBI and all other business outfits.
Corbyn wants a more social EU, with enhanced worker rights, preferably no TTIP free trade deal with the United States, and an end to debt and deficit reduction policies.
The Cridland-Corbyn axis of qualifying their support for staying in the EU with old-fashioned political impossiblist demands - more neoliberal Europe for Cridland, more trade union and statist Europe for Corbyn - means that no-one is out there campaigning to stay in, period.
Neither business nor the left and the unions are going to get the EU of their dreams between now and the date of the referendum, which HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Peter Mandelson assured at the same fringe meeting is scheduled for late next year.
Every single EU capital and all of the Brussels bigwigs agree that Europe needs reform. They just disagree what those reforms are.
We are seeing the rise of a new protectionism against competition in Europe's over-expensive, anti-competitive taxi market. East European countries are horrified at being told that they must take refugees and economic migrants coming across the Mediterranean.
But they are equally horrified at calls from UK politicians for limits or quotas on the free movement of their own citizens - especially the right to export their unemployment to Britain and other richer EU states with labour markets greedy for cheap labour.
The canny British EU commissioner Lord Jonathan Hill this week unveiled plans to create a Capital Markets Union for all 28 member states. Read the small print reference to "legislative changes", and once again Brussels is talking about more EU power to override national legislation regulating the savings, insurance and banking industries so that a pan-EU market for capital can come into being.
Before the referendum, there will be the Super Thursday elections next May for a Scottish Assembly, along with those for the Mayor of London, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Welsh Assembly and the councillors in all major English cities and towns.
All those seeking votes will take a line on Europe, especially Ukip, whose 4m votes did not produce a single extra MP, but whose network of MEPs and councillors will be busy making the case for leaving Europe as part of the intense political campaigning period about to open. The Leave camp has already raised a reported £20m, while there is no In or Remain organisation yet in sight.
It has been taken as a given in elite circles of government, business and politics that there was no chance of Britain ever voting itself out of the EU. That complacency needs serious re-thinking.
Britain can easily sleepwalk out of Europe with the encouragement of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Nigel Lawson and Denis Healey, and every business should start making contingency plans for that possibility.
£ Denis MacShane is a former minister of Europe and senior adviser to Avisa Partners in Brussels. His book Brexit: How Britain Will Leave Europe is published by IB Tauris.
Every business should start making contingency plans
