HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "General Council Chairman Fried to Cede Post to de Mateo Following WTO Meeting
·         HYPERLINK \l "Rich nations could prefer services from LDCs
·         HYPERLINK \l "Lawmakers press currency as trade debate heats up
·         HYPERLINK \l "Currency Warriors Get Boost At G-20
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S. business lobby survey warns of China protectionism
·         HYPERLINK \l "Mexico says US sugar deal not optimal, but better than dispute
·         HYPERLINK \l "India Will Not ‘Appease' U.S.  Over Intellectual Property Regime
·         HYPERLINK \l "Indian sugar mills make distress sales to pay farmers
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S. airlines disclose details of bookings lost to Gulf carriers
·         HYPERLINK \l "Japan and Mongolia sign free trade pact, lowering barriers for auto exports
 
 
General Council Chairman Fried to Cede Post to de Mateo Following WTO Meeting
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, February 11, 2015
 
Feb. 10 — The chairman of the World Trade Organization's General Council, Ambassador Jonathan Fried of Canada, is expected to step down following the Feb. 20 General Council meeting, Geneva trade officials said.
 
Mexican Ambassador Fernando de Mateo, the current chairman of the WTO Dispute Settlement Body (DSB), is viewed as Fried's likely successor.
 
The WTO's DSB chairmen generally become General Council chairmen after their one-year terms expire, with some exceptions.
 
Though the annual selection process has not yet been formally announced, the handover is expected to take place in late February or March, Geneva trade officials said.
 
Feb. 20 Agenda
 
WTO members will continue to discuss advancing a post-Bali ministerial work program at this month's General Council meeting, according to an agenda published Feb. 10.
 
The WTO's trade negotiation groups have been working during the past month to develop a detailed work program to conclude the Doha round of trade negotiations.
 
Members also will discuss the following issues at the Feb. 20 meeting: 
•  administration/financial questions,

•  budget,

•  intellectual property,

•  intergovernmental organizations,

•  small and island economies, and

•  trade and development.
 
 
Rich nations could prefer services from LDCs
BD can bank on waiver to book MIC status : Tofail
Financial Express
11 Feb, 2015 00:00:00
 
Waiver-providing countries will try to submit notification to the World Trade Organisation (WTO) to offer preferential treatment to least developed countries' (LDCs) services by this coming July, the commerce minister said Tuesday.
 
Back from a meeting in Geneva on trade and services, Tofail Ahmed expressed his optimism to reporters that the move -- if it gets through -- would greatly facilitate Bangladesh in exporting services from various professions and modes.
 
And this preference to hiring services from members of the poor-country club would also advance Bangladesh's vision to be a middle-income country by its golden-jubilee year.              
 
A meeting of the Council for Trade and Services (CTS) will be held in March and an assessment report will be prepared by the LDC Group in order to evaluate the commercial value of the preferences on the table and the ensuing need for capacity building in the LDCs concerned, he said at a press briefing at the ministry of commerce (MoC).
 
The commerce minister joined a high-level meeting on operationalization of the LDC services waiver, on 5-6 February 2015 at the WTO in Geneva, Switzerland. The press conference was held to inform the press about outcome of the meeting.
 
"If the developed countries provide waiver facility on services in favour of LDCs, it will help Bangladesh boost its economy towards achieving the middle-income status by 2021," Mr Ahmed said.
 
The LDC services waiver decision stems from the outcome from a previous WTO ministerial conference held in Geneva in 2011.
 
However, in the two years that followed, no preferences had been requested by LDCs or granted to them, prompting WTO members to reconsider ways to move this decision forward, the commerce minister mentioned.
 
He said at the high-level meeting on services many countries indicated their preferences for LDCs in the service sector. The LDCs should work together to reap benefit from the member-countries.
 
The minister said most of the developed countries, including European Union (EU) states, Mexico, Canada, Switzerland, Norway, Brazil, Australia, New Zealand, Japan, India, China, Korea, Jamaica and Qatar, indicated their willingness to provide preferential treatment to the LDCs for ensuring effective implementation of services waiver.
 
But the United States of America (USA) refrained from making any commitment.
 
Under this move, Bangladesh's sectors like Information Technology Enabled Services (ITES) and Business Operations Processing services, Auditing, Accounting, Financial services, hotel, tourism, independent professionals, computer-related services may have preferential access to the waiver-providing countries.
 
The minister also said for the extension of the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) waiver in pharmaceuticals, which will expire on 31 December 2015, the LDCs will work together.
 
He said during his Geneva visit, he had sat in a bilateral meeting with Director-General of the WTO Roberto Azevedo. They exchanged views on the outcome of the high-level meeting on services and progress in developing work programme for Doha Development Agenda.   
 
Two separate meetings were held with secretary-general of UNCTAD Mukhisa Kituyi and trade, industry and cooperatives minister of Uganda Amelia Anne Kyambadde.
 
 
Lawmakers press currency as trade debate heats up
By Doug Palmer 
2/10/15 5:17 PM EST
POLITICO
 
A bipartisan group of senators on Tuesday threatened to withhold support for President Barack Obama’s trade agenda unless their concerns about foreign currency manipulation are addressed, but it remained unclear whether they could rally enough votes to block key trade legislation or an Asia-Pacific trade deal.
“The bottom line is the administration could make their job of passing something a lot easier if they listened to us,” Sen. Chuck Schumer (D-N.Y.) said at a news conference with other senators to introduce legislation aimed primarily at China that would allow U.S. manufacturers to win countervailing duties on goods from countries that deliberately undervalue their currency for a trade advantage.
The White House opposes the bill, which a bipartisan group of lawmakers also introduced today in the House, and has balked at including rules against currency manipulation in the proposed Trans-Pacific Partnership with Japan and 10 other countries in the fast-growing Asia-Pacific.
Treasury Secretary Jack Lew and other U.S. officials say they worry either approach could backfire on the United States by undermining international efforts to prod China toward a market-oriented exchange rate and to discourage Japan from resuming its past practice of intervening in currency markets to devalue the yen.
They got support on that point from the U.S.-China Business Council, which represents companies that do business in China.
“Over the past ten years, we have seen how continued engagement from two administrations, Democrat and Republican, has led to China’s currency appreciating more than 35 percent against the U.S. dollar,” the group’s president, John Frisbie, said in a statement. “The Bush and Obama administration’s successful multilateral and bilateral approach should be supported and continued, not undermined with counterproductive tariff legislation that taxes the American consumer.”
The White House also does not want Federal Reserve monetary policy that could have the effect of devaluing the dollar to be subject to enforceable provisions of a trade deal. But supporters of including currency rules in trade agreements argue that’s an unfounded concern because their only intent is to go after countries that directly intervene in currency markets for a trade advantage.
“I believe there is growing support on the Republican side, on the Democratic side to ensure that TPP, TPA [Trade Promotion Authority] doesn’t pass until we deal with this issue,” Sen. Lindsey Graham, a South Carolina Republican, said. “This [bill] is a bipartisan solution to a bipartisan problem.”
The 10 initial Senate cosponsors also include Jeff Sessions (R-Ala.), Sherrod Brown (D-Ohio) and Debbie Stabenow (D-Mich.), who raised similar concerns at the press conference, as well as Richard Burr (R-N.C.), Susan Collins (R-Maine), Bob Casey (D-Penn.) Joe Donnelly (D-Ind.) and Rob Portman (R-Ohio), who did not attend.
Rep. Sander Levin, the top Democrat on House Ways and Means, argued at a separate news conference earlier in the day for a two-track approach that includes persuading TPP countries to agree to enforceable rules against currency manipulation and passing the countervailing duty legislation.
Reps. Tim Murphy (R-Penn.), Tim Ryan (D-Ohio) and Mo Brooks (R-Ala.) joined Levin as cosponsors of the House currency bill, which was immediately backed by labor and auto groups as well as a respected international economist, Fred Bergsten, president emeritus of the Peterson Institute for International Economics.
The Washington-based think tank estimates that 10 to 20 countries, including China, manipulate their currency for an unfair trade advantage. “That has had a very substantial affect on the United States, probably adding to our trade deficit by several hundred billion dollars per year, costing us several million jobs,” Bergsten said.
“Currency manipulation is the number one protectionist policy of the 21st century and something you just have to deal with,” Bergsten added. “It is very clearly a major export subsidy to a company selling to the United States from China or anywhere else when the country’s currency is substantially undervalued through manipulation,” he said.
Both Levin and Bergsten agreed that Japan was not currently manipulating its currency, even though Bank of Japan monetary policies aimed at stimulating the country’s economy have caused the yen to decline against the dollar.
But Levin and many other Midwestern lawmakers argue it is important to include enforceable rules against currency manipulation in TPP because Japan has directly intervened in the foreign exchange market in the past to boost its exports.
Despite strong feelings in Congress on the issue, the Obama administration appears to be making the calculation that it can win approval of both TPA and TPP without giving in to demands on the currency front.
More than 230 House members and 60 senators signed letters in 2013 calling on the administration to address currency concerns in the TPP pact. After the November election those tallies have shrunk to 198 House members and 52 senators, including two senators who were elected to the upper chamber from the House last year.
While those are still large numbers, it is possible that some members who signed the letters could still vote for TPP without currency provisions if other elements of the deal, such as new market access for U.S. exports, are attractive enough.
Meanwhile, past efforts to pass currency legislation have all come to a dead end. Both the House and the Senate approved currency bills in 2010 and 2011 that were similar to the ones introduced today, but neither became law.
A number of important Republicans, including House Speaker John Boehner, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, Senate Finance Committee Chairman Orrin Hatch and Ways and Means Committee Chairman Paul Ryan, opposed those previous efforts to treat currency manipulation as an export subsidy under U.S. countervailing duty law.
Asked for comment today, both Hatch and Ryan stressed their concern about currency manipulation but showed little enthusiasm for the bill.
“The chairman shares concerns about currency manipulation, but questions whether this would be an effective strategy to combat it and, additionally, is concerned about its WTO [World Trade Organization] compliance,” a spokesman for Ryan said, even though supporters say the measure has been carefully crafted to comply with global trade rules.
Hatch added: “I think it’s going to be really tough to get it unless there is presidential leadership, and from a foreign policy standpoint there are a lot of problems.”
Schumer and his cosponsors said it did not matter to them whether the currency bill passed as part of TPA or as a stand-alone measure. But without action on the issue, the administration will have a much harder task of winning its trade agenda, they warned.
Adam Behsudi contributed to this report.
 
 
Currency Warriors Get Boost At G-20 
By Ian Talley and Brian Blackstone 
11 February 2015
The Wall Street Journal
 
ISTANBUL -- The world's top finance leaders on Tuesday in effect backed currency depreciation as a tool for promoting growth by signaling strong support for aggressive easy-money policies aimed at boosting the fragile global economy.

The support by finance ministers and central bankers from the Group of 20 largest economies for mass monetary easing -- policies that have weakened exchange rates from Europe to Japan -- is at odds with the traditional view that currency depreciation could have damaging effects on other economies.

It also reflects worry that economies in much of the world could get stuck in a low-growth rut without decisive cash injections from central banks. It marks an implicit acknowledgment of the failure across the globe to enact longer-lasting structural overhauls to major economies after years of relying on short-term spending and other temporary stimulus programs.

The finance ministers appeared to be "trying to reduce tensions over perceived competitive devaluations by saying it's in the collective good," said Simon Johnson, professor at Massachusetts Institute of Technology's Sloan School of Management.

International support for "accommodative monetary policies," as the G-20 statement issued at a meeting here put it, came the same day China said consumer prices last month rose just 0.8% compared with a year earlier, the slowest growth in five years. The announcement sparked fears that China might be tilting toward deflation, and boosted pressure on China's central bank to cut interest rates and expand credit.

With its economy slowing and many industries dealing with overcapacity from the boom years, China is contributing to the world's pricing problems through its huge exports of manufactured goods.

"The price of goods shipped out of China is getting weaker, trickling down and affecting global inflation," said Societe Generale CIB economist Wei Yao.

The link between central bank policies and exchange rates has been particularly pronounced in Europe. The European Central Bank's announcement last month that it would purchase more than 1 trillion euros in public and private bonds by autumn 2016 prompted a steep drop in the euro's value against the U.S. dollar, both in anticipation of last month's decision and in its aftermath.

The dollar's rise to decadelong highs has revived concerns in Congress about perceived currency manipulation by other countries and its impact on U.S. exports and competitiveness. On Tuesday, lawmakers introduced a bill that would allow the U.S. government to impose punitive duties on imports from countries whose finances fit a pattern of manipulation.

But U.S. administration officials, for now, appear to have concluded that any growth-dragging effects from a stronger dollar would be offset by faster overseas growth.

"It's not going to be a good ride for the global economy if the one strong wheel is the United States," said U.S. Treasury Secretary Jacob Lew, who attended the G-20 meetings along with Federal Reserve Chairwoman Janet Yellen.

Seven years after the global financial crisis pushed the world's economy into a nose dive, the G-20 is still struggling to find the right recipe to revive growth.

Windfalls from plummeting oil prices and a revving-up of growth in the U.S., the world's largest economy, aren't proving enough to pull Europe and Japan out of their economic funks.

Meanwhile, major emerging markets, including China, are slowing much faster than expected as they hit the limits of their capacity to grow without extensive economic restructuring.

This has put added pressure on central banks to ramp up stimulus through rate cuts or printing vast amounts of new money to spur borrowing and spending.

A side effect has been lower exchange rates, particularly for the euro and yen, and upward pressure on currencies in traditional havens, such as Switzerland, as well as in countries like the U.S. that are expected to tighten monetary policy this year.

"The use of that monetary policy, if it's done on a large scale, will depreciate your currency, there's no question about it," said one senior G-20 official. "That depreciation . . . is seen as acceptable by international standards to get output going."

To be sure, the G-20 statement didn't support overt policies aiming to weaken exchange rates -- such as interventions in currency markets -- to gain a competitive edge. Rather, G-20 officials stressed that monetary policy decisions should be made for domestic economic objectives.

"There is a clear agreement of all countries on the fact that monetary policies are done for domestic reasons to achieve inflation objectives," said Christian Noyer, head of France's central bank. However, differences in monetary policy settings across central banks can affect exchange rates, he noted.

The rationale for fresh monetary policy stimulus taken so far this year in many parts of the world -- from China to Australia and eurozone -- was underscored by a series of reports Tuesday showing consumer prices flattening or declining in many key economies.

Beneath their sluggish pace in China, consumer prices in Switzerland fell 0.5% in January from a year earlier, and 0.3% in Denmark.

Central banks in these countries have loosened monetary policy this year.

Low inflation can be a windfall for households, but if prices stay soft for too long they may harm the economy by raising debt-servicing costs and making it less attractive for businesses to invest. For this reason, many large central banks consider around 2% to be the optimal rate of inflation.

Yet the backing of aggressive central-bank stimulus has a more troubling side: Governments appear to lack the resources, or the will, to lift their economies' prospects through fiscal policies and economic reforms, putting all the more pressure on central bankers.

Most advanced economies racked up high debt levels in the aftermath of the global financial crisis, making it harder to cut taxes or raise spending. In Germany, one country that has such fiscal maneuvering room, officials have resisted calls to use it.

"In Europe, there's a need for more fiscal policy. There's a demand shortfall," said Mr. Lew.

Meanwhile, a report Monday from the Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development warned that many of its members have failed to take recommended steps to overhaul their economies in recent years.
 
 
U.S. business lobby survey warns of China protectionism 
 
BEIJING (Reuters) - China's regulators are targeting foreign firms, a majority of respondents said in a survey by an American business lobby, citing protectionism among the top concerns for their operations in the world's second largest economy.

Fifty-seven percent of the 477 respondents included in an annual survey by the American Chamber of Commerce in China said they believed recent government investigations "singled out" foreign companies.

The survey results, published on Wednesday, also said increasing protectionism had become the fifth greatest concern for businesses in China for the first time since 2010.

Labor costs, unclear laws and regulations, and shortages of qualified staff and managers, remained atop the list of business challenges.

"There are concerns that China will take an approach, that when the economy slows down, they become more protectionist," Chamber chairman James Zimmerman told reporters.

On Monday, U.S. chipmaker Qualcomm Inc agreed to pay a $975 million fine, the largest in China's corporate history, ending a 14-month government investigation into anti-competitive practices.

In recent months, four international business lobbies have raised alarms over how China's antitrust regulators carried out investigations. At least 30 overseas firms, including U.S. software giant Microsoft Corp and South Korea's Samsung Electronics Co Ltd, have come under scrutiny.

The National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC), which conducted the Qualcomm investigation, has defended its practices and said it does not target foreign companies.

Cyber security, the risk of intellectual property leakage and data security threats were greater in China than in other markets, according to 60 percent of survey respondents.

Business lobbies have also warned that foreign technology vendors could be locked out of China business or forced to disclose sensitive intellectual property as the country implements new cyber security regulations.

Despite the concerns cited in the survey, the majority of Chamber members were positive about the China market over the next two years, with 73 percent saying their businesses were profitable or very profitable.

Corruption ranked 13 on the list of most serious challenges, down from sixth place in 2014, amid  
 
 
Mexico says US sugar deal not optimal, but better than dispute 
 
MEXICO CITY, Feb 10 (Reuters) - A deal reached with the United States in December to limit Mexican sugar exports is not ideal, but preferable to entering into a bitter trade dispute, Mexican economy minister Ildefonso Guajardo said on Tuesday.

After almost a year of fighting, the two countries signed an agreement that put an end to the free trade in sugar enjoyed by the two countries since 2008 under the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).

The deal, reached through a "suspension agreement," halted anti-dumping probes which had included subsidies and tariffs against the Mexican sweetener. It also eliminated Mexico's threat to take the dispute to international trade bodies.

"It is obviously not an ideal, which would have allowed us to export as much as we wanted, but it was what was possible," said Guajardo, whose office handles trade negotiations with the United States.

He said Mexico's sugar industry, which exports its surplus to U.S. markets, benefits from high American prices derived from the United States' very protective sugar program.

"It obviously wasn't in the interest of Mexican sugar producers to weaken the sugar program, which would be like shooting yourself in the foot," Guajardo said.

"A deal that is not optimal is still better than a harmful dispute," he said.

The deal reached in December allows Mexico to supply 100 percent of the excess U.S. sugar demand, after U.S. producers and other countries with fixed ceilings have filled their quotas.

As part of its agreements with the United States, Mexico last week issued rules to control its sugar exports the world over, allowing it to track the actual amount of sugar that reaches the United States and not exceed its ceiling. (Reporting by Adriana Barrera; Writing by Alexandra Alper; editing by Andrew Hay) 
 
 
India Will Not ‘Appease' U.S.  Over Intellectual Property Regime
By Amrit Dhillon
WTO Reporter, February 11, 2015
 
Feb. 10 — Indian Commerce Minister Nirmala Sitharaman has rejected speculation that the Indian government is willing to “appease” the U.S. over its intellectual property regime.
 
In a Feb. 9 tweet, Sitharaman responded to a question asking why India was trying to “appease” the U.S. by saying: “Our IPR policy is in the making. The draft is out inviting inputs from all. No ‘trying to appease’ anyone.”
 
India is currently working on a new IP policy. A special panel set up to examine the issues and make recommendations has given a report to the government, and the public has been invited to comment. The draft report does not recommend any dilution of India's policy on patents or compulsory licensing (04 WTO, 1/7/15).
 
Speculation about India's intentions in the Indian media arose from the testimony of U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman to the U.S. Senate Finance Committee Jan. 27 . “Use of the out-of-cycle review helped to secure commitments from India in the 2014 Trade Policy Forum on a broad range of IP issues of concern to the United States and its stakeholders,” Froman said. “I believe we have a good dialogue going with the new government on this issue and we are committed to working to achieve concrete progress in this area.”
 
Froman's remark prompted media speculation that India had agreed to dilute its policy to meet American accusations that India's IP policy is discriminatory.
 
The USTR has strongly criticized India's IPR in the past. In April 2014, in its “Special 301” report reviewing the intellectual property protections of its trading partners, the USTR downgraded India's status to “priority foreign country”—meaning it would be subject to intense scrutiny over its IP policies—a status which it later withdrew.
 
The belief that India is making concessions also has arisen from the October 2014 agreement between the U.S. and India, as part of the Trade Policy Forum, to set up an Intellectual Property Working Group (190 WTO, 10/1/14).
 
In addition, during President Barack Obama's visit to India last month, Prime Minister Narendra Modi, during a meeting with Indian and American CEOs, said: “India is ready to accept suggestions made by the joint working group with the U.S. on intellectual property rights.”
 
Khrishna Sharma, managing partner at the Corporate Law Group in New Delhi, which represents the foreign pharmaceutical industry, told Bloomberg BNA Feb. 10 that no one knew the deliberations of the working group but that India's stand on IPR at every international forum so far has remained unchanged.
 
“Even if this government wanted to change the IPR policy, it would have to be enacted by amendments to Indian law, and at present the ruling party has a majority in the lower house but not in the upper house. Moreover, it's not clear how the government would sell the change politically,” she said.
 
Punita Bhargava, an advocate with Inventure IP and a member of the panel advising the government on a new IP policy, told Bloomberg BNA Feb. 10 that the panel had received no directive from the government to suggest that the media speculation was correct.
 
“We have heard nothing of this kind from the government,” she said. “On Feb. 5-6, we met 50 stakeholders, including officials from the U.S. government, [multi-national corporations] and the UK Patent Office. We are collating all the feedback and hope to give the final report at the end of March,” she said.
 
Bangalore-based IP expert Shamnad Basheer, former professor at the National University of Judicial Sciences, said media speculation seemed to be fuelled by two factors: the U.S. sounding happier than before and the lack of information about the deliberations of the bilateral working group on IPR.
 
“Absolutely nothing has changed in Indian policy,” Basheer said. “The problem is that no one knows what is going on in the bilateral dialogue and that is creating anxiety. And the fact that the U.S. seems less critical is also feeding concerns that India might make concessions damaging to the IPR,” he said.
 
But, he added, “on a day when the ruling party has suffered a gigantic defeat in the New Delhi elections at the hands of a pro-poor, pro-socialistic party, it is not likely to make any policy change that could be seen to be detrimental to the interests of the poor.”
 
 
Indian sugar mills make distress sales to pay farmers 
By Rajendra Jadhav 
 
MUMBAI, Feb 11 (Reuters) - India's cash-strapped sugar mills, waiting on the government to approve export subsidies, are being forced to dump supplies in the domestic market to raise cash to pay cane farmers, pulling down local prices to 4-1/2 year lows.

The aggressive selling comes as production exceeds demand for a fifth straight year and is set to deepen losses for producers like Bajaj Hindusthan, Shree Renuka Sugars Ltd and Balrampur Chini Mills.

Without any government incentive, Indian sugar is uncompetitive in world markets well supplied by low-cost producers Brazil and Thailand.

India, the world's second-biggest sugar producer, exported more than 1 million tonnes of raw sugar in 2014 but has shipped out little in the current season that began on Oct. 1.

"Mills don't have a choice," said Ashok Jain, president of the Bombay Sugar Merchants Association (BSMA). "On the one hand the sugar commissioner is asking them to pay farmers cane dues quickly, on the other hand demand is weak for sugar."

Each year the federal government and states fix the price at which mills can buy cane from farmers. The cane price has climbed 65 percent in five years, while sugar prices have fallen 8 percent.

Some co-operative mills from the western state of Maharashtra, the biggest producer, sold sugar at 2,460 rupees ($40) per 100 kg this week, the lowest level since August 2010.

"Cost of production is higher than current sugar prices. Mills are not able to pay the stipulated cane price," said Sanjeev Babar, managing director of Maharashtra State Co-operative Sugar Factories Federation.

"Exports can help reduce the stockpile and raise prices, but the government is delaying a subsidy announcement."

Subsidies of 3,300 rupees a tonne helped exports of raw sugar last year and government sources said last month India was considering a rise in the subsidy to 4,000 rupees this year.

But Prime Minister Narendra Modi's cabinet has yet to approve the proposal, potentially halving this year's raw exports from a year ago.

"To make cane payments mills are ready to sell sugar at whatever price they are getting," said Balasaheb Patil, chairman of Sahyadri co-operative sugar factory based in Maharashtra.

India is likely to produce 26 million tonnes of sugar in the current season, up to 4 percent above an earlier estimate. Local demand is pegged around 24.7 million tonnes.

"Inventory is rising every day due to ongoing cane crushing. Prices are unlikely to recover unless we manage to sell in the world market," BSMA's Jain said. ($1 = 62.0850 Indian rupees) (Editing by Richard Pullin) 
 
 
U.S. airlines disclose details of bookings lost to Gulf carriers 
By Jeffrey Dastin 
 
Feb 10 (Reuters) - U.S. airlines have lost at least five percentage points of their share of flight bookings from the United States to the Indian subcontinent and Southeast Asia since 2008, due to fierce competition from Gulf carriers, according to data seen by Reuters.

More recently, U.S. carriers have seen an erosion in their share of bookings to Milan, according to a report the U.S. airlines sent to the White House and the departments of State, Transportation and Commerce. The 55-page white paper is not yet public.

The report says the combined share of bookings between the United States and the Indian subcontinent for Delta Air Lines , United Airlines and American Airlines has fallen to 34 percent in 2014 from 39 percent in 2008. The drop includes bookings on the airlines' joint-venture partners, such as British Airways and Air France.

In the same time, Emirates Airline, Qatar Airways and Etihad Airways have surpassed them. The Gulf airlines' share of that market has jumped to 40 percent from only 12 percent seven years ago, according to the report.

The report sheds light on the intensifying battle between the U.S. carriers and their rivals from Qatar and the United Arab Emirates since "Open Skies" agreements authorized commercial flights between those countries and the United States more than a decade ago.

The data shows that the Gulf carriers have eroded U.S. airlines' market share even beyond the subcontinent, although bookings to the region resulted in the largest revenue hit so far, Delta Chief Legal Officer Ben Hirst said in a telephone interview.

U.S. airlines and their joint-venture partners' share has fallen to 36 percent from 43 percent of the market between the eastern United States and Southeast Asia, according to the report. The region includes Vietnam, Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines.

Gulf carriers, meanwhile, expanded their share of bookings to 13 percent from just 1 percent.

GOVERNMENT SUBSIDIES

The U.S. airlines are stepping up efforts to persuade the American government to alter or terminate the Open Skies pacts.

The white paper, citing confidential financial statements from the Gulf airlines, alleged that their rivals have received subsidies from their home governments contrary to U.S. trade policy. The report says loans, tax exemptions and other support totaled more than $40 billion since 2004, which the Gulf carriers used to pay expenses that airlines typically must cover themselves, such as aircraft acquisitions.

"We fully expect the government to act on the evidence," Delta's Hirst said, adding, "From the U.S. airlines' standpoint, we're competing with (foreign) governments, not private businesses."

An official from the U.S. State Department said the agency was carefully reviewing the claims and coordinating with other agencies.

"The U.S. government takes seriously the competition concerns raised by our airlines," the official said in an email on condition of anonymity. "However, we remain committed to the Open Skies policy, which has greatly benefited the traveling public, the U.S. aviation industry, American cities, and the broader U.S. economy."

CHEAPER FARES

The report says the Gulf carriers could drive ticket prices down to a point where U.S. airlines could not afford to stay in certain markets, costing hundreds of jobs. They say government subsidies enable the Gulf carriers to buy planes and add capacity in excess of demand, forcing industrywide price cuts on certain routes.

But advocates for travelers say that slashing prices and improving service is precisely what Open Skies agreements are intended to do.

"From the passengers' point of view, they want as many choices as possible," said Erik Hansen, a senior director at the U.S. Travel Association, a non-profit industry group based in Washington.

Hansen said he had not seen the report and could not comment in detail on its findings, but added that Open Skies pacts have improved the U.S. balance of trade. He said a change would "send a message that the U.S. is willing to implement protectionist policies if just a few airlines protest."

Executives of the Gulf carriers dispute the U.S. carriers' charges that they have received unfair subsidies and bailouts.

"We have no problem with competition. In fact, we relish it," Emirates Airline President Tim Clark said in a statement last week.

The Gulf airlines are pushing to expand their reach. U.S. carriers have lost their share of bookings from New York to Milan since Emirates announced service there in 2013 as a stopover on the way to Dubai. Emirates' share has jumped to 19 percent since then, while the share held by U.S. airlines and their partners has fallen to 78 percent from 85 percent. (Additional Reporting by Arshad Mohammed in Washington; Editing by Joe White and Jonathan Oatis) 
 
 
Japan and Mongolia sign free trade pact, lowering barriers for auto exports
Associated Press 
February 10, 2015 - 6:05 AM
 
TOKYO — Japan and Mongolia signed a free trade agreement Tuesday that is expected to open the landlocked frontier market to more Japanese auto exports and strengthen Tokyo's leverage with a key partner in its dealings with North Korea.
 
Prime Minister Shinzo Abe and his Mongolian counterpart Chimed Saikhanbileg signed the agreement at a summit in Tokyo.
 
As part of the "economic partnership agreement," Mongolia assured resource-scarce Japan of stable access to supplies of coal and rare earths. Japan has looked to Mongolia, India and other countries to help reduce its reliance on China for rare earths — minerals used in high-tech products and automobiles.
 
Japan reportedly also was due to offer concessional loans for building a new airport in Ulan Bator, the Mongolian capital, one of Tokyo's many official development assistance projects in the country.
 
The two countries began free trade talks in 2012 and reached a basic accord last July.
 
Mongolia's imports from Japan, mostly vehicles, are roughly 16 times the size of its exports to Japan. The agreement signed Tuesday calls for Japan to scale back tariffs on its imports of Mongolian products such as cashmere.
 
Mongolia holds strategic importance for Japan as a conduit for Japan's talks with North Korea on abductions of Japanese decades ago. Japan lacks formal relations with North Korea and the two sides have held talks on the kidnapping issue in Mongolia.
END


  ________________________________  
Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.