HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "China, Korea Continue Impasse Over Terms Covering Information Technology Agreement
·         HYPERLINK \l "Russia Files a Pair of WTO Disputes Against EU, Ukrainian Tariffs
·         HYPERLINK \l "Japan, Europe against India’s ‘safeguard’ probes on steel imports
·         HYPERLINK \l "Commerce Won't Adjust AD Duties on Steel Welded Pipes from China
·         HYPERLINK \l "World FZO’s annual conference
·         HYPERLINK \l "Obama to Democrats on Asia trade pact: like Nike, 'just do it'
·         HYPERLINK \l "Australia targets multinationals in tax crackdown
·         HYPERLINK \l "Australian PM's adviser says UN using climate change for "new world order"
 
China, Korea Continue Impasse Over Terms Covering Information Technology Agreement
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, May 11, 2015
 
May 8 — China urged parties to the Information Technology Agreement (ITA) to accept its current terms to cut tariffs on nearly 200 technology products during a meeting of the World Trade Organization's ITA committee.
 
Since December 2014, ITA members have impatiently awaited signals that China would cut tariffs on a small number of additional IT products considered economically significant for other members like South Korea.
 
China said that despite a series of “difficult” consultations with its domestic IT industry, it would not reduce tariffs on products like flat-panel displays or accumulator batteries, among other products, according to participants at the May 8 meeting.
 
Ministers of countries participating in the ITA negotiations are expected to discuss the issue on the sidelines of this month's Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation meeting in the Philippines and the June Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development meeting in Paris.
 
Billions in Savings
 
The ITA requires each participant to eliminate and bind its tariffs at zero for all products specified in the agreement and to implement them on a most-favored-nation basis among WTO members.
 
The agreement further encourages members to reduce non-tariff barriers, like diverging national standards, certification and testing requirements, that often delay or increase the costs of trade.
 
U.S. trade officials estimate that an expanded ITA could contribute as much as $190 billion to the global gross domestic product and support 60,000 U.S. jobs.
 
Eighty WTO countries participate in the ITA talks and account for approximately 97 percent of global trade in IT products.
 
Five-Month Impasse
 
Last year, China and the U.S. sparked hopes for an enhanced ITA accord when its negotiators agreed to a new list of products, like GPS devices, medical equipment and multi-component semiconductors (219 WTO, 11/13/14).
 
ITA participants failed to seal a broader agreement in December 2014, after China rejected South Korea's demands to eliminate duties on flat-panel displays (240 WTO, 12/15/14).
 
Korea, home to TV manufacturers Samsung Electronics Co. Ltd. and LG Electronics Inc., ultimately dropped its demand for the inclusion of flat screens and instead asked that China agree to include a handful of alternative products, such as accumulator batteries. Chinese trade officials refused and said that they would not renegotiate their bilateral deal with the U.S.
 
Korea said that it is actively engaged in good-faith negotiations and sees the remaining gap as “not big and within reach,” according to participants at the May 8 meeting. China said that members should focus on the items that are currently on the table and not make “unrealistic requests” for one or two more items.
 
U.S. Growing ‘Impatient.’
 
U.S. trade officials said that the IT industry is growing impatient with the ITA talks, adding that the impasse bodes ill for members' broader efforts to conclude the Doha round of trade negotiations.
 
The U.S. also said that it supports proposals to permit the use of e-labels, or digital versions of technical seals that indicate various technical certifications for IT products. Last year the U.S. approved e-labeling legislation that is estimated to save technology companies millions of dollars each year.
 
The European Union urged ITA participants not to block the agreement and to agree upon what is now on the table. Japan said that members should embrace a sense of urgency with regard to the negotiations.
 
Australia, Canada, Chinese Taipei, Colombia, Hong Kong, Montenegro, Norway, Singapore and Switzerland each said that they supported an early conclusion to the ITA talks.
 
 
Russia Files a Pair of WTO Disputes Against EU, Ukrainian Tariffs
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, May 11, 2015
 
May 8 — The Russian Federation launched a dispute over European Union trade policies that it said violate World Trade Organization rules.
 
Russia also initiated a WTO dispute over Ukraine's antidumping measures on Russian exports of ammonium nitrate, according to a second May 8 WTO notification.
 
The two disputes come amid high tensions between Russia and western nations following the Russian annexation of Crimea in 2014. The WTO's Dispute Settlement Body (DSB) is investigating the EU's claim that Russian duties on imports of paper, palm oil and refrigerators exceed WTO limits.
 
A request for consultations is the first step in a dispute at the WTO's dispute settlement system. Ukraine must respond to the request within 10 days, after which the two countries shall enter into consultations within 30 days after the request is received.
 
Separate Antidumping Disputes
 
Russia requested consultations with Ukraine over antidumping duties that it alleged are in violation of the WTO's Anti-Dumping Agreement.
 
The Ukrainian measures stem from a 2008 investigation that found Russian imports of ammonium nitrate were dumped at less than the fair domestic market value.
 
Separately, Russia alleged that the EU implemented illegal “cost adjustment” methodologies in its calculation of dumping margins in antidumping proceedings relating to Russian imports of ammonium nitrate, certain welded tubes and pipes and certain seamless pipes, among other products.
 
Russia said that the EU measures violate the WTO's Anti-Dumping Agreement, the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures, the 1994 General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and the Marrakesh Agreement.
 
May 20 DSB Meeting
 
The WTO will evaluate several other trade disputes at the next meting of the DSB, scheduled for May 20.
 
The DSB will consider the U.S. and New Zealand's joint claim that Indonesia's 2012 import licensing programs unfairly discriminated against imports of foreign poultry, beef, apples, grapes, potatoes and other horticultural products.
 
Though Indonesia blocked the creation of the panel in April, the appointment of a panel may not be rejected a second time.
 
The U.S. will also deliver a statement about China's compliance with a WTO decision regarding electronic payment services.
 
Since 2012, the U.S. has urged China to amend its licensing requirements for credit card companies that the U.S. said unfairly favored China Union Pay. Last month, China announced that it revised its regulations, effective June 1, to ensure that its policies comply with the WTO dispute ruling.
 
 
Japan, Europe against India’s ‘safeguard’ probes on steel imports 
Amiti Sen 
11 May 2015
Business Line (The Hindu)
 
Allege that many of them have been ‘initiated on weak grounds’ 
 
The EU and Japan have criticised India for “frequent and frivolous” use of safeguard measures — imposition of higher duties to protect domestic industry against import surges — and have asked New Delhi to review its use of the tool.

The countries also questioned India’s recent safeguard investigation on certain steel products, in a recent meeting of the WTO’s Committee on Safeguards.

“The EU has alleged that many of the investigations have been initiated on weak grounds and asked India to review its use of safeguard measures,” an official who attended the meeting told Business Line .

Of the total 30 safeguard actions notified by countries at a recent meeting of the WTO’s Committee on Safeguards, India accounted for five, but later dropped two.

In 2014, too, safeguard investigations initiated by India were one of the highest at 14.

Japan, the EU and Russia expressed concerns about India’s safeguard investigation on seamless pipes, tubes and hollow profiles of iron or non-alloy steel, arguing that imports had not surged.

India, in its defence, said that while imports had decreased, they were still sufficiently high compared to the base year. A number of members, including the US and China, are affected by duties on steel products.

Safeguard duties, which are basically levies in addition to the existing import duties, can be imposed on items that witness a surge in imports, thereby hurting the domestic industry.

Easy to establish

India has been depending more on this measure to protect its domestic industry as it is easy to establish. Imposing anti-dumping duty, which is the other form of penal duty that the WTO allows, is more difficult as one has to prove that the imports are actually happening at prices lower than what is being charged in the seller’s home country.

“India is very careful that all conditions laid down by the WTO are met before safeguard duties are imposed. It abandons a lot of investigations when there is room for doubt,” a Commerce Ministry official said.

India announced at the meeting that it had terminated its safeguard investigation on cold rolled flat products of stainless steel. Japan welcomed the announcement but said it still has systemic concerns about India’s safeguard investigations.

The country also announced termination of its safeguard investigation on slabstock polyol, used in manufacture of pillows and mattresses. It is mostly imported from the US and Japan.

Safeguard duties, which are basically levies in addition to the existing import duties, can be imposed on items that witness a surge in imports, thereby hurting the domestic industry.
 
 
Commerce Won't Adjust AD Duties on Steel Welded Pipes from China
By Brian Flood
WTO Reporter, May 11, 2015
 
May 8 — Antidumping duty rates on imports of circular welded carbon quality steel pipe from China will not be adjusted downward to take account of countervailable subsidies, the Court of International Trade affirmed May 7 (Wheatland Tube Co. v. United States, 2015 BL 133381, Ct. Int'l Trade, No. 12-00298 (Slip Op. 15-44), 5/7/15).
 
The Commerce Department changed course on remand, and Judge Leo M. Gordon upheld the new decision, as all parties to this case supported Commerce's new approach.
 
From now on, Commerce said, it will seek industry-specific data directly from respondents to determine how countervailable government subsidies affect the department's antidumping duty calculations and whether Commerce runs the risk of “double remedies” in imposing both antidumping and countervailing duties on merchandise.
 
Commerce Tries ‘Apples-to-Apples' Approach
 
Since 2007, the U.S. has maintained both antidumping and countervailing duties on certain products from nonmarket economy countries, including this type of Chinese pipe. The World Trade Organization Appellate Body, however, ruled that such a setup runs an unacceptable risk that, because of the way Commerce calculates margins for nonmarket economies, the department will issue overlapping remedies, where the same subsidy is effectively offset by both antidumping and countervailing duties (49 WTO, 3/14/11).
 
In response to that ruling, and a decision by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit saying Commerce could not apply countervailing duties on goods from nonmarket economies (244 WTO, 12/20/11), Congress authorized Commerce to continue to apply both antidumping and countervailing duties to nonmarket economies but directed Commerce to estimate and apply an offset to antidumping duties in the event of double counting.
 
Commerce applied such an offset to the antidumping duties on Chinese pipe, but domestic producers Wheatland Tube Co., United States Steel Corp., Allied Tube and Conduit and TMK IPSCO Tubulars challenged Commerce's decision.
 
The court agreed with the domestic producers that Commerce had not met its statutory burden of showing that an offset was required. The department had relied on indirect evidence and a series of inferences to determine that countervailable government subsidies lowered the average U.S. import price of welded steel pipe, which would affect the department's antidumping duty rate calculations, the court found. This approach was not reasonable where Commerce failed to address evidence submitted by the domestic producers indicating that domestic output prices and export prices for Chinese steel pipe were not correlated, the court said (230 WTO, 12/1/14).
 
On remand, Commerce announced that it had changed its approach for such cases. Now, the department said, it looks for direct evidence of the effect between subsidies and costs by asking for industry-specific cost data directly from the respondents so that Commerce can make what it called “apples-to-apples” comparisons between prices and costs.
 
Here, Commerce said, the respondents failed to provide industry-specific cost data, so in light of the domestic producers' evidence, the department decided that no offset was warranted.
 
In a one-page decision, the court said Commerce's new approach was in line with the court's remand order, and since no party objected, it upheld Commerce's decision.
 
Gilbert B. Kaplan and P. Lee Smith, King & Spalding LLP, represented Wheatland Tube Co. Robert E. Lighthizer, Jeffrey D. Gerrish, Stephen J. Narkin and Nathaniel B. Bolin, Skadden Arps Slate Meagher & Flom LLP represented United States Steel Corp. Roger B. Schagrin and John W. Bohn, Schagrin Associates, represented Allied Tube and Conduit and TMK IPSCO Tubulars.
 
 
World FZO’s annual conference 
Rushika Bhatia 
10 May 2015
SME Adviser Middle East
 
The World Free Zones Organisation (World FZO), the multi-lateral, not-for-profit association for free zones, has announced Robert Koopman, Chief Economist at the World Trade Organisation (WTO), as a keynote speaker for its upcoming annual conference: Free Zone Outlook International”.

The event, which brings together free zone representatives, multi-lateral and commercial organisations will focus on the theme: Towards a new global trade order”. Speakers will examine the fragmentation of global production and supply chains and how this is impacting international trade dynamics, as well as how free zones are being used to achieve specific economic objectives.

The conference will also feature keynote presentations from a number of high profile business personalities and representatives of multilateral organisations. These include Gaozhang Zhu, Director of Compliance and Facilitation, World Customs Organisation (WCO), and Professor Xavier Sala-i-Martin, Chief Economic Advisor of the Center for Global Competitiveness and Performance at World Economic Forum (WEF).

Dr. Mohammed Alzarooni, Chairman, World FZO, said: Free zones have been used around the world to diversify economies, attract inward investment, create jobs and stimulate innovation and trade. However this contribution to the global economy often goes unrecognised. We are therefore delighted to have such a strong line-up of speakers confirmed for our annual conference to share their views on critical global issues relating to free zones and trade. The event will also provide participants with business development, partnership and networking opportunities with key international decision makers, service providers and consultants.”

Koopman added: Many free zones have proved to be dynamic engines of growth, contributing to economic prosperity and development. They can serve as important catalysts for foreign and domestic investment. Free zones can be effective development poles though thesynergies created by groups of enterprises, including SMEs, in close proximity and with access to improved infrastructure, research and development institutions, an educated workforce and trade facilitation measures.”

The conference will be held on May 11-13, 2015 at the Grand Hyatt Hotel in Dubai, UAE. In addition to the keynotes, it will also feature panel discussions with key representatives from free zonesand business leaders from around the world. These will cover a variety of topics, such as the role of free zones in regional economic development; how they are enabling companies to integrate international networks of assets; as well as the best strategies for attracting foreign direct investment and stimulating trade. Finally, a number of dedicated workshops will be run on free zone management and operations for members and interested parties.

 
Obama to Democrats on Asia trade pact: like Nike, 'just do it' 
By Jeff Mason 
 
BEAVERTON, Oregon (Reuters) - President Barack Obama, co-opting Nike Inc's famous slogan, told Democrats on Friday to "just do it" and support a trade deal with Asian countries that the shoe company said would help it create up to 10,000 U.S. jobs over 10 years.

The setting - Nike's headquarters in Beaverton, Oregon - was an unusual one for a presidential trade pitch.

Nike has long faced criticism for using Asian sweat shops to produce its pricey footwear. But the company has worked to improve conditions overseas and said on Friday it would also boost investment in U.S. manufacturing if the 12-nation Trans Pacific Partnership (TPP) pact is approved.

Obama used that promise of new jobs to try to convince skeptical lawmakers from his own party to support TPP and join Republicans in granting him "fast-track" authority to finalize the deal.

Many Democrats are concerned the proposed pact would help companies move operations to cheaper offshore facilities.

"On trade, I actually think some of my dearest friends are wrong. They're just wrong," Obama said at Nike headquarters. "If we don't write the rules for trade around the world, guess what: China will."

He added, "Just do it, everybody."

SHOES FROM VIETNAM

Before the trip, White House aides had been coy about why Obama chose such a controversial backdrop for his speech. An administration official said Nike had approached the White House about the trade deal and that led to Obama's appearance there.

Labor and environmental groups protested Obama's appearance at Nike and said the company's job-creating claims were vague.

"We have heard similar promises from companies before, and very few have panned out," said Eric Hauser, a spokesman for the AFL-CIO, the nation's largest labor coalition.

Nike has 26,000 U.S. employees, but it counts on more than 1 million workers in contract factories worldwide to make its shoes, some of which sell for hundreds of dollars. A third of those factories are in Vietnam, a TPP participant.

Almost all footwear sold in the United States is made overseas and is subject to import tariffs that average 25 percent to 35 percent, according to the Footwear Distributors and Retailers of America, a shoe dealer's group.

For shoes imported from TPP countries, notably Vietnam, U.S. firms paid $400 million in tariffs in 2014, the group said.

Nike said relief from "antiquated" footwear tariffs in the TPP deal would allow it to invest more money at home. In addition to 10,000 U.S. manufacturing and engineering jobs, it promised as many as 40,000 additional jobs would pop up in its domestic supply chain if an agreement were reached.

"Free trade opens doors. It removes barriers. It creates jobs," Nike Chief Executive Mark Parker told the crowd ahead of Obama's speech in Beaverton, seven miles from Portland.

When asked, Nike offered few details on, for instance, whether it would build new plants, how soon new jobs could come on line, how much money workers might be paid, or what kind of shoes could be produced in the United States.

A Nike spokesman said in an email that it was "too early for us to say specifically where we will invest, but it will be a significant investment over the next decade."

The White House declined to provide additional details, referring questions to Nike.

MORE LOBBYING EXPENSE

In the past two years, Nike has ramped up its lobbying efforts as debate over the trade treaty has intensified.

The company nearly tripled its lobbying spending to more than $1.1 million in 2014 from $400,000 in 2012, according to data collected by the Center for Responsive Politics, a Washington campaign finance and lobbying research group.

Nike multibillionaire co-founder Philip Knight is Oregon’s richest person and leans Republican, though he has donated money over the years to both parties, including more than $85,000 to Republican congressional committees in 2013 and 2014, according to federal records analyzed by the center.

Knight has also given money to Democratic Senator Ron Wyden, a key supporter along with Republicans of giving Obama "fast-track" authority to negotiate the TPP deal.

Under the deal's terms, Obama said Vietnam is one country that would be forced to improve its labor standards, set a minimum wage, and protect workers' rights to unionize.

"It would be good for the workers in Vietnam even as it helps make sure that they're not undercutting competition here in the United States," he said.

The TPP would also help more companies move advanced manufacturing to the United States, Obama added.

But despite anecdotal evidence that some companies are shifting production back to the U.S., economic data suggest America's production lines rely more than ever on suppliers from low-wage countries.

"The data clearly show no sign of reshoring," said University of Munich economist Dalia Marin, in a detailed analysis published in November.

Lori Wallach of Public Citizen, a government watchdog group, said labor standards in the TPP were too weak, pointing to a U.S. Government Accountability Office study that found similar standards in trade deals with Peru, Colombia, Panama and Korea had failed to improve labor conditions in those countries. 
 
(Additional reporting by Roberta Rampton, Howard Schneider, Jason Lange and Krista Hughes in Washington; Editing by Kevin Drawbaugh, Kieran Murray and Christian Plumb) 
 
 
Australia targets multinationals in tax crackdown 
11 May 2015
Agence France Presse
 
Australia Monday announced plans to go after large multinational firms shifting profits offshore to minimise taxes, with 30 companies in the government's sights.

It also outlined proposals to force companies selling digital products, such as streamed content and e-books, to pay a goods and services tax.

Treasurer Joe Hockey, who last year said the practice of corporations shifting profits amounted to "theft", said he would reveal the new legislation when he hands down the national budget on Tuesday.

"The government will be proceeding with new tax integrity measures in the budget," he said, adding that the multinational anti-avoidance law would target the activities of 30 identified companies.

"These companies are diverting profits earned in Australia away from Australia to no tax or low-tax jurisdictions," said the treasurer.

The initiative comes amid increased efforts by governments around the world to crack down on global firms that use complex corporate structures to lower their tax bills.

Last month, Australian parliamentarians grilled global technology and mining giants including Apple, Google, BHP Billiton and Rio Tinto at an upper house Senate hearing on their tax structures.

The inquiry heard Google Australia in 2013, for example, made Aus$358 million (US$275 million) in income, generated profits of just over Aus$46 million and paid Aus$7.1 million in tax.

The firms insisted they had paid the taxes they owed under the country's laws.

Hockey did not name any of the companies being targeted, or say how much revenue the government hopes to get back, but said the Australian Tax Office had spent months embedded in some of the world's biggest firms.

They had noted that billions of dollars in profits have been transferred offshore to minimise tax in Australia.

A usual scenario was to operate in Australia with billing occurring out of Singapore.

"The money is transferred to Ireland and then advantage is taken of a range of different EU tax procedures in relation to royalties," said Hockey.

"This is all designed to avoid paying tax in Australia on profits earned in Australia."

Under the planned rules, the Tax Commissioner will have the power to recover unpaid taxes and issue a fine of an additional 100 percent of the unpaid taxes plus interest.

Australia made closing corporate tax loopholes and endorsing a common reporting standard to increase transparency a key focus of the G20 meetings last year when it assumed the rotating presidency.

As well as targeting profit-shifting, Hockey plans to impose a Goods and Services Tax (GST) on digital products.

"It is plainly unfair that a supplier of digital products into Australia is not charging the GST whilst someone locally has to charge the GST," he said.

"When the GST legislation was originally drafted, it did not anticipate the massive growth in the supply of digital goods like movie downloads, games and e-books from overseas."

 
Australian PM's adviser says UN using climate change for "new world order"
By Jane Wardell

SYDNEY, May 8 (Reuters) - Australian Prime Minister Tony Abbott's chief business adviser has accused the United Nations of using debunked climate change science to lead a new world order, provocative claims made to coincide with a visit from the top UN climate negotiator.

Christiana Figueres, who heads the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, toured Australia this week, urging the country to move away from heavily polluting coal production.

Under Abbott's leadership, Australia has been reluctant to engage in global climate change politics, unsuccessfully attempting to keep the issue off the agenda of the Group of 20 Leaders' Summit in Brisbane last year.

Maurice Newman, the chairman of Abbott's business advisory council and a climate change sceptic, said the UN was using false models showing sustained temperature increases to end democracy and impose authoritarian rule.

"The real agenda is concentrated political authority," Newman wrote in an opinion piece published in The Australian newspaper on Friday. "Global warming is the hook.

"It's about a new world order under the control of the UN," he added. "It is opposed to capitalism and freedom and has made environmental catastrophism a household topic to achieve its objective."

Figueres used an address in Melbourne to urge Australia to move away from coal, the country's second-largest export, as the world grapples with global warming.

"Economic diversification will be a challenge that Australia faces," she said.

Abbott has described coal as "good for humanity" and the "foundation of prosperity" for the foreseeable future.

Figueres also urged Australia to play a leading role at the climate summit in Paris in December, a call unlikely to be heeded given Abbott's track record.

At the Brisbane G20 meeting, Abbott warned that the Paris summit would fail if world leaders decided to put cutting carbon emissions ahead of economic growth.

At home, Abbott, who in 2009 said the science behind climate change was "crap", repealed a tax on carbon pricing and abolished the independent Climate Commission advisory body.

Asked on the Canberra leg of her trip if the politics around renewable energy was as toxic elsewhere in the world, Figueres said: "No. At the global level what we see is increased participation of renewables, increased investment in renewables, increased excitement about renewables."

Abbott's office and the United Nations did not immediately respond to requests for comment. (Editing by Nick Macfie) 
END


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.