
·         G-20 meet: India to oppose premature conclusion of Doha Round


·         Nairobi calling: WTO to deliver 


·         NZ ratifies WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement


·         Canada to Seek WTO Authorization in Response to Country of Origin Labelling


·         Desaceleración del comercio pone en peligro el crecimiento global 


·         India, Africa to forge common cause against Western trade bullying


·         A fish called development


·         L'expérience marocaine en matière de commerce des produits de pêche exposée à Genève 

·         The SDGs are useless without economic growth 


·         Modi's power drive 


 


 

 


G-20 meet: India to oppose premature conclusion of Doha Round


Business Line (The Hindu)

By Amiti Sen

5 October 2015

Will stress on inclusion of permanent solution for food procurement subsidies in Nairobi package India will speak out at the G-20 trade ministers’ meet this week against attempts by some developed countries to conclude the ongoing Doha Round of World Trade Organisation (WTO) by delivering on just a handful of issues “cherry-picked” by them while ignoring the rest.

Commerce & Industry Minister Nirmala Sitharaman will also reject the idea – mooted by the US – of denying countries, including India and China, the concessions (special & differential treatment) that are to be extended to developing nations at the WTO, a Commerce Ministry official told BusinessLine .

“Some developed countries are trying to somehow conclude the Doha Round by getting certain issues that also favour them off the ground while burying the rest. Once the Doha Round, which was to primarily focus on development issues, is out of the way, they would try to move on to others such as competition policy, investment issues, labour, environment and e-commerce, that are not part of the Doha agenda but suit their interests,” the official said, adding that India had to stop that from happening.

New Delhi will try to push the negotiations on agriculture in the right direction and ensure that a permanent solution to the problem of calculation of food procurement subsidies without attracting penalties is in place, the official added.

The US, in a recent paper circulated at the WTO, has called for members to avoid using minimum support prices and input subsidies for farm products — the mainstay of India’s support to its farmers.

The G-20 trade ministers’ meet in Turkey, which will see participation from all 20 members, including the US, China, Argentina, the EU, South Africa and Russia, will focus on the agenda for the WTO ministerial meeting in Nairobi in December. WTO Director-General Roberto Azevedo is expected to give a presentation on the current state of world trade and trade negotiations.

The potential emerging deliverables that are being talked about by members such as the US, the EU, New Zealand and South Africa, and also the WTO DG, include outcomes on export competition in agriculture, issues to improve transparency and also a package for the Least Developed Countries (LDCs).

“We would not only want a permanent solution to the issue of food procurement subsidies to be part of the Nairobi deal, but would also insist on a commitment that all other issues from the Doha agenda, including market access in industrial and farm products, would be part of post-Nairobi work, and Doha round would not be called off,” the official said.

Crucial talks

The US has called for scrapping of minimum support prices for farmers

The G-20 trade ministers’ meet in Turkey will focus on the agenda of Nairobi ministerial

Competition in agriculture, package for LDCs are seen as some of the ‘deliverables’

Kasturi & Sons Ltd

 

 


Nairobi calling: WTO to deliver 


ByAsjadul Kibria 

The Financial Express (Bangladesh)

4 October 2015

Bangladesh, Oct. 4 -- The year, 2015, is quite a busy year for the global leaders. They, along with their respective teams, have already spent huge time and energy for attending and contributing to a series of important international conferences. The summits or conferences are considered crucial for future direction of the world, although all of these are not new.

The most hyped of these is the Sustainable Development Summit, a special summit during the 70th session of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"United Nations General Assembly in New York on September 25-27. This summit has formally adopted the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), a set of 17 goals divided in 169 targets with 304 indicators, to be achieved in next 15 years. SDGs are the successors of Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), adopted in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"UN in 2000 for 15 years. 2015 is thus the terminal year of the MDGs and 2016 will be the first year of the SDGs. It includes the goals of eliminating all kinds of poverty and hunger, building resilient infrastructure, protecting the eco system and revitalising global partnership for sustainable development.

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"UN summit on SDGs will be followed by annual conference on global climate change. Termed as Conference of the Parties (COP), it will take place in Paris from November 30 to December 11. The main objective of the COP is to limit carbon emissions and save the planet from global warming and associated changes in climate.

Impact of climate change is a great concern for the world. Despite lots of efforts, little has been achieved so far to cut carbon emission as developed and developing countries are in logger-heads on devising effective ways of reducing carbon emission. In fact, developed countries are reducing emissions slowly while developing countries (for example--China, India) want to use energy to grow their economies on the plea that the same thing was done by the developed countries earlier. So, it becomes a tricky issue to settle.

SDGs are linked with the global challenge of climate change as sustainable development is not possible without protecting environment and addressing adverse impact of climate change. So, policy makers and negotiators of different countries are putting additional efforts for the Paris meet energised by successful adoption of the SDGs.

In addition to these events, another significant event is also due to be held this year -- the 10th ministerial conference of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organisation (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO) in the Kenyan capital Nairobi in December 15-18. Let us have a look at some of the major issues set for the most important conference that would govern international trade in the years to come.

FROM BALI TO NAIROBI: Around two years ago, trade ministers and senior representatives of the member countries of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO managed to revive the multilateral trade regime. They decided to move ahead by agreeing to ease the procedures of cross-border trade, remove imbalance in agriculture subsidy and allow better market access to the poorest countries. Known as the Bali Package', it is the most substantive breakthrough in the prolonged negotiation process of the Doha Development Round which was initiated in 2001.

The follow-up actions of Bali are, however, not fully satisfactory. Although the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO adopted Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA) as an outcome of Bali deal, very few member countries have ratified the agreement so far. Some countries including Bangladesh have adopted a 'wait and see' policy. These countries will not ratify the TFA now and will wait for others. The idea is that when two-third members will ratify it, the agreement will be binding for all 161 member countries of the organisation. But such policy to 'skip' the ratification process will delay the implementation of the TFA.

Again, the most contentious issue in the Bali conference was public stockholding for food security. It was India's strong insistence that finally forced the members in reaching a compromised deal. It was thus agreed that member countries would not go for legal step in case of farm subsidies on food unless a 'permanent solution' is adopted. Members also agreed to work out the permanent solution by the time of the 11th ministerial conference or by 2017. This is a tricky issue. The Agreement on Agriculture (AoA) has allowed maximum subsidies, termed as Aggregate Measures of Support (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"AMS), at 10 per cent of value of farm output for the developing countries. Government procurement of food at higher than the market price is also considered trade distorting and thus subject to challenge in HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO through trade dispute mechanism. But developing countries claimed that the method and reference price of calculating HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"AMS is outdated. The global food price of 1998-99 is the reference price which is no more logical after 25 years and it requires revision in line with the current global trend.

In Bali, developed members also agreed to widen market access for the least developed countries (LDCs) and report on measures taken by them in this regard. Already, almost all the developed countries and some developing countries have extended duty-free market access and preferential access respectively to the LDCs. The United States is the only developed county which is yet to provide 100 per cent market access to LDCs on the plea that Doha negotiation is not fully concluded.

Against this backdrop, the Nairobi ministerial conference is set to review the progress and implementation of the Bali Package and also adopt some more initiatives to complete the prolonged Doha round negotiation.

CAUTIOUS OPTIMISM: As the time for Nairobi ministerial conference is approaching, differences between developed and developing countries are re-emerging strongly. And with it, the increasing uncertainty. Sensing this, WTO Director General HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Roberto Azevedo has already cautioned the member countries. In his latest speech, delivered at the Peterson Institute in Washington D.C. on September 24, Mr Azevedo said: "Right now, we are working hard to deliver meaningful outcomes in our next Ministerial Conference in Nairobi this December. This will be the first time such a meeting is being held in Africa. But as things stand today - and this won't come as a surprise - it doesn't look like there will be big breakthroughs in the issues that have been stalled for so long, such as domestic support in Agriculture and market access in Agriculture, NAMA and services.

The gaps in these areas are still very big. The situation may change, but there are few signs of this at present. And if there are no prospects for a major advance on these issues, members will need to face the reality. They will need to think about what they want the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO to be and how it should work in the future."

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO chief, however, expressed his cautious optimism' on successful outcome of the 10th ministerial meeting. That's why, he said: "Despite differences on major issues, I think there is still potential for a meaningful agreement in Nairobi. And indeed delivering a successful Nairobi meeting is perhaps the best thing we can do to make the system work better."

In fact, leading countries in the multilateral trade negotiation also want to move forward by narrowing their differences. That's why, the so-called HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"G-7 (the US, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union or EU, Japan, Australia, Brazil, China and India) is going to meet in Turkish capital Istanbul on October 5 to reach a 'consensus' to make the Nairobi meeting a minimum success. Many believe that the Istanbul meet will have little positive development and so trade ministers have to go to Nairobi with uncertainty. Besides, as the negotiations on plurilateral trade deals like Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement (TPP), Environmental Goods Agreement, and Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) gain momentum, future of multilateral trade negotiation appears really uncertain.

Plurilateral deals are, for the most part, aggressive having stringent terms and conditions where small and poor countries will get very little space. Even big developing countries are not as comfortable as in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO process. Thus, having lots of differences, Nairobi meet actually brings an opportunity for narrowing the gap and making some deliverables. Moreover, taking cue from the SDGs, it is high time to strongly use trade as an important tool for sustainable development. As HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO enters into the 20th year of its existence, there should be call from Nairobi for the organisation to deliver in a more balanced way.

Published by HT Syndication with permission from The Financial Express.

 

 


NZ ratifies WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement


The Main Report Farming Alert

5 October 2015, 

89 words, 

English,

(c) 2015 The Main Report Publications Ltd

NZ has formally accepted the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA). Trade Minister Tim Groser says “the TFA is designed to facilitate trade through the simplification and streamlining of customs and border processes.” The implementation of the TFA will provide concrete benefits to New Zealand businesses over time, minimising costs associated with getting products across borders and into the marketplace. In particular, NZ’s agricultural exporters will benefit from a provision to provide for the release of perishable goods within the shortest possible time.

 

 

 

Canada to Seek WTO Authorization in Response to Country of Origin Labelling

U.S. must repeal COOL measures that continue to harm Canadian livestock industry

June 4, 2015 - Ottawa, Ontario - Foreign Affairs, Trade and Development Canada

The Honourable Ed Fast, Minister of International Trade, and the Honourable Gerry Ritz, Minister of Agriculture and Agri-Food, today announced that Canada will seek World Trade Organization (WTO) authorization to impose over $3 billion in retaliatory measures against U.S. exports to Canada.

Canada’s request for authorization to retaliate, filed today with the WTO, will be considered by the WTO Dispute Settlement Body on June 17, 2015.

On May 18, 2015, the WTO ruled for the fourth time against the U.S. country of original labelling (COOL) requirements, reaffirming Canada’s long-standing position that these measures violate the U.S.’s international trade obligations and discriminate against Canadian cattle and hogs. The decision was final and without the possibility of further appeal.

With the final WTO decision, the Canadian government once again calls on the United States to immediately repeal the COOL measures on beef and pork to meet its trade obligations or face retaliation.

Since the implementation of the U.S. COOL requirements in 2008, producers and processors on both sides of the border have been harmed by this unnecessary trade barrier. Damages to the Canadian livestock industry are estimated to be more than $3 billion annually, and Canada will ask the WTO for authority to impose retaliation measures up to that amount. Once WTO authorization is received, Canada will choose how and when to retaliate.

Quick Facts

In June 2013, Canada released a proposed list of U.S. imports targeted for retaliation.

Canada will seek WTO authorization to impose $3.068 billion per year in retaliatory measures against U.S. exports to Canada.

Canada and the United States enjoy the strongest bilateral trading relationship in the world, with two-way trade in goods and services surpassing $870 billion last year.

In 2014, agriculture and agri-food trade between Canada and the United States was $51 billion.

 

 

 

 

 

Desaceleración del comercio pone en peligro el crecimiento global 

El Comercio, 

4 October 2015

Por Simon KennedyCorresponsal jefe de economía internacional

Después de haber sido el lubricante del crecimiento global, el comercio internacional no ha podido repuntar totalmente desde la recesión del 2009 y ahora vuelve a desacelerarse. Las exportaciones chinas cayeron 5,5% en agosto respecto de un año antes, en tanto las estadounidenses disminuyeron 3,5%. Corea del Sur y Singapur experimentaron caídas de dos dígitos. Reflejando esta debilidad, la Organización Mundial del Comercio rebajó esta semana su pronóstico para el comercio este año desde 3,3% hasta 2,8%. Reconoció que su nueva predicción puede ser ?excesivamente optimista?.

Estas tasas no alcanzan el promedio de 5% de las dos últimas décadas. También quedaron atrás los años 1990 y 2000, cuando el comercio creció el doble del crecimiento económico. El 2015 será el cuarto año consecutivo en que los dos crecen más o menos al mismo nivel. Más preocupante todavía, Carl Weinberg, economista principal de High Frequency Economics en Valhalla, Nueva York, señala que, al mes de junio, las exportaciones totales mundiales se hallaban por debajo de sus niveles de un año atrás en un nivel anual de US$1,6 billones, el equivalente de 2,1% del producto interno bruto global.

Esta caída prolongada en las exportaciones durante los seis primeros meses del año hasta 11% respecto del año anterior es suficiente como para preocuparse por un estancamiento en la economía global, considerando la estimación de Weinberg de que existe una correlación de 70% entre los movimientos del crecimiento y las exportaciones. ?La contracción del comercio mundial todavía no ha tocado fondo?, dijo Weinberg. ?Esto podría ser más que un viento en contra económico, podría ser un tornado?.

Desaceleración china

La perspectiva más pesimista para el comercio es probablemente una de las razones por las que el Fondo Monetario Internacional se apresta a rebajar su pronóstico de 3,3% para el crecimiento global este año cuando realice sus reuniones anuales en Lima la semana próxima.

Detrás de la reciente desaceleración en el comercio está la regresión en China y el resto de los mercados emergentes, las conmociones en los países ricos en materias primas y un dólar en alza. No obstante, los cambios estructurales también están incidiendo conforme países como Estados Unidos y China dependen de una mayor producción local y se cierran menos acuerdos comerciales, lo cual indica que posiblemente la globalización haya alcanzado su pico.

Hay esperanza, empero. Los economistas de HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Crédit Suisse Group AG dicen que pese a ser dependientes de las exportaciones, la Eurozona y Japón han sorteado bien la debilidad del comercio gracias a su producción de bienes de alta tecnología y a sus tipos de cambio más bajos. La OMC predice una aceleración del comercio el año próximo hasta de 3,9%.

Un informe de la firma de investigación Gavekal Dragonomics también sugirió que posiblemente haya una nueva fase de globalización encabezada por los servicios y las compañías innovadoras en los países avanzados en lugar de las multinacionales y las economías orientales asiáticas.

De todos modos, si el comercio no repunta, Adam Slater, economista en Oxford Economics Ltd., predice una presión continua a la baja sobre los rendimientos de los bonos y esfuerzos renovados por parte de los países para lograr prosperidad devaluando. ?Posiblemente aumente la tentación de tratar de quedarse con la mayor tajada de una torta comercial dada?, dijo Slater. 

 

 

 

Le ralentissement du commerce mondial s'installe

 

Le Monde Éco et entreprise

4 October 2015, 

© Le Monde, 2015. Tous droits réservés. 



© Le Monde, 2015. Tous droits réservés. 

L'OMC a révisé à la baisse, mercredi 30 septembre, ses prévisions de croissance 2015

Morosité, quand tu nous tiens ! La progression du commerce mondial devrait se limiter à 2,8 % en 2015 au lieu des 4 % prévus en avril, estime l'Organisation mondiale du commerce (OMC) dans ses prévisions, révisées à la baisse, du mercredi 30 septembre. L'année 2015 serait ainsi la quatrième consécutive au cours de laquelle la croissance des échanges de biens et de services ne dépassera pas les 3 %.

Le ralentissement du commerce mondial s'installe donc dans le paysage économique. Quelques chiffres donnent une idée des évolutions en cours. Avant la crise, la progression annuelle des échanges mondiaux était deux fois plus élevée que celle du produit intérieur brut (PIB) : respectivement + 7,2 % en moyenne contre + 3,2 % entre 1995 et 2007. Elle est tombée à + 3,5 % entre 2012 et 2014 pour une croissance mondiale de 2,5 %.

Ce ralentissement hors norme, qui tranche avec le fort rebond du commerce mondial en 2010 (+ 13 % contre + 4 % pour le PIB), a surpris les économistes. Ils y ont d'abord vu un phénomène conjoncturel résultant de la croissance molle dans une Union européenne qui compte pour environ un tiers des échanges à la surface du globe en volume. Mais devant la morosité persistante, des causes plus structurelles ont été avancées.

Recentrage économique chinoisDans le numéro de décembre 2014 de Finance & Développement, publication mensuelle du Fonds monétaire international (FMI), trois économistes, Cristina Constantinescu, Michele Ruta et Aaditya Mattoo expliquent cette rupture par les changements intervenus dans les chaînes de valeur internationales des Etats-Unis et de la Chine. Le terme désigne, selon le HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Centre d'études prospectives et d'informations internationales (Cepii), " la fragmentation du processus de production en un grand nombre de tâches effectuées dans des pays différents pour tirer le meilleur parti des différences de qualifications, de technologies, de disponibilités d'intrants et de prix des facteurs. " Ce processus, qui a joué un rôle central dans l'accélération du commerce mondial dans les années 1990 et 2000, s'épuise. Le recentrage économique de la Chine y contribue, les entreprises de ce pays remplaçant désormais les intrants étrangers par des intrants chinois.

" Les importations de la Chine devraient reculer de 3,8 % en volume en 2015. Ce serait la première baisse depuis vingt ans, ce qui pèse sur le commerce mondial, analyse Bernard Marc de l'Insee. L'Europe, toutefois, exporte surtout des produits finis en Chine, dont la demande a moins baissé que celle des produits d'assemblage, essentiellement importés des autres pays d'Asie. " L'Europe serait donc mieux armée que les pays asiatiques pour résister au ralentissement chinois.

Claire Guélaud

Société Editrice du Monde 

 

 

India, Africa to forge common cause against Western trade bullying

IANS | New Delhi October 4, 2015 Last Updated at 16:22 IST

HYPERLINK "http://www.business-standard.com/search?type=news&q=India"India and the 54 countries of HYPERLINK "http://www.business-standard.com/search?type=news&q=Africa"Africa are expected to join forces at a mega summit later this month to form a united front to counter perceived Western bullying, notably by the US, over global trade negotiations ahead of an upcoming WTO ministerial meet to be held in Nairobi in December.

Trade officials from India and Africa are already into negotiations ahead of the Third India-Africa Forum Summit (IAFS) being held here October 26-30, to firm up a joint front that will seek to protect the interests of developing countries in the face of Western pressure to succumb to laws seen as tailored to suit their interests.

The 10th ministerial conference of the World Trade Organization (WTO), to be held in Nairobi on December 15-18, is likely to see the developed world led by the US and the EU in a stand-off against developing countries led by India, China and others, over protecting their interests.

The forging of an alliance between India and the 54 African countries assumes all the more importance in the face of two mega regional trading agreements being negotiated - the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) between the US and the EU and the Trans Pacific Partnership (TPP) among 12 countries including the US, Australia, Canada, Mexico, Malaysia, Singapore, Vietnam and Japan.

Many of the developed countries of the two groupings are keen to see that the "high standards" of these agreements are imported into the WTO corpus.

India is concerned that the TPP and TTIP agreements, that it is not part of, may seek to set international phyto-sanitary standards and factory standards for goods that India and developing countries like it are not yet ready to measure up to.

The two US-led mega trade groupings, being aggressively pursued by the Barack Obama administration, are expected to go beyond WTO standards and protection measures for intellectual property, environment and labour. The standards they set up are also expected to put constraints on India's pharmaceutical sector, which produces vital generic drugs at cheap rates for the masses.

Another alarming factor is that foreign investors can file complaints against governments for not adhering to standards or any other issue at dispute panels under a special mechanism as part of the mega agreements, which would put constraints on countries like India.

India and developing countries like in Africa are not yet ready to meet the high norms that the two trading blocs are seeking to impose.

The negotiations at the IAFS would seek to form a support base of partnership in countering such heavy-handedness from big blocs, said a source.

Besides forming a common partnership on international trading concerns, the India-Africa Forum Summit would also see India and the 54 African countries forming a partnership on global issues like reform of the UN Security Council for greater representation and on climate change.

The discussions on climate change are set to figure in a major way at the summit, especially ahead of Conference of the Parties in Paris next month.

Terrorism, especially in the wake of terror groups like Boko Haram, Al-Shabaab and Islamic State, spreading their network and activities in the continent would also feature in a big way at the IAFS. Countering terror, sharing information and forging a united front would feature in the talks.

Skilling of their large burgeoning youth population, which is a matter of concern for both sides, would also be a major focus area of talks at the summit.

(Ranjana Narayan can be contacted at ranjana.n@ians.in

 

 

 

A fish called development

Mon, Oct 5th, 2015

Business Day, Lagos, Nigeria

The just-adopted Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) are expected to herald the start of a new era in global development, one that promises to transform the world in the name of people, the planet, prosperity, peace, and partnership. But there is an ocean of difference between promising and doing. And, while global declarations are important – they prioritize financing and channel political will – many of today’s pledges have been made before.

In fact, whether the SDGs succeed will depend to a significant degree on how they influence other international negotiations, particularly the most complex and contentious ones. And an early test concerns a goal for which the Global Ocean Commission actively campaigned: to “conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas, and marine resources for sustainable development.”

When political leaders meet at the tenth WTO Ministerial Conference in Nairobi in December, they will have an opportunity to move toward meeting one of that goal’s most important targets: prohibition of subsidies that contribute to overfishing and illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing by no later than 2020.

This is not a new ambition; it has been on the WTO’s agenda for many years, and it has been included in other international sustainable development declarations. But, even today, countries spend $30 billion a year on fisheries subsidies, 60 percent of which directly encourages unsustainable, destructive, or even illegal practices. The resulting market distortion is a major factor behind the chronic mismanagement of the world’s fisheries, which the World Bank calculates to have cost the global economy $83 billion in 2012.

In addition to concerns about finances and sustainability, the issue raises urgent questions about equity and justice. Rich economies (in particular Japan, the United States, France, and Spain), along with China and South Korea, account for 70 percent of global fisheries subsidies. These transfers leave thousands of fishing-dependent communities struggling to compete with subsidized rivals and threaten the food security of millions of people as industrial fleets from distant lands deplete their oceanic stocks.

West Africa, where fishing can be a matter of life and death, is being particularly hard hit. Since the 1990s, when foreign vessels, primarily from the EU and China, began to fish on an industrial scale off its shores, it has become impossible for many local fishers to make a living or feed their families.

From 1994 to 2005, Senegal’s catch fell from 95,000 to 45,000 tons, according to government estimates, and the country lost half of its fleet of traditional wooden pirogues. As the fish stocks collapsed in 2005, 5,000 people decided to put their redundant fishing boats to a different use, by fleeing to the Spanish Canary Islands. A year later, more than 30,000 others made the same perilous journey, and an estimated 6,000 drowned. Senegalese and Mauritanian fishermen and their families are also among the thousands of people risking their lives to get to Europe today.

On the high seas, the distortion is even larger. According to fisheries economists, subsidies by some of the world’s richest countries are the only reason large-scale industrial fishing in areas beyond coastal countries’ 200-mile exclusive economic zones is profitable. But fish do not respect international boundaries, and it is estimated that 42 percent of the commercial fish being caught travel between countries’ exclusive zones and the high seas. As a result, industrial fishing far from shore undermines developing countries’ coastal, mostly artisanal, fisheries.

Eliminating harmful fisheries subsidies by 2020 is not only crucial for conserving the ocean; it will also affect our ability to meet other goals, such as our promises to end hunger and achieve food security and to reduce inequality within and among countries.

The credibility of both the WTO and the newly adopted SDGs will be on the line in Nairobi. The Global Ocean Commission has put forward a clear three-step program to eliminate harmful fishing subsidies. All that is needed is for governments finally to agree to put an end to the injustice and waste that they cause.

Fortunately, there are encouraging signs. Nearly 60 percent of the WTO’s membership supports controlling fisheries subsidies, with support from the African, Caribbean, and Pacific Group of developing countries – together with the EU’s contribution to improve transparency and reporting – giving new momentum to the effort. Among the initiatives being put forward in advance of the Nairobi meeting is the so-called “NZ +5 proposal.” Co-sponsored by New Zealand, Argentina, Iceland, Norway, Peru, and Uruguay, the plan would eliminate fisheries subsidies that affect overfished stocks and contribute to illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing.

The Global Ocean Commission urges the remaining 40 percent of the WTO’s members – and especially the biggest players currently blocking this process – to accept the relatively modest proposals on the table. A sustainable future for our planet and its oceans depend on it.

Oby Ezekwesili, José María Figueres & Pascal Lamy

 

 

L'expérience marocaine en matière de commerce des produits de pêche exposée à Genève 

Libération

05 October 2015

 

L'expérience marocaine en matière de commerce des produits de la pêche a été présentée, jeudi à Genève, lors d'une session de travail du Forum public de l'Organisation mondiale du commerce (OMC). 
Le secteur de transformation et de commercialisation de ces produits occupe une place de choix parmi les activités économiques du Maroc, mais son développement se heurte à une série d'obstacles que le Royaume œuvre à surmonter, a indiqué la délégation marocaine. 
Ces difficultés se rapportent notamment aux règlements techniques trop stricts, aux exigences liées à la mise en conformité, aux règles d'origine ainsi qu'aux normes privées de sécurité sanitaire des aliments, en plus des droits de douane. 
Les mesures non-tarifaires représentent l'un des grands défis pour les exportateurs des produits de la mer, y compris ceux marocains, a-t-elle ajouté, mettant en garde contre les effets négatifs de telles restrictions sur la performance de l'activité exportatrice. Ces mesures sont en fait des entraves non-nécessaires qu'il conviendrait d'éliminer afin de promouvoir le commerce mondial. 
La délégation, composée de représentants de l'Association marocaine des exportateurs (ASMEX), la Fédération nationale des industries de la pêche (FENIP) et la Mission permanente du Maroc à Genève, a plaidé pour l'établissement et le respect des règles de subvention aux pêcheries. 
Le Maroc, a-t-elle indiqué, ambitionne d'obtenir des résultats concrets en la matière aussi bien dans le cadre du programme de travail post-Bali de l'OMC que lors de la prochaine conférence ministérielle de l'organisation prévue en décembre à Nairobi. 
Les recommandations de la délégation marocaine ont été favorablement accueillies par les experts prenant part à cette séance de travail axée sur "Les difficultés liées au commerce des produits de la mer". Il s'agit notamment d'experts de l'Organisation de l'ONU pour l'alimentation et l'agriculture (FAO) et l'Organisation de coopération et de développement économiques (OCDE). 
Le Forum public est la principale activité de communication annuelle de l'OMC qui offre une plate-forme pour débattre des développements du commerce mondial et proposer des mesures pour renforcer le système commercial multilatéral. 
Il attire plus de 1.500 représentants issus de la société civile, des milieux universitaires, du monde des affaires, des médias, des gouvernements, des Parlements et des organisations intergouvernementales.

 

 

 

The SDGs are useless without economic growth 

Mon, Oct 5th, 2015

Business Day

Lagos, Nigeria

The United Nations was founded on the noble ideas of promoting world peace and common humanity. For decades, these ideas have made the UN, established in 1945, a melting pot of “good intentions” and actions on how to make the world a better place. However, the UN’s broad remit and inclusivity have also led to its tendency to create omnibus global agendas, which, in order to accommodate different interests, are often unwieldy, ambitious and even utopian. These words, I would argue, describe the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), which were adopted by world leaders at the UN on September 26. The SDGs are loaded with good intentions, from ending poverty to saving life below water!

The SDGs replace the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), which came into existence in 2000 and lasted until September this year. But the MDGs had a modest ambition, captured in just eight goals and 21 targets. The SDGs, on the other hand, are far more ambitious, with 17 goals and 169 targets! Think of any social, economic or environmental issue, it is covered in the SDGs: poverty, inequalities, water and sanitation, energy, urbanisation, infrastructure, climate change, peace, and many more!

Although not all the goals were achieved, the MDGs had a decent record, particularly with respect to the central goal of halving extreme poverty by 2015. So, why do we need another set of goals? Well, the answer, according to supporters of the SDGs, is that the MDGs were too narrow. They argued, for instance, that while the central goal of the MDGs was to reduce poverty, its root causes were not addressed. As Amar Bhattacharya, Senior Fellow at the Global Economy and Development Programme at Brookings Institute, put it, “It is inconceivable to think today about ending poverty without simultaneously achieving peace, dealing with natural disasters, connecting people to a market economy via better access to infrastructure or reducing the impact of climate change”. So, the new agenda represents a more broad-based and integrated approach to ending poverty, which is the overarching goal of the SDGs.

However, for critics of the bloated SDG framework, while poverty and its causes should be tackled holistically, you do not need 19 development goals and 169 related targets to do that. One of the strongest critics of the SDGs was The Economist magazine, which, in one article, described the goals as “unsustainable”, and argued that they “would be worse than useless”. For The Economist, the SDGs “are a distraction” from the central goals of ending poverty and dealing with issues relating to education and health.

Both proponents and critics of a broad SDG agenda did their best during the drafting of the goals to influence the outcome. The Economist called for a reduction from 17 to 10 goals, “aimed squarely at” reducing poverty, boosting education and improving health. Some governments also favoured a smaller list of goals. For instance, British Prime Minister David Cameron said that he wanted “12 goals at the most, preferably 10”. But all attempts to cut down the list failed. Indeed, according to Nigeria’s Amina Muhammed, the UN secretary general’s special adviser on post-2015 development planning, it was a hard fight to get the number of goals to 17.

So, then, the world community and individual countries are stuck with the 17 MDGs and 169 targets. But how achievable are they? Well, what must be said unequivocally is that most of the SDGs cannot be achieved without public money. The Economist estimated, for instance, that meeting the goals would cost “$2 trillion-3 trillion a year of public and private money over 15 years”. Yet, despite the worldwide excitement about the adoption of the SDGs, there is little clarity on how the goals will be financed. What is obvious, however, is that there will be no huge development aid from Western countries to finance the goals. Many of these countries have not even fulfilled their promise, made several years ago, to provide 0.7 percent of their GDP in aid. But even if they all fulfil the promise, the estimated $135 billion in annual overseas aid is a drop in the ocean compared to the trillions of dollar required to fund the SDGs.

At the UN International Conference on Finance for Development held in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia in July, the participants stressed the fundamental importance of “domestic resource mobilisation” as the main means of financing the SDGs. In other words, it would largely fall to each country to meet the SDGs from its own resources. Of course, this would pose severe challenges for most developing countries. For instance, at a time that Nigeria is facing a serious economic crisis, with dwindling oil revenues, there must be serious questions about whether it can afford the costs of funding most of the SDGs. The Commonwealth Deputy Secretary-General for Economic and Social Development, Deodat Maharaj, made the same point recently in respect of most Commonwealth countries.

Yet the heart of the problem is economic growth. As most experts now accept, the success of the SDGs depends crucially on sustained economic growth. In November last year, 18 leading economists from Harvard, Oxford, Princeton and the London School of Economics wrote to the UN to make precisely this point. The economists, including Paul Collier, Tim Besley, Larry Summers and Dani Rodrik, argued that “Without sustained economic growth, the resources required for effective public action to meet the SDGs will be limited”.

It is, of course, an economic truism that tackling poverty and inequalities requires strong and sustainable growth. Indeed, the modest success of the MDGs in halving the number of people globally in extreme poverty (i.e., living on under $1.25 a day), which was 36 percent in 1990, was largely attributed to China’s economic growth. For instance, China reduced the proportion of its people living in extreme poverty from 60 percent in 1990 to 12 percent in 2010. Sub-Saharan Africa managed to bring its own down from 56 percent to 48 percent.

So, the inescapable truth is that there must be strong and continued economic growth in order to generate the prosperity needed to tackle poverty and inequality and meet all the other SDGs, such as securing food, heath, education and energy. Even in terms of Western aid, leaving aside the question of the willingness of some Western countries to give aid, their ability to do so in respect of the SDGs would depend on their economies continuing to grow. That is why it is important to look beyond the euphoria around the SDGs and think more seriously about how to increase economic growth. And, for me, trade has a critical role to play in this.

Earlier this year, the World Bank and the World Trade Organisation (WTO) produced a joint publication titled “The Role of Trade in Ending Poverty”. Poverty reduction is, of course, the World Bank’s raison d’etre. Indeed, in 2013, the World Bank adopted two overarching goals to guide its work. The first is ending extreme poverty by 2030; the second is boosting shared prosperity by increasing the average incomes of the bottom 40 percent of the population in each country. These two goals are, of course, central to the SDGs. But in that publication, both the World Bank and the WTO argued that it would be near impossible to achieve the goals of tackling poverty and inequality and, indeed, the wider SDGs without continued economic growth, and they highlighted the critical role of trade in achieving the goals. They are right!

To be sure, the expansion of international trade has been essential to development and poverty reduction. Africa clearly needs to trade more with the rest of the world to generate growth and reduce poverty. For instance, an estimated 75 percent of the extreme poor in Africa live in rural areas. Clearly, agricultural development is critical to reducing rural poverty. Yet, agriculture in Africa suffers from three problems: low productivity, low value-addition and poor access to world markets.

Each of these problems is largely linked to trade. For instance, trade openness is needed to increase agricultural productivity by allowing farmers to gain better access to new technologies as well as to reduced price and greater variety of inputs. This is really important because, as the World Bank has estimated, just 1 percent rise in agricultural GDP would result in a 6 percent increase in income growth for the poorest 10 percent of the population. So, trade opportunities must be exploited to improve the productivity and sustainability of the agricultural sector. Increased productivity and innovation are also necessary to achieve higher value-addition. At the moment, little value is added to agricultural produce and, indeed, natural resources, in Africa, which is limiting the continent’s ability to diversify its export base.

Of course, as I wrote recently, one the main challenges facing the food and agro-based sector in Africa, particularly Nigeria, is the poor access to markets and the costs of compliance with standards set by large export markets, such as the US and the EU, which make it difficult for agricultural producers to reach such markets. There are also distortions to international agricultural trade, including product-related subsidies in the developed countries, which contribute to poverty in developing countries. For instance, a recent study indicates that the removal of agricultural distortions could reduce the number of extreme poor by 2.7 percent.

Surely, if ending extreme poverty is the overarching goal of the SDGs and market access barriers and other distortions to international agricultural trade are a major cause of poverty in Africa, then it follows that this problem must be tackled in order to increase the chance of success in achieving the SDG central goal of ending extreme poverty. For Africa, this means making a strong case for the liberalisation of the international agricultural trade, which must be linked to the attainment of the SDGs. They should argue that, in addition to whatever aid the West may wish to give, Africa needs to trade and export more in order to generate the economic growth necessary to meet the SDGs. Of course, trade expansion must be complemented by other domestic measures to ensure the benefits of economic growth reach the poor. But it is certainly the case that Africa needs to achieve the level of growth that would generate the needed resources to meet the SDGs. And trade can play a significant role in fostering such growth, for instance, because it can drive economic and export diversification.

But in addition to economic growth, African countries also need to invest in social capital in order to achieve the SDGs. The key elements of social capital, according to the 2015 World Happiness Report, are good governance, absence of corruption and generosity. Some of the SDGs, such as gender equality, promotion of wellbeing as well as peace and justice, require behavioural change more than public money. As Jeffrey Sachs argued in the World Happiness Report, societies with high social capital, such as good governance and low level of corruption, tend to outperform those with low social capital in terms of subjective well-being and economic development, which are included in the SDGs.

Then, take generosity. The contributions of Bill Gates and his wife, Melinda, to the attainment of the MDGs, through their foundation, were very significant in terms of reducing diseases, such as malaria and polio, and even tackling poverty. The Gates are the world’s richest couple, but they are also the world’s biggest philanthropists, having given away more than $30.7 billion. Clearly, the SDGs are also more likely to succeed if rich people in Africa can be great philanthropists and social entrepreneurs. Of course, in this regard, Nigeria’s own Tony Elumelu deserves commendation for his contribution to the MDGs through the activities of his foundation. But African billionaires and even millionaires should do more to support social progress. They should be good capitalists and adopt John Wesley’s famous maxim: “earn as much as you can, save as much as you can, give away as much as you can”!

To be clear, the SDGs are noble and full of good intentions. But good intentions are not enough. Primarily, there must be strong and sustained economic growth to ensure the success of the goals. This should be complemented by greater investment in social capital. The truth is that unless the SDGs are underpinned by strong economic growth and high social capital, they could, as The Economist said, be “worse than useless”. The hard task facing supporters of the SDGs is to ensure that this sad fate doesn’t befall the global goals!

Olu Fasan

 

 

Modi's power drive 


ByGautam Adhikari

The Times of India & The Economic Times Blogs

5 October 2015 

Copyright © 2015. Bennett, Coleman & Co., Ltd. 

To play in the premier league, India must focus on economic growth WASHINGTON: For any nation that has major power ambitions in today's highly complex world, its foreign policy must, to start with, be structured on a dynamic worldview resting on a realistic appreciation of evolving relations among global powers; and, second, be steered by political, not bureaucratic, hands. Do India's global strategy and policy direction meet the two criteria? If we look at India's dealings in its regional backyard, as well as in nurturing relations bilaterally with certain global powers, the answer would be a cautious yes.

When it comes to stances and pronouncements in the global arena, however, India seems to be nurturing a hangover from Cold War era indulgences of the 20th century when India's approach to the world was based on the wisdom of bygone times. Regionally, Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Narendra Modi has given political leadership in improving relations with all South Asian nations with the exception of Pakistan. He seems to have a view of regional relations that may partially be to keep Pakistan sulking in a corner while India's ties with other countries in South Asia become firmer. Critics of this approach to Islamabad say New Delhi should extend a hand of friendship and build close economic ties to thus bolster the efforts of the democratically elected government of Nawaz Sharif. But it's easier said than done. Frankly, Nawaz Sharif has limited capacity to deliver on either friendship or economic ties. It's Raheel Sharif, the army chief, who has the final say on foreign relations, including trade ties with India. He and his cohort have a view of Indo-Pak relations that doesn't yet rest on bonhomie. Bilaterally, India under Modi has done well to intensify the already growing close ties with the United States and in the Asian sphere with Japan and Australia. His frequent flyer miles can yield better bilateral ties with several major players, including some European powers. It is on the global stage, in HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO or climate talks or the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"UN, that the problem manifests itself. To see the contrast between an India, the regional power that wants bilateral understandings with world powers, and an India that aspires to be a player in the premier league of international relations, look at Modi's recent visit to the US. On the one hand, he pitched India to Silicon Valley leaders as a terrific digital destination and then in New York squeezed in an hour-long discussion with President Barack Obama and his team on the sidelines of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"UN General Assembly. On the other, he initiated a meeting of the so-called G-4, or Germany, Japan, Brazil and India, a bunch of me-too nations craving for membership of an exclusionary world club that is unlikely to accept them. Three questions: One, what are the realistic prospects of the five permanent members agreeing to make any of those G-4 nations a full member of the Security Council? As the G-4's own statement acknowledged, "No substantial progress had been made since the 2005 World Summit when all the heads of state and government had supported the 'early reform' of the Security Council." At best, the P-5 might agree to any one or two of the G-4 aspirants to be associate permanent members with no veto power. Which raises question two: Why would India want to become a secondary member, with no serious voting right, of a club dominated by a group of powers who are not willing either to share their authority or to take in a member who may side with one side or the other of the US-Europe-China-Russia divisions within the council? And three: Is India truly ready to take on the role of a world power that will perforce have to take clear stands on global issues and thus move from its age-old let's-not-take-sides approach? It might be worth asking such questions instead of blindly following the old bureaucratic track of taking high-sounding positions on the global stage. Germany and Japan have managed to play in the premier league so far without Security Council membership. Why not study how they developed the chutzpah for that to happen? Might it be that they seriously concentrated on economic growth to achieve stunning success before they were called to play? 

 

 

 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.
