BD seeks generous offers from WTO members under LDC Services Waiver
Tofail meets WTO DG, Unctad chief; discusses trade issues
India promises preferential market access to services suppliers from LDCs
India offers to waive off visa fees to LDCs at WTO meet
EU tightens seal ban rules
Pakistan, India moving towards trade liberalisation
EU trade deal boosts Pakistan exports by $1bn: minister Masroor GILANI
INTERVIEW-Mexico sees Pacific trade pact in first half of 2015
British tastebuds caught in crossfire of chocolate war










BD seeks generous offers from WTO members under LDC Services Waiver
7 February 2015
The New Nation (Bangladesh)
Dhaka , Feb.7 -- Commerce Minister Tofail Ahmed has urged all the World Trade Organisation member countries to come out with generous offers and notify the preferential market access under the Least Developed Countries (LDCs) Services Waiver.
He made the call during the opening session of a two-day high level meeting on the operaltionalisation of the services waiver for the LDCs in Geneva on Thursday.
The main purpose of the meeting is to provide the opportunities to the WTO members to indicate their offer for granting preference to LDCs to operationalise the LDC Services Waiver in response to the 'Collective Request', which prioritised the core demand that the LDCs get commercially meaningful preferential market access of their services and services suppliers in the world market.
In his speech, Tofail Ahmed highlighted the importance of the service sectors for Bangladesh to fulfill its goal to become a middle income country by 2021.In an open discussion, most of the delegates recognised the contribution and active engagement of Bangladesh Commerce Minister as a leader of LDCs in the previous WTO Ministerial Conferences and WTO process and appreciated his presence in the meeting, according to a message received here on Friday.
The meeting decided that preference giving countries will endeavour to submit the notification of their preferential schemes for LDCs by July 2015.

Tofail meets WTO DG, Unctad chief; discusses trade issues
8 February 2015
The Financial Express (Bangladesh)
Bangladesh, Feb. 8 -- Commerce Minister Tofail Ahmed has met Director General of World Trade Organisation (WTO) Roberto Azevedo and discussed the outcome of a high-level meeting on service and progress in developing work programme for Doha Development Agenda.
The commerce minister thanked the DG for taking the initiative to convene high-profile meeting of the council for trade in services to enable the WTO members to indicate the sectors and modes of services where they intend to provide preferential treatment to LDCs, according to a message received in the capital on Saturday, reports UNB.
He expressed his satisfaction over the positive response to a number of WTO members to the LDCs' collective request.
Mr Tofail requested DG to monitor the notification process so that the LDC service waiver is operationalised as outlined in the Bali Ministerial Decision.
He also mentioned that the meeting has raised the confidence among the LDCs about the possible operationalisation of the waiver decision.
The commerce minister assured the DG that Bangladesh will remain engaged with WTO membership to finalise the work programme by July 2015 and emphasised that Bali package on LDC, including a timeline for the implementation of the Duty Free Quota Free market access decision should get proper reflection in the work programme.
He hoped that the WTO membership will overcome the current stalemate in the negotiations and conclude the Doha round.
The WTO director general assured that he will pay maximum attention towards implementation of the decision on LDC issues adopted in the Bali Ministerial.
The commerce minister also had a meeting with Secretary General of Unctad Dr Mukhisa Kituyi.
Welcoming the minister, the Unctad secretary general highlighted some of their activities taken place in Bangladesh. He mentioned that Unctad will also provide technical support for the development of pharmaceutical industry.
Mr Tofail also met Trade, Industry and Cooperatives Minister of Uganda Amelia Anne Kyambadde.
During the meeting, the ministers shared their views about the outcome of high-level meeting on service and expressed their satisfaction for the positive outcome of the meeting.
The commerce minister emphasised that LDCs should work together to get benefit from the member countries.
The ministers also agreed to work collectively for the extension of TRIPS Waiver in Pharmaceutical, which will expire on December, 31, 2015.
Minister of Uganda informed that LDCs will work together for the extension of TRIPS waiver for the Pharmaceutical products. During the meeting, the Ugandan minister also acknowledged the progress made by Bangladesh in all areas under the dynamic leadership of the Bangladesh Prime Minister.

India promises preferential market access to services suppliers from LDCs
 D. Ravi Kanth
7 February 2015
Mint
Geneva, Feb. 7 -- India has promised preferential market access for services suppliers from the poorest countries at the World Trade Organization (WTO)-an offer that has enhanced New Delhi's image as a generous partner of the least developed countries (LDCs) in global trade.
The Indian offer includes market access for short-term contractual services suppliers and independent professions (what is called Mode 4 supply of services in trade jargon) in sectors such as engineering services, integrated engineering services, computer and related services and management consulting services.
The offer also includes access to project management services other than for construction, hotel and other lodging services, travel agency and tour operator services and a quota of 250 tourist guides in non-English foreign languages.
New Delhi has announced that it will waive the visa fee for applicants from these countries applying for Indian business or employment visas. High visa fee in industrialized countries is one of the biggest barriers for services suppliers from the poorest nations.
At a high-level meeting convened by WTO on Thursday for implementing what is called the waiver for preferential treatment to services providers from these nations, India's generous and substantive offer seemed several notches ahead of what industrialized countries announced to assist the poorest countries, several trade envoys said.
As part of the Bali ministerial declaration, trade ministers had directed industrialized countries and developing countries to indicate what they are willing to offer to LDCs at a high-level meeting.
"India made an excellent offer to provide substantial market access and also technical assistance to train our services suppliers in different sectors," said the LDC coordinator, ambassador Christopher Onyanga Aparr of Uganda.
Aparr said he was disappointed with offers from some industrialized countries, describing them as empty promises.
"India made most creative statement to operationalize the LDC waiver by offering access in a range of sectors coupled with the promise to build the supply-side capacity-building," an industrialized country official said on condition of anonymity.
As part of technical assistance and capacity building to enable LDCs to supply quality services, India will train financial candidates from LDCs at the Reserve Bank of India and also "conduct specially designed course for around 1,000 LDC professional each year in areas such as Management Consulting, Technical Consulting, and Project Management".
New Delhi will also accord priority to training LDC professionals and consultants in areas such as insurance services, promotion of micro, small and medium enterprises, agriculture and rural development sectors, and railway infrastructure services. India will assist LDCs to promote their trade and tourism exports along with creative industry services such as audio-visual co-production agreements.
Besides India, China, Mexico, the European Union (EU), Canada, Australia, Norway, Japan and Switzerland, among others, made several offers in different sectors, particularly areas concerning short-term services providers, and technical assistance and capacity-building.
The US, however, took a back seat by saying it would need time to learn from the high-level meeting before making any concrete offers, said participants at the meeting.
"I'm encouraged by the overall positive response from the developed and developing countries to address the two issues-market access and capacity-building and technical assistance-for services providers in the least developed countries," the chair for the council for trade in services, ambassador Choi Seokyoung, said.
Ugandan trade minister Amelia Kyambadde said there are a "lot positive elements in the offers made by members and we need time to digest them". She said the next step is how soon the best offers made by members will be operationalized.
A tentative deadline of end-July has been agreed for enabling members to make notifications of the proposals they suggested at the meeting.
Among the industrialized countries, the EU said it would offer enhanced access to contractual services suppliers for providing independent services and graduate trainees. Brussels also promised that it would extend preferential access for services in the Economic Partnership Agreements to LDC countries.
Canada said it would provide full market access in three-quarters of all services sectors to LDCs while Australia came up with specific proposals concerning short-term services providers, and capacity-building and technical assistance to train LDC services providers in computer and business services at Adelaide university.

India offers to waive off visa fees to LDCs at WTO meet

From Shreerupa Mitra Jha Geneva, Feb 8 (PTI) India has made substantial offers like waiving off visa fees, granting market access and technical assistance to service providers from poor nations, showing its resolve to support the Least Developing Countries.
The offers were made at a high-level WTO meeting here convened to indicate proposals from developed and developing countries for preferential treatment to service providers from the Least Developing Countries (LDCs).
Among major concessions and offers, India proposed to waive off visa fees for applicants applying for Indian business or employment from LDCs.
High visa fees is one of the biggest impediments for service providers from the poorer nations.
"Onerous application fees for visas, licenses and residence and work permits for many LDCs are tantamount to one month’s salary for the families. Also, a severe loss if the visa is not granted and the fees are not returned," said Uganda's Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives Amelia Anne Kyambadde.
"Visa waiver is a really good thing if India does it in practice," said LDC coordinator and Ugandan Ambassador Christopher Onyanga Aparr.
Also, the Indian offers made in Thursday meeting includes market access, capacity building and technical assistance to service providers from poor nations. The offer is specific to the requests made by LDCs in July 2014.
The sectors for preferential treatment in market access, under General Agreement and Trade in Services plus new mode 4 commitments - contractual service suppliers and independent professionals - are engineering services and management consulting services (excluding services in legal consultancy).
In addition, computer and related services, integrated engineering services, hotel and lodging services, travel agency and tour operator services and project management services other than construction are part of GATS.
An exclusive quota of 250 is for tourist guides from the LDCs. Some of the 15 sub-sectors with which India will engage with LDCs were not included in earlier GATS commitments.
Under the technical assistance support, India will earmark at least 25 per cent of all technical assistance offered by Ministry of External Affairs exclusively for LDC members, among other proposals.
India will also design courses for about 1,000 LDC professionals every year, which will be conducted in India or any LDC country, in areas such as management consulting, technical consulting, project management etc.

EU tightens seal ban rules
QMI AGENCY
7 February 2015
The Toronto Sun
The European Union announced Friday plans to toughen its 2009 ban of commercial seal hunt products.
Last May, Canada lost its challenge of a World Trade Organization ruling that upheld the EU ban on the trade of seal skins, furs and other products.
The EU banned those products because of animal welfare concerns.
But the WTO Appellate Body concluded exceptions for Inuit and other indigenous hunts, as well as for maritime resource management, had some discriminatory effects.

The new proposals try to remedy that by removing the exception for skins, furs and products that result from marine resource management -- while still recognizing the importance of seal population management hunts -- and increasing oversight of products brought in under the traditional Inuit hunt exceptions.
Canada and Norway have repeatedly challenged the EU ban, arguing the hunt is humane.
Humane Society International applauded the proposals as a victory for animal welfare.
The EU has to officially adopt the proposals by October to comply with WTO rules.

Pakistan, India moving towards trade liberalisation
8 February 2015
The New Nation (Bangladesh)
Islamabad , Feb. 8 -- Pakistan may grant non-discriminatory market access status to India and the two countries are moving towards sealing a deal to liberalise trade, Commerce Minister Khurram Dastgir Khan has said.Khan told the Senate Friday that Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif had personally identified liberalised trade with India as a policy priority."Pakistan may grant 'non-discriminatory market access' (NDMA) status to India. The new deal will protect our business interests," he said in response to a question."There is an incorrect perception (among many) that Most Favoured Nation means giving India extraordinary market access, which is actually not correct.
That is why we decided to replace this term with NDMA," he said.Pakistan and India are getting closer to sealing a deal to liberalise trade between them, the minister was quoted as saying by Express News.The minister said Pakistan was working to protect its agriculture business while giving concessions to its mighty neighbour.NDMA status is essentially the same as granting Most Favoured Nation (MFN) status, which Pakistan is obliged to grant India under Islamabad's treaty obligations to the World Trade Organisation (WTO), the daily said.The two countries became founding members of the WTO in 1995 and as part of the agreement were required to grant each other MFN status. India did so in early 1996, but Pakistan is yet to reciprocate the move.

EU trade deal boosts Pakistan exports by $1bn: minister Masroor GILANI
8 February 2015
Agence France Presse
Pakistani exports to the European Union increased by more than a billion dollars after a landmark trade deal last year which made its products more competitive, the commerce minister told AFP.
The EU signed a law in late 2013 granting Pakistan so-called "GSP-plus" status, which means firms pay no tax on certain categories of goods exported to the 27-nation bloc for 10 years.
The EU makes GSP-plus conditional on implementing international conventions on human and labour rights, and there have been fears Pakistan's decision to end a moratorium on executions could affect the deal.
Pakistan's key textile industry in particular welcomed the agreement, which came into force in January 2014, and in an interview with AFP commerce minister Khurram Dastgir Khan hailed its impact.
"As a result of GSP-plus, Pakistan's exports to the EU have increased by $1.08 billion during the period January to October 2014 as compared to the same period in 2013," Khan said.
Exports to the EU in January-October 2014 totalled $6.38 billion, up by just over 20 percent from the $5.3 billion recorded in the corresponding period in 2013, he said.
Before GSP-plus, textile exports faced customs tariffs of between 6.4 and 12 percent and leather goods and footwear up to six percent, he said.
The textile industry is the backbone of Pakistan's exports, making up more than 50 percent of the country's total overseas shipments.
"Now these exports have duty-free access in EU and it has helped Pakistani products to become more competitive vis-a-vis its competitors, including Bangladesh, India and Vietnam," he said.
Khan played down the possibility that resuming executions could threaten GSP-plus status.
"There is no legal obligation to EU regarding death penalty, though they have expressed concern over it," Khan said.
"They understand our situation that GSP-plus would help us create jobs and when we create jobs, it keeps young men and women away from terrorism."
Pakistan has executed 22 convicts since Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif lifted a six-year death penalty moratorium in the wake of a Taliban massacre at a school.
Heavily-armed gunmen murdered 153 people, including 134 children, at the school in the northwestern city of Peshawar in Pakistan's deadliest ever terror attack.
Opposition to the death penalty is a key EU policy and the bloc's mission in Islamabad condemned the resumption of executions in December.
But EU diplomats in Islamabad have said that while they are concerned about the return to hangings, the development was unlikely to affect the GSP-plus arrangement immediately.
Improving the economy after years of drift and sluggish growth under the last Pakistan People's Party government was a key pledge in Sharif's election campaign in 2013, when he was swept to power for a third term.
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) said this week the government's reform programme -- tied to a $6.6 billion loan from the Washington-based lender -- was on track.
"Economic activity and the external position continue to improve, driven by prudent monetary and fiscal policies and helped by lower oil prices and robust remittances," IMF mission chief Jeffrey Franks said.
Growth for 2014-15 is expected to hit 4.3 percent and the budget deficit for end-December was below the target, the IMF said.
But the government has so far struggled to improve a long-running energy crisis, with hours-long electricity blackouts still a near-daily reality.
Power and gas shortages have hampered industry and held back GDP growth, which experts say needs to hit seven percent in order to provide enough jobs for new entrants to the workforce.
Projects to boost electricity production are in the pipeline, including a 6,600-megawatt coal-fired energy park along the Arabian Sea coast west of Karachi, but these have yet to yield results.

INTERVIEW-Mexico sees Pacific trade pact in first half of 2015

By Ana Isabel Martinez and Simon Gardner MEXICO CITY, Feb 6 (Reuters) - Mexico expects negotiations toward a 12-nation Asia-Pacific trade pact to be finalized during the first half of this year, Foreign Minister Jose Antonio Meade said on Friday.
Mexico had previously said a deal on the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) could be concluded in mid-March, though negotiators are still going over several issues including wrangling between the United States and Japan over agriculture.
A deal would still need to be approved by the U.S. Senate, where President Barack Obama is likely to face resistance from some of his fellow Democrats.
"We feel there are windows of opportunity for the treaty to reach its final stage during the first half of the year," Meade said in an interview before a visit to London ahead of state visit by President Enrique Pena Nieto next month.
"Mexico is ... ready and willing for an early conclusion, but is not in a position to determine the timeline," he added.
Late last month, U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman told lawmakers the pact could be wrapped up within months.
Froman said sticking points included a lack of consensus on how long to protect the exclusivity of biologic drugs and gaps on other intellectual property protections, environmental protection rules, investment and state-owned enterprises.
The TPP would link up a dozen Asia-Pacific economies by eliminating trade barriers and harmonizing regulations in a pact covering two-fifths of the world economy and a third of all global trade.
During the state visit to the United Kingdom, Meade said the Mexican delegation expected to hold talks with a host of companies, including oil majors as Mexico prepares to open up its oil fields to private and foreign investment.
UK-based oil companies BP and BG Group have both expressed interest in Mexico's first-ever exploration and production bid round set for later this year.
However, Meade added that Mexico has no plans to make concessions to lure big oil because of a sharp drop in crude prices.
"We don't feel that the appetite or interest (to invest in Mexican energy) is a function of short-term issues," Meade said. (Reporting by Ana Isabel Martinez and Simon Gardner; Editing by Richard Chang)

British tastebuds caught in crossfire of chocolate war

Kadhim Shubber Financial Times February 6, 2015 5:55 pm Chocolate from the UK has long been a source of comfort for homesick British expatriates in America.
But now Brits living in the US will have to settle for — what some regard as inferior — American versions of chocolate after the confectionery giant Hershey forced two companies to stop importing UK-made versions.
The spat is part of a war of trademark claims that involves products by Cadbury and Nestlé, the world’s biggest chocolate makers — with British tastebuds caught in the crossfire.
Nicola Edwards runs The Queen’s Grocer, a store in Odenton, Maryland, that sells tea, biscuits and Doctor Who memorabilia to the local British population. The expat from Leicester kept her taste for British confectionery when she moved to the US 15 years ago, and says Hershey’s Cadbury is barely worth calling “chocolate”.
“It’s brown, and that’s about it,” she said. Her petition protesting against Hershey’s actions has attracted more than 30,000 signatures online.
Her store’s supply of British-made Cadbury, which is owned by Mondelez, formerly called Kraft, and Toffee Crisp, Rolo, Yorkie and Kit Kat — brands owned by Nestlé — is fast running out after Hershey blocked two US companies from importing them, claiming that the products infringed its trademarks.
Although she does not purchase directly from Posh Nosh Imports and LBB Imports, the companies Hershey took to court last year, she says her suppliers do not want to face similar legal action by a “billion-dollar company”.
Hershey’s claim stemmed from exclusive licensing deals it agreed with Cadbury and Rowntree, which was later purchased by Nestlé, in the 1970s and 1980s. Hershey makes Cadbury’s chocolate and Nestle’s Kit Kat and Rolo in the US, albeit with a slightly different recipe to cater to American tastes.
“We undeniably own those trademark rights,” it said. Although British-made Cadbury products have been imported to the US for years, Hershey took action in 2014 because they were appearing in mainstream retailers, which Hershey declined to name.
The company, which won an injunction last year against Steve Hershey, the US senator, for allegedly imitating its branding on his campaign posters, also argued that Nestlé’s Toffee Crisp packaging too closely re­sembled its Reese’s Peanut Butter Cups, and that the name Yorkie was too similar to its peppermint patty brand York.
LBB settled out of court and agreed to stop importing the products, while Posh Nosh lost its case in November. John Baumgartner, an analyst at Wells Fargo Securities, said the dispute was an open-and-shut case. “Hershey has the rights to sell Cadbury’s chocolate in the US. There’s not much leeway on that,” he said. Posh Nosh declined to comment and an LBB spokesman was unavailable for comment.
Both Nestlé and Mondelez distanced themselves from the spats, describing them as legal disputes between third parties. However, Nestlé said it did sell directly to Posh Nosh Imports, albeit in “insignificant” amounts when compared with its £400m of annual exports.
Mondelez said ingredients for Hershey’s Cadbury chocolate were supplied from its Irish chocolate factory, “to maintain the same taste”. Nestlé said that its products were “completely different” in different markets to reflect local tastes and regulations.
Nestlé said on Thursday that it was investing £5.25m at its Halifax factory to manufacture more than 5,000 tonnes of Butterfinger Peanut Butter Cups. The product is for export to the US to compete with Hershey on its home turf.
Brad Armitage, who runs American Fizz, a candy shop in Bournemouth that caters to American expats, criticised Hershey’s actions. He said both Reese’s Peanut Butter Cups and Toffee Crisp sat side-by-side on shelves in the UK.
“We’re able to decipher which is which. Are they saying American people can’t tell?” he said. It was still possible to buy British-made chocolates for delivery in the US on Amazon, he pointed out.
Despite stocking more than 3,000 types of confectionery from the US, Mr Armitage, who is from the UK, admitted that he was not a devoted fan of American candy, particularly Hershey’s chocolate.
“It’s an acquired taste,” he said.
While Hershey has been on the offensive against British-made chocolate, it has been forced to defend its “Malteser” brand, which effectively acts as a block on the sale of Mars’s “Maltesers” product in the US. Mars took Hershey to court last April in a case, still running, over Hershey’s “Malteser” confectionery, which consists of crunchy chocolate-covered balls in red packaging. Mars declined to comment.
Nathan Dulley, president of LLB, said his company would survive the loss of income from the block on imports. “It is really the small businesses across the country that rely on these products for their livelihoods that are going to be affected,” he said.
