China crop subsidies in crosshairs at WTO
Restore America's standing through trade
UK's Cameron to vent dismay over EU-U.S. trade deal delay at G7
(AE) EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: Key TTIP debate at plenary
Antidumping duty on steel imports from China, 2 other nations
(AE) TRADE: WTO/Doha - agriculture still a stumbling block
(AE) COMMERCE: OMC/Doha, l'agriculture demeure le poil àratter
Le G7 face àes crises multiples
 
China crop subsidies in crosshairs at WTO
By Victoria Guida and Bill Tomson
6/6/15 2:55 PM EDT
POLITICO
The World Trade Organization’s reputation as a negotiating body might depend on whether China will agree to cut the agricultural subsidies it’s allowed to provide. But, according to data compiled by a U.S. firm, Beijing isn’t complying with its current commitments. Not even close.
WTO ministers from developed countries gathered in Paris this week to take stock of efforts to chart a path forward on the troubled Doha Development Agenda while lower-level officials met in Geneva for a routine meeting on members’ agricultural policies. Industrialized nations are pushing for China to lower its level of allowed subsidies, but Beijing’s unwillingness to change its commitments has continued to emerge as one of the major sticking points in outlining what a final Doha package might look like.
“The U.S. has been saying, if you want us to do something on domestic support, India and China are going to have to do something on domestic support also,” a foreign Geneva-based official told POLITICO. “It’s been described as a gateway issue that we’re going to have to resolve.” The official also noted countries like Canada, New Zealand and Australia are pushing hard for China to lower its level of allowed subsidies.
Talks on the long-stalled Doha Round have been happening in a substantive way for the first time since 2008, although all sides remain far apart on the details. The discussion on agricultural subsidies has focused on the United States, European Union, Japan, China, India and Brazil.
Of these, only the United States wouldn’t be able to meet the commitments assigned to it under draft 2008 Doha texts. Under those proposed commitments, the U.S. would have exceeded its trade-distorting subsidy limits by $3.6 billion in 2012.
To help move the conversation in a different direction, the consulting firm DTB Associates drafted a report in November that showed economies like China, India and Brazil are violating their current commitments, meaning the U.S. isn’t the only culprit. For example, it found that China was subsidizing its corn production in marketing year 2013-2014 by anywhere from $20.6 billion to $54.4 billion. Its limit, which it agreed to upon entry into the WTO in 2001, is 8.5 percent of the total annual value of production of a crop, was roughly $6.7 billion for corn during that period.
China’s subsidy for wheat was anywhere from $15.4 billion to $18.4 billion, well above the $4.3 billion limit, the report said. For rice, the subsidy was between $12.4 billion and $37 billion, potentially several times the $8.2 billion limit.
Cotton was not addressed in the consulting firm’s study, but China’s policy of paying domestic farmers exorbitant prices to stockpile the commodity over the past four years is troubling to farmers here.
The effort hasn’t hurt U.S. producers yet, but it likely will in the near future, said Deepayan Debnath, an international market and policy analyst for the University of Missouri’s Food and Agriculture Policy Research Institute.
“Once they start releasing that stockpile [of cotton], that will reduce prices by increasing global supply on the world market,” he said.
Then-National Cotton Council Chairman Wally Darneille told administration officials in September that the prospect has U.S. cotton farmers and exporters frightened.
“China has no stated policy regarding the disposition of their reserves and the entire cotton market is subjected to a high level of risk and uncertainty,” Darneille said at a hearing of the interagency Trade Policy Staff Committee, which is chaired by the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative.
He presented data showing that China gave rice farmers support from 2011 through 2013 that equaled 19.4 percent of the commodity’s value, more than double the 8.5 percent ceiling.
U.S. representatives at the WTO meetings this week directly accused China of stockpiling cotton, saying the country has amassed 149 percent of what Chinese mills can process in a year, WTO officials said. Chinese officials did not acknowledge the build-up of cotton, but stressed that the country hasn’t been exporting and therefore could not be distorting international markets.
The Geneva-based foreign official said the U.S. push on the issue has brought most countries, including Brazil, which is also mentioned in the consulting firm’s report, in line with Washington’s thinking on China’s subsidies.
“It’s really changed the discussion,” said Jim Grueff, a former U.S. agricultural trade negotiator. “When I was a Doha round negotiator, [U.S. subsidization] was almost the total discussion. This has introduced a whole new dimension.”
He said Deputy USTR Michael Punke, who serves as U.S. ambassador to the WTO, has “taken this up with great enthusiasm.”
A USTR spokesman said China and India haven’t kept up to date with reporting on their significant increases in agricultural support, as the WTO requires, and the U.S. would like to see Beijing keep current and stay within its spending commitments. He noted that the DTB Associates’ findings were featured at a House Agriculture Committee hearing on foreign subsidies earlier this week.
“We have pressed China to fully engage in current efforts to recalibrate across all Doha issues, with particular emphasis on domestic support,” the spokesman said, noting that the consulting firm’s report suggests Beijing is now the largest provider of such support globally.
Grueff said it would make the most sense for the U.S. to continue to use the report as leverage to pressure China to help move the Doah talks forward.
“My sense would be that Punke and Froman would make an evaluation as to whether the Doha round negotiation is coming together and has a chance, and if they do they wouldn’t go to dispute settlement,” he said. “Right now, they can say, ‘Clearly, we have the ability to go to dispute settlement, why don’t we just conclude this agreement? … That would be their wish and the path they would like to follow.”
House Agriculture Committee Chairman Michael Conaway told POLITICO that his panel’s hearing meant to illustrate that major players in global agricultural trade, like China, are not living up to their trade commitments “and are, in fact, cheating and getting a free pass from those who are charged with enforcement.”
“My message to the WTO and to the U.S. government is simple,” the Texas Republican continued. “Ignoring this kind of cheating, or sweeping it under the rug, does not advance the cause of trade liberalization but instead seriously sets back the cause by eroding public confidence. If they really want to promote the cause of trade, then the U.S. government and the WTO need to examine the reports on foreign subsidies and tariffs that we discussed at our hearing and, at long last, do something about it. Perhaps then we can start having meaningful discussions about additional disciplines going forward.”
Subsidies can be one of the most trade distorting factors in international commerce, especially for agriculture, a USDA economist told POLITICO. When China bestows big subsidies on its farmers, it boosts production, and that can create less demand for imports or even allow the country to export at prices that U.S. producers can’t compete with.
“When you’re subsidized, you can bring in more marginalized lands and [the subsidies] support a higher cost of production,” said the economist, who also asked not to be named.
The foreign official said the report is helpful, although it’s difficult to tell exactly how much China is subsidizing its agricultural sector. Unlike India, which also got mention in the consulting firm’s study, Beijing does not make numbers like the total amount of production of a crop readily available, so the report relies heavily on U.S. government data.
“It’s been very difficult to ascertain the extent to which [China] might be within its current obligations because it’s behind on its domestic support notifications, which is ultimately the way we would check and prove they have a problem,” the official said.
China last month submitted a notification of its agricultural subsidies for 2009 and 2010, putting it still several years behind. U.S. experts dispute the methodology China uses in the notifications to show it is not breaching its allowed subsidy levels. At the WTO agricultural committee meeting Thursday, Chinese officials emphasized that Beijing was honoring all of its WTO commitments and noted that its support programs are important for its impoverished farmers, a WTO official said.
To view online:
HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/go/,DanaInfo=.awxyCttrp1rmz142Os54,SSL+?id=48382" https://www.politicopro.com/go/?id=48382
 
Editorial-Opinion
Restore America's standing through trade
Condoleezza Rice   
7 juin 2015
The Washington Post
 
Condoleezza Rice was U.S. secretary of state from 2005 to 2009.
 
At the end of World War II, with the world still reeling from the devastating conflict, the United States set out to build a new foundation for peace and prosperity. The three pillars of that strategy were American military strength, support for the aspirations of free peoples and a belief that free markets, bolstered by free trade, would increase prosperity for all.
 
That new international order was wildly successful in achieving its goals. After five decades of sustained U.S. commitment, the Cold War ended and the Soviet Union collapsed, swelling the ranks of free peoples and more open economies, lifting millions out of poverty and creating new allies in the defense of freedom.
 
Today, that order is under strain. From the expansion of the threat of Islamic extremism, to Russia's challenge to peace and stability in Europe, to Iran's destabilizing influence in the Middle East, the challenges are multiplying.
 
Then there is the impact of a rising China, creating risks of a different kind in the Asia-Pacific region and beyond. A growing Chinese economy built on openness and fairness would most assuredly strengthen the world economy and, by extension, the U.S. economy. That was the hope that animated the decision to admit China to the World Trade Organization in 2001, embedding it in the rule-based global economy and pushing it toward greater economic openness.
 
Yet, that hope is clouded today by China's assertiveness in Asia. Our allies, despite growing economic interdependence in the region, look nervously at the growth of Beijing's military power and activity. From Tokyo to Manila, our friends anxiously await signals that the United States intends to remain the dominant force in the Asia-Pacific.
 
Unfortunately, questions about America's commitment to sustaining the very global system we helped create are frequent and growing. The word "disengagement" is more often used today when discussing the United States' role in the world than at any time in recent memory. It is in that context that President Obama's request for trade- promotion authority and his desire to negotiate new agreements in Asia and Europe should be understood.
 
Trade-promotion authority is a critical tool in the conduct of U.S. diplomacy. It does not strip Congress of a role in negotiating trade agreements. It explicitly allows Congress to outline principles that must be heeded during negotiations and to exercise its constitutional duties by voting on negotiated agreements. Congress has used that authority to shape the direction of trade agreements over decades - and without it those agreements would not have been possible. Our negotiating partners will not sign trade agreements with the United States if those agreements will, after the fact, be subject to line-by-line amendment during ratification.
 
This is not a matter of trusting the inhabitant of the White House, whoever that may be. For 40 years, trade- promotion authority (also called fast-track authority) has effectively balanced the role of the executive and legislative branches. When it has lapsed (1995 to 2001 and 2007 to the present), the United States has had to sit on the sidelines. In those periods, more than 100 regional trade agreements were negotiated without us. We cannot afford to have that continue - especially now.
 
The post-WWII leaders who brilliantly designed an international order to support free markets understood that either we would write the rules of the game or someone else would. They were haunted by the protectionism of the 1930s that worsened the Great Depression and arguably contributed to World War II. They believed that free trade was an essential pillar of economic liberty, prosperity and peace.
 
They were right then, and the same is true today. The United States needs an active trade agenda to strengthen its own economy within the context of international economic growth.
 
That is an important outcome in its own right, given continuing concerns about the health of the U.S. economy. But the larger issue is what trade- promotion authority says about America's role in the world. Our allies will read a failure to renew this authority as further evidence that we have lost interest in sustaining the international order. They already worry that others, China in particular, stand ready to fill the vacuum.
 
Free trade is no substitute for military strength or for giving voice to those who still seek liberty. Trade-promotion authority and new trade agreements will not alone solve the global challenges that we face. Yet trade is an essential element of a strategy that long ago placed faith in the proposition that the future would belong to free peoples and free markets. That is why I urge Congress to renew trade-promotion authority. The United States cannot afford to be sidelined, ceding the ground to those who do not share our values and our interests. Future generations would pay dearly for that choice.
 
The writer was U.S. secretary of state from 2005 to 2009. 
 
UK's Cameron to vent dismay over EU-U.S. trade deal delay at G7
By Andrew Osborn   
7 juin 2015
Reuters News
 
GARMISCH-PARTENKIRCHEN, Germany (Reuters) - British Prime Minister David Cameron will use a meeting of the Group of Seven industrial nations to vent frustration at what he sees as poor progress toward a multibillion-dollar trade deal between the European Union and the United States.
 
Cameron, in bullish mood after winning re-election with a surprise majority last month, is expected to raise the issue in one-to-one talks with U.S. President Barack Obama on Sunday at the G7 and to join host Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, in pushing EU officials to speed negotiations.
 
His intervention would come after the EU's chief negotiator said in April that talks to clinch the so-called Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) would stretch into 2016.
 
"We launched this at a G8 that was ours in Lough Erne in 2013," one British official told reporters. "That was over 700 days ago, and the prime minister feels we should be making swifter progress."
 
Cameron wanted a political deal by the year-end, the official said, warning the global cost of not getting one was about 630 million pounds ($962.01 million) daily.
 
Proponents say such a settlement could add $100 billion in annual economic output on both sides of the Atlantic.
 
The TTIP has faced opposition from protesters in Germany, however, and has also stumbled on U.S. demands for an investor protection clause.
 
Cameron, who has said he wants the G7 to use the scandal engulfing FIFA to focus on cracking down on corruption, will also warn the world must be much better prepared for a disease epidemic.
 
"The reality is that we will face an outbreak like Ebola again and that virus could be more aggressive and more difficult to contain," Cameron said on the eve of the summit. "It is time to wake-up to that threat."
 
He is expected to say Britain is ready to "lead the way" and work with the World Health Organization to try to harness better global research, more drug development, and a faster and more comprehensive approach to fighting disease outbreaks.
 
He will announce a British program to focus on the most threatening diseases, a requirement for UK-funded vaccine research to be shared globally, and the creation of a rapid reaction unit of specialists backed by a reserve force of doctors who can be dispatched to global disease hot spots.
 
($1 = 0.6549 pounds)
 
(Additional Reporting by Kylie MacLellan; Editing by Lisa Von Ahn) 
 
(AE) EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: Key TTIP debate at plenary
6 juin 2015
Bulletin Quotidien Europe
 
Brussels, 05/06/2015 (Agence Europe) - The European Parliament's plenary sitting in Strasbourg on 8 to 11 June will debate and vote on the transatlantic treaty currently being negotiated. The MEPs will debate and vote on Wednesday 10 June on their recommendations for the transatlantic treaty between the EU and the United States (TTIP).
 
On Friday 5 June, the political parliaments were still attacking each other in an attempt to define a common negotiating position for the draft EP recommendations on the free trade talks (TTIP), a position drafted by Bernd Lange (S&D, Germany), particularly on the highly controversial question of the protection of investment and the inclusion in the TTIP of a dispute settlement mechanisms for disputes between investors and countries (ISDS).
 
The MEPs will hold a debate in the afternoon of Wednesday 10 June on a report by Gabrielius Landsbergis on relations between the EU and Russia. The relationship was already complicated but became even more complex following publication of a list of European politicians not allowed into Russia, including many MEPs, and measures taken by the president of the European Parliament against the Russian authorities. The idea behind the resolution is to lay down red lines without breaking off contact with Russia, explained a European Parliament source.
 
Given the question's prominence in the news, the MEPs decided to hold a debate on Wednesday evening into the leaked information about corruption at FIFA (the international football association federation) and are expected to vote through a resolution on this matter on Thursday 11 June.
 
The plenary is scheduled to debate and vote on a report by Sergio Cofferati (S&D, Italy) on changes to shareholders' rights, including the question of country by country reporting. Although the EP Conference of Presidents decided to keep the debate and vote in this plenary, a number of political groups may request that the vote be postponed. At the Conference of Presidents, the heads of the EPP, ALDE and ECR groups opposed the postponing of the vote until July.
 
MEPs are also expected to vote on a resolution on Hungary's position on the death penalty and immigration, which they debated in the previous plenary. As at 5 June, all political groups bar the EFDD had proposed a resolution and MEPs have until Monday 8 June to draft a common resolution, if they so desire. The EP will vote on a resolution on the 2014 progress report on Turkey by Kati Piri (S&D, the Netherlands), which they discussed on 20 May.
 
At midday on Tuesday 9 June, the president of Mongolia, Tsakhiagiyn Elbegdorj, will address MEPs in a formal sitting. This will be his first visit to the European Parliament since he was elected in May 2009. (Camille-Cerise Gessant)
 
Antidumping duty on steel imports from China, 2 other nations
7 juin 2015
Press Trust of India
 
New Delhi, Jun 7 (PTI) India has slapped anti-dumping duty of up to USD 316 per tonne on imports of certain steel products from three countries, including China, to protect domestic producers from below-cost inbound shipments.
 
A duty of USD 309 per tonne has been imposed on imports from China, while USD 316 per tonne duty has been fixed for Malaysia and USD 180 per tonne for Korea.
 
The Finance Ministry imposed the duty on the recommendation of Directorate General of Anti-Dumping Duty.
 
The duties have been imposed for five years on imports of certain variety of hot-rolled flat products of stainless steel used in sectors such as auto.
 
These steel products are used for manufacture of process equipment, reactor vessels, material handling equipment, railways, pipes and tubes, automotive components, architecture, building and construction, industrial fabrication and power sector.
 
The Directorate General of Anti-Dumping Duty (DGAD), under the commerce ministry, had initiated and conducted investigation into dumping, injury and causal links between dumping and injury to the domestic industry.
 
Jindal Stainless had filed an application before the authority for initiation of an anti-dumping investigation concerning alleged dumping of certain "Hot Rolled Flat Products of Stainless Steel of ASTM Grade 304 with all its variants" originating in or exported from China, Korea and Malaysia.
 
In its probe, the DGAD had concluded that the goods have been exported to India from these countries below its associated normal value, thus, resulting in dumping of the product.
 
It has also concluded that "the domestic industry has suffered material injury and the injury has been caused to the domestic industry, both by the volume and price effect of dumped imports of the subject goods originating in or exported from the subject countries".
 
The Finance Ministry has said that the anti-dumping duty imposed shall be effective for a period of five years.
 
Welcoming the decision, Indian Stainless Steel Development Association said: "Domestic stainless steel industry has started showing signs of being a sick industry, as excessive imports have threatened the huge investments and resulted in underutilisation of capacities."
 
Countries initiate anti-dumping probes to check if domestic industry has been hurt because of a surge in below-cost imports. As a counter-measure, they impose duties under the multilateral WTO regime. PTI RR MR ABK
 
(AE) TRADE: WTO/Doha - agriculture still a stumbling block
6 juin 2015
Bulletin Quotidien Europe
 
Brussels, 05/06/2015 (Agence Europe) - In Paris on Thursday 4 June, the Director General of the WTO, Roberto Azevedo, told the trade ministers of the OECD countries and the European Commissioner for Trade, Cecilia Malmstrom, of his concern at the slow progress in the key fields of the negotiations of the Doha round. At the WTO headquarters in Geneva, blockages over the agricultural issues are still holding up the discussions on industrial products.
 
At Thursday's OECD ministerial, Azevedo repeated the concerns he expressed to the heads of delegation of the WTO on 1 June. “hile I am encouraged by the good engagement that we have seen in recent months, I am becoming increasingly concerned that we are not making the progress we need to deliver a substantive work programme in July. This is particularly the case in the key areas of agriculture, industrial products and services. I heard views today that are clearly divergent on some of these issues. It is vital that we move quickly to find convergence if we are to deliver results that are both meaningful and achievable. I will do everything I can to support members to find a way forward” Azevedo explained after the meeting. “ told ministers that we were rapidly approaching the point where political calls will be required. It was encouraging in this regard to hear strong support from ministers for the WTO and a recognition of the importance that they attach to a successful Nairobi meeting” he added.
 
The Kenyan Foreign Minister, Amina Mohamed, who will chair the Nairobi conference, sent out a “lear message”n the need to deliver outcomes. “here was a strong focus throughout the discussion on the importance of development and LDC issues” Azevedo added.
 
Following the Bali mini-agreement concluded in December 2013 and the agreement on implementing the trade facilitation agreement (TFA) reached at the end of 2014, the WTO member countries are due to set out their work programme by 31 July on the main sections of the Doha round - agriculture, industrial products, services and rules - in order to make a comprehensive political agreement possible in Nairobi.
 
The president of the WTO negotiation committee on industrial products (market access for non-agricultural products), the Swiss ambassador Remigi Winzap, warned on 1 June that ultimately, it will be difficult to get formal proposals to move the talks forward if no progress is made in agriculture. During the meeting, many developing members confirmed their reluctance to fully commit to the talks on industrial goods until the level of ambition on agriculture is clarified. Some of them stressed their concerns at the lack of progress on special and differentiated treatment and other flexibilities for this category of countries.
 
The Doha agenda will be discussed by the G7 leaders at their summit at Schloss Elmau on 7 and 8 June, where they will be joined on Monday by Azevedo.
 
Spectacular drop in cost of trade under TFA, OECD forecasts. The implementation of the WTO's trade facilitation agreement (TFA) could bring the cost of global trade down by between 12.5% and 17.5%, and the developing countries would be the principal beneficiaries of this, according to the 2015 edition of the trade facilitation indicators drawn up by the OECD, and presented in Paris on Thursday.
 
Trade costs comprise all tariff and non-tariff costs including transport, border -related and local distribution costs from foreign producer to final user in another country.
 
Countries which implement the TFA in full will reduce their trade costs by anywhere from 1.4 to 3.9 percentage points more than those which only implement the minimum requirements of the agreement. The greatest opportunities for reductions in the costs of trade are in the low and lower middle-income countries, according to the OECD.
 
The TFA comprises a raft of binding rules to simplify and streamline customs procedures, thereby facilitating trade flows. It will enter into force once two thirds of the member countries of the WTO have completed their internal ratification processes. (Emmanuel Hagry)
 
(AE) COMMERCE: OMC/Doha, l'agriculture demeure le poil àratter
6 juin 2015
Bulletin Quotidien Europe
 
Bruxelles, 05/06/2015 (Agence Europe) - Le directeur gééal de l'OMC, Roberto Azevedo, a fait part aux ministres du Commerce des pays de l'OCDE ainsi qu'àa commissaire europénne au Commerce, Cecilia Malmströ, jeudi 4 juin àaris, de sa préccupation face àa lenteur des progrè dans les domaines clé des néociations du round de Doha. Au sièe de l'OMC, àenèe, les blocages sur les questions agricoles freinent en effet les discussions sur les produits industriels.
 
Lors de la ministéielle OCDE jeudi, M. Azevedo a rétéées inquiéudes formulés le 1er juin devant les chefs de dééation de l'OMC. «lors que je me sens confortéar le bon engagement que nous avons vu ces derniers mois, je m'inquièe de plus en plus du fait que nous ne progressons pas pour convenir d'un agenda de travail en juillet. Cela est vrai en particulier dans les domaines clé de l'agriculture, des produits industriels et des services. J'ai entendu aujourd'hui des positions clairement divergentes sur certaines de ces questions. Il est vital que nous trouvions rapidement une convergence, si nous voulons obtenir des réultats àa fois significatifs et rélisables. Je vais faire tout mon possible pour soutenir les membres afin de trouver un moyen d'avancer » a expliqué. Azevedo, aprè la rénion. «'ai dit aux ministres que nous approchions vite du point oùes appels politiques seront néessaires. Il est encourageant àet éard d'entendre un fort soutien des ministres à'OMC et l'importance qu'ils attachent au succè de la rénion de Nairobi » a-t-il ajouté
 
La ministre kenyane des Affaires érangèes, Amina Mohamed, qui préidera la conféence de Nairobi, a adressén «essage clair »ur la néessité'y obtenir des réultats. «l y avait un fort accent lors de la discussion sur l'importance des questions de déeloppement et des PMA » a ajouté. Azevedo.
 
Dans la foulé du mini-accord de Bali conclu en déembre 2013 et de l'accord sur la mise en oeuvre de l'accord sur la facilitation des éhanges (TFA) déagéin 2014, les pays membres de l'OMC doivent éablir d'ici le 31 juillet un programme de travail sur les principaux volets du round de Doha - agriculture, produits industriels, services, rèles - pour rendre possible un accord politique global àairobi.
 
Le préident du comitéOMC de néociation sur les biens industriels (accè aux marché pour les produits non agricoles), l'ambassadeur suisse Remigi Winzap, a préenu, le 1er juin, qu'il sera trè difficile d'obtenir enfin des propositions formelles pour faire avancer les discussions, si aucun progrè n'est accompli en matièe agricole. Au cours de la rénion, de nombreux pays en déeloppement ont confirméeurs réicences à'engager pleinement dans les pourparlers sur les biens industriels tant que le niveau d'ambition sur le volet agricole ne sera pas clarifié Certains d'entre eux ont soulignéeur inquiéude devant l'absence d'avancés sur le traitement spéial et difféenciét d'autres flexibilité pour leur catéorie de pays.
 
L'agenda de Doha est inscrit à'ordre du jour des discussions des dirigeants du G7, lors du sommet de Schloss Elmau, les 7 et 8 juin, auquel se joindra M. Azevedo lundi.
 
Baisse spectaculaire du coû des éhanges avec le TFA, selon l'OCDE. La mise en oeuvre de l'accord sur la facilitation des éhanges (TFA) de l'OMC pourrait se traduire par une baisse de 12,5% à7,5% du coû des éhanges dans le monde, une baisse dont les pays en déeloppement seraient les principaux bééiciaires, selon l'éition 2015 des indicateurs de facilitation des éhanges (IFE) éaboré par l'OCDE, et préentéeudi àaris.
 
Le coû des éhanges englobe l'ensemble des coûs tarifaires et non tarifaires, dont le transport, les coûs lié aux procéures aux frontièes et àa distribution locale, encourus entre le producteur dans un pays et l'utilisateur final dans un autre pays.
 
Les pays qui mettront en oeuvre le TFA dans son intéralitéerront le coû de leurs éhanges baisser de 1,4 à,9 points de pourcentage de plus que ceux qui n'appliqueront que les prescriptions minimales de l'accord. Les possibilité de réuction du coû des éhanges sont les plus importantes dans les pays àaible revenu et àevenu interméiaire de la tranche inféieure, selon l'OCDE.
 
Le TFA comprend un ensemble de rèles contraignantes pour simplifier et alléer les procéures douanièes et ainsi faciliter les flux commerciaux. Il entrera en vigueur une fois que les deux tiers des pays membres de l'OMC auront achevéeur processus de ratification interne. (Emmanuel Hagry)
 
Le G7 face àes crises multiples
6 juin 2015
L'Expression
 
La chancelièe allemande, Angela Merkel, sera dimanche àerlin l'hôe d'un G7 marquéar l'absence de Poutine
 
Berlin semble avoir àoeur de montrer des dirigeants accessibles, malgréa foule de manifestants altermondialistes attendus comme àhacun de ces sommets.
 
Angela Merkel sera demain et lundi l'hôe d'un G7 confrontéàes crises multiples, des problèes de la Grèe àa guerre en Ukraine, en passant par le terrorisme international, dans l'ombre d'un grand absent, Vladimir Poutine. La chancelièe allemande rencontrera d'abord demain matin le préident améicain Barack Obama àa mairie du village de Krü, avant une réeption avec ses prè de 2000 habitants sur la place de l'élise.
 
Au programme: costumes folkloriques, fanfare, bretzels et bièe, dans le paysage de carte postale des Alpes bavaroises. Berlin semble avoir àoeur de montrer des dirigeants accessibles, malgréa foule de manifestants altermondialistes attendus comme àhacun de ces sommets. Une premièe mobilisation jeudi àunich a déàéni sans violence prè de 40.000 militants pour une mondialisation plus juste. Changement de déor dans l'aprè-midi. Les rénions de travail commenceront avec aussi les dirigeants du Canada, de France, d'Italie, du Japon et du Royaume-Uni au Chteau d'Elmau, un palace poséur un alpage à200 m d'altitude, coupéu monde et protééar des milliers de policiers. Cette rénion des sept puissances éonomiques sera la troisièe sans le préident Vladimir Poutine, depuis son exclusion de l'ancien format G8 aprè l'annexion de la Crimé par la Russie en mars 2014. Son absence a ééritiqué par plusieurs personnalité, dont son ami l'ancien chancelier allemand Gerhard Schröer, au motif que les discussions perdaient de leur sens en l'absence d'un dirigeant incontournable sur les grands dossiers internationaux. Mme Merkel a pourtant jugéette exclusion inéitable, le G7 repréentant selon elle un club de pays partageant des «aleurs communes» Tant que la Russie, accusé de soutenir les troupes rebelles dans l'Est de l'Ukraine, «e se conforme pas au droit international, un retour au format du G8 n'est pas imaginable» a-t-elle délarééemment. La menace imminente d'un nouvel embrasement militaire dans ce pays nourrira les discussions au Chteau d'Elmau. Le terrorisme islamique, du Proche-Orient à'Afrique, en lien avec l'Iran et son dossier nucléire, sont cependant le principal sujet mis en avant par la préidence allemande. Au deuxièe jour du sommet, le G7 accueillera d'ailleurs le Premier ministre irakien Haider al-Abadi et cinq dirigeants africains, dont le préident tunisien Béi Caï Essebsi et son homologue du Nigeria, Muhammadu Buhari. Il s'agira d'examiner «uel soutien les pays du G7 peuvent fournir àes pays» explique-t-on àerlin, en soulignant qu'il sera aussi question d'aide au déeloppement. A cet éard, seront convié les préidents de grandes organisations internationales: ONU, FMI, OMC, Banque mondiale, OCDE. La Grèe, au bord du déaut de paiement et mêe menacé pour certains d'une sortie de la monnaie unique europénne, sera éalement incontournable. Le préident françis Françis Hollande, Angela Merkel, et Christine Lagarde du Fonds monéaire international, ainsi que le chef du gouvernement italien Matteo Renzi devraient s'en entretenir. Les Améicains font pression pour une réolution rapide du conflit entre la Grèe et ses crénciers européns afin d'éargner une nouvelle crise àne éonomie mondiale déàhancelante. Le préident de la Commission europénne Jean-Claude Juncker et le préident du Conseil europén Donald Tusk seront d'ailleurs de la partie. Chancelièe depuis prè de dix ans, Angela Merkel, souvent considéé comme la femme la plus puissante du monde, sera la plus ancienne en fonction parmi les dirigeants du G7. Elle veut donner une dimension sociale et environnementale au deuxièe sommet de ce type qu'elle accueille en Allemagne, aprè celui de Heiligendamm en 2007, au bord de la mer Baltique.?
