HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO aims to conclude Doha Development Agenda
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S. loses meat labeling case; trade war looms
·         HYPERLINK \l "México y Canadá alistan represalias contra EU
·         HYPERLINK \l "Etiquetage/OMC: rétorsions du Canada et du Mexique contre les États-Unis
·         HYPERLINK \l "Officials in Mexico, Canada Praise WTO Decision on Meat Packaging Against U.S.
·         HYPERLINK \l "EU, Russia progress in talks on friendly settlement of 2-3 WTO suits - Russian Economic Development Minister
·         HYPERLINK \l "Norway Considering Aggressive Standardized Tobacco Labeling Rules
·         HYPERLINK \l "Taiwan and Japan should cooperate on food labels: Ma
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO gets update on Thailand’s compliance with cigarette ruling
·         HYPERLINK \l "PHL to endorse action agenda on growing global SMEs, MEs in APEC MRT
·         HYPERLINK \l "Dispelling worries, Iran renews WTO bid
·         HYPERLINK \l "China levies measures on Japanese, U.S. fiber preforms
·         HYPERLINK \l "Gov subsidies have forced US airlines out of India: Delta CEO
·         HYPERLINK \l "China-backed AIIB founding members to meet in Singapore this week
·         HYPERLINK \l "Chocolate factory opens in cocoa king Ivory Coast
·         HYPERLINK \l "Global energy subsidies fuel climate change, says IMF study
·         HYPERLINK \l "Asia becomes world's largest investor region: UNCTAD
·         HYPERLINK \l "ILO says only one-fourth of the world's workers have solid jobs
 
WTO aims to conclude Doha Development Agenda
The Star Online
Tuesday, 19 May 2015 
By: WONG WEI-SHEN
 
KUALA LUMPUR: The World Trade Organisation hopes to conclude the Doha Development Agenda in the near future. 
 
"It has to be in the foreseaable future. We can't afford to wait another 18 years," said WTO director general H.E. Roberto Azevedo said at a briefing earlier today. 
 
He is positive with the perspective that members are now engaging each other. 
 
"This is not something they were doing before. But now they are talking to each other. It is going to be extremely difficult but it is a possible deal," he said.

The Doha Round was launched in 2001 seeks to achieve a global agreement on the reduction of tax and non-tariff barriers on international trade. 
 
The WTO is the only international body dealing with the rules of trade between nations. 
 
International Trade and Industry minister Datuk Seri Mustapa Mohamed said Malaysia has benefitted from being a member as the organisation provided a more transparent and predictable trading environment.  
 
Azevedo, on his two day working visit, will be paying a courtesy call to Prime Minister Datuk Seri Najib Tun Razak and also participate in a roundtable session by the Institute of Strategic and International Studies Malaysia on "The Role of the WTO for the Future". 
 
The WTO currently has 161 members, accounting for 97% of global trade.
 
 
U.S. loses meat labeling case; trade war looms 
 
* World Trade Organization says U.S. meat labeling illegal
* Canada, Mexico seek permission for trade retaliation
* U.S. lawmakers split over scrapping meat labeling rules 
 
By Krista Hughes

WASHINGTON, May 18 (Reuters) - Canada and Mexico are readying trade sanctions against the United States after they won a meat labeling dispute on Monday, increasing pressure on the U.S. Congress to scrap the laws.

The World Trade Organization upheld a complaint by Canada and Mexico about U.S. laws requiring retailers to label meat with the country where the animal was born, raised and slaughtered, saying they discriminated against imported livestock.

Republicans, who have a majority in Congress, have signaled they may act to repeal the laws as early as this week, but consumer groups and many Democrats say they provide essential information for shoppers.

Canadian beef and pork industries say the rules add to expenses and have cut livestock exports, driving some farmers out of business and costing them more than $1 billion a year.

"Our governments will be seeking authorization from the WTO to take retaliatory measures against U.S. exports," the Mexican and Canadian ministers for trade and agriculture said in a joint statement.

Canada has published a hit list of potential U.S. targets, including wine, chocolate, ketchup and cereal. Mexico has not done so but estimates damages similar to Canada's.

The Republican chairman of the House of Representatives Committee on Agriculture, Michael Conaway, called for swift action.

"It is more important now than ever to act quickly to avoid a protracted trade war with our two largest trade partners," he said.

But the committee's top Democrat, Collin Peterson, said he would oppose efforts to repeal the laws and said there were still steps to follow at the WTO before rushing into a decision.

Uncertainty about the U.S. reaction helped pressure Chicago Mercantile Exchange live cattle and lean hog futures lower. Allendale Inc chief strategist Rich Nelson said any material impact depended on the U.S. response, but rescinding the legislation could increase Canadian hog imports.

U.S. pork producers and the National Cattlemen's Beef Association, along with business groups, are pushing for legislative action.

"Unless Congress acts now, Canada and Mexico will put tariffs on dozens of U.S. products," said National Pork Producers Council President Ron Prestage. "That's a death sentence for U.S. jobs and exports."

But R-CALF USA, a small but vocal lobby group for U.S. cattle producers, said Congress should stand firm and not surrender "U.S. sovereignty."

Consumer group Public Citizen pointed to a 2014 survey showing nine in 10 Americans supported the rules.

"Today's WTO ruling ... effectively orders the U.S. government to stop providing consumers basic information about where their food comes from," said Public Citizen's Global Trade Watch Director Lori Wallach, adding that it showed the danger of free trade deals' undermining consumer safeguards.

U.S. Trade Representative Chief Counsel Tim Reif said the office was considering all options and would continue to consult with members of Congress and the public.

The dispute stems from a 2009 U.S. requirement that retail outlets use labels such as "Born in Mexico, Raised and Slaughtered in the United States" to give consumers more information about the safety and origin of their food. (Reporting by Krista Hughes; Additional reporting by Theopolis Waters in Chicago; Editing by Susan Heavey and Lisa Von Ahn) 
 
 
México y Canadá alistan represalias contra EU 
El Economista 
19 May 2015
El Economista
 
Roberto Morales El Economista 
México y Canadá informaron que planean imponer represalias comerciales contra Estados Unidos, país que les ha causado pérdidas millonarias en sus exportaciones ganaderas por un etiquetado considerado ilegal por la Organización Mundial de Comercio (OMC), en un fallo divulgado ayer. Nuestros gobiernos (de México y Canadá) solicitarán autorización a la OMC para implementar medidas de represalia en contra de las exportaciones provenientes de Estados Unidos , afirmaron los secretarios de Economía, Ildefonso Guajardo, y de Agricultura, Enrique Martínez y Martínez, en un comunicado conjunto. El fallo de la OMC es definitivo y sólo falta determinar el monto de la suspensión de los beneficios que tendrán derecho a aplicar México y Canadá, que podrían estar entre 1,600 y más de 2,000 millones de dólares anuales, sumando las estimaciones oficiales de cada uno de ellos, rango que depende de los precios del mercado.

Debido al hecho de que Estados Unidos ha continuado discriminando a los productos canadienses del sector ganadero, Canadá buscará la autorización de la OMC para usar represalias contra productos agrícolas y no agrícolas de Estados Unidos , dijeron los ministros canadienses de Comercio, Ed Fast, y de Agricultura, Gerry Ritz, en otro comunicado conjunto. La etiqueta COOL, vigente desde el 2009 bajo el mandato del Congreso estadunidense, obliga a los empacadores a identificar dónde nacieron los animales, dónde se criaron y fueron sacrificados, información que es impresa en los paquetes de carnes de res y cerdo, entre otros. La OMC concluyó que el etiquetado exige una mayor segregación de la carne y el ganado según el origen; supone una carga mayor en materia de mantenimiento de registros e incentiva a optar por el ganado nacional con preferencia al importado. Hacemos un llamado a Estados Unidos a derogar la legislación que establece COOL y a cumplir con sus obligaciones internacionales , exhortaron los secretarios Guajardo y Martínez y Martínez. Las reglas COOL no tienen que ver con la seguridad alimentaria, porque los productos alimenticios que importa Estados Unidos deben ser inspeccionados por un sistema que es al menos igual que el aplicado para bienes similares producidos localmente. rmorales@eleconomista.com.mx
 
 
Etiquetage/OMC: rétorsions du Canada et du Mexique contre les États-Unis 
18 May 2015
Agence France Presse ECOFI
 
Le Canada et le Mexique vont décider de mesures de rétorsion commerciale contre les produits américains après avoir gagné à l'OMC dans le différend qui les opposaient aux États-Unis au sujet de leur politique d'étiquetage, ont annoncé lundi leurs deux gouvernements.

"Pour la quatrième fois, l'Organisation mondiale du commerce (OMC) a donné tort aux États-Unis concernant sa politique en matière d'étiquetage indiquant le pays d'origine (EPO)", a indiqué le ministre du Commerce canadien Ed Fast.

Dans un communiqué conjoint avec le ministre mexicain de l'Agriculture Enrique Martinez y Martinez, les autorités canadiennes ont indiqué qu'"une fois encore, l'OMC a confirmé que, comme le Canada et le Mexique le soutiennent de longue date, les exigences en matière d'EPO imposées sur le boeuf et le porc par les États-Unis constituent de toute évidence des mesures protectionnistes, qui enfreignent les obligations commerciales internationales des États-Unis".

Ottawa et Mexico estimaient que la politique américaine correspondait "de toute évidence à des mesures protectionnistes et discriminatoires" contre les producteurs et les consommateurs dans leurs deux pays.

Le litige entre les trois partenaires de la zone nord-américaine de libre-échange (ALENA) découle de l'adoption en 2009 par les États-Unis d'une nouvelle réglementation rendant obligatoire la mention du pays d'origine dans l'étiquetage de certains produits.

Le Canada et le Mexique, jugeant que cette règle lésait leurs éleveurs bovins et porcins, avaient porté plainte à l'OMC qui a finalement donné raison au Canada.

"Les États-Unis ont utilisé et épuisé tous les recours possibles pour contourner leurs obligations internationales, causant du tort à la chaîne d'approvisionnement hautement intégrée d'Amérique du Nord ainsi qu'aux producteurs et aux transformateurs de part et d'autre de la frontière", selon Ed Fast.

"Nous demandons aux États-Unis de retirer leur loi prévoyant l'EPO et de se conformer à leurs obligations internationales", indique le communiqué conjoint publié sur le site du ministère des Affaires étrangères et du commerce canadien.

"À la lumière de la décision définitive rendue par l'OMC et étant donné que les États-Unis maintiennent cette mesure discriminatoire, nos gouvernements solliciteront l'autorisation de l'OMC pour prendre des mesures de rétorsion contre des exportations américaines", ajoute-t-on de même source.

La liste des produits importés des Etats-Unis contre lesquels Ottawa et Mexico pourraient appliquer des droits de douanes plus importants comprend des fromages, des pommes, des cerises, du riz, des plats cuisinés, des chocolats, des pâtes alimentaires, des produits à base de céréales, le "ketchup" et autres sauces tomates, certains alcools, des articles de bijouterie ou encore des meubles en bois.

 
Officials in Mexico, Canada Praise WTO Decision on Meat Packaging Against U.S.
By Emily Pickrell and Peter Menyasz 
WTO Reporter, May 19, 2015
 
May 18 — Mexican and Canadian trade officials applauded the World Trade Organization ruling May 18 that the U.S. regulations requiring special labeling for meat sourced from their countries violates its trade agreements.
 
The World Trade Organization's decision comes after a U.S. appeal of a decision in favor of Mexico and Canada on a 2009 U.S. requirement that meat packaging include information about where an animal was born, raised and slaughtered.
 
“The WTO has once again confirmed Mexico and Canada's stance on meat packaging for beef and pork: that making special obligatory requirements is clearly protectionist and constitutes a violation of U.S. international trade obligations,” Ildefonso Guajardo Villarreal, Mexico's trade secretary, said in a written statement.
 
The U.S. had created the new packaging standards to require that meat products from Canada and Mexico be labeled as such, even though its North American Free Trade Agreement had integrated the three countries' meat markets.
 
Coming at a time when both countries are looking to expand their trade ties through the Trans-Pacific Partnership, Mexican trade experts said the ruling shows the importance of having good ways to resolve trade disputes as they arise.
 
“It shows that you have an effective mechanism that ensures the implementation of the agreements,” said Beatriz Leycegui Gardoqui, the former undersecretary for international trade in the Felipe Calderon administration and associate with SAI Consulting. “That gives legitimacy and the legal certainty to economic actors that the rules of the game are respected.”
 
Guajardo urged Congress to pass legislation ensuring that meat-packaging regulations become compliant with the ruling.
 
Other trade experts believe Mexico could issue sanctions if U.S. regulations are not adjusted to comply, saying such measures are important to keep the pressure on until compliance has been achieved.
 
“Taking retaliatory measures is necessary for the rule of law,” said Luis de la Calle, the former undersecretary for International Business Negotiations at Mexico's Ministry of Economy and partner with De la Calle, Madrazo, Mancera, an international trade consulting firm. “When we have chosen not to do it in the past, there is an incentive for non-compliers to drag their feet and do nothing. If the U.S. does not correct itself, Mexico and Canada would be doing a disservice if they did not take retaliatory measures.”
 
He also predicted there could be a range of products targeted.
 
“We have an integrated market, so the retaliatory measures could include important products and be broad-based,” de la Calle said. “They will have to ensure that the retaliatory measures taken encourage the U.S. to amend their laws so they will comply with the panel.”
 
Canada Seeking to Retaliate
 
The Canadian government also welcomed the WTO ruling.
 
The final ruling, the fourth time the WTO has ruled against the U.S. policy, reaffirms Canada's long-standing position that the measures are blatantly protectionist and discriminate against Canada, Trade Minister Ed Fast and Agriculture Minister Gerry Ritz said in a joint statement.
 
“The United States has used and exhausted all possible means to avoid its international obligations, damaging our highly integrated North American supply chain and hurting producers and processors on both sides of the border,” the officials said. “Once again, we call on the U.S. to cease this harmful policy and repeal COOL's provisions against beef and pork, removing this unnecessary trade barrier.”
 
With the final decision in hand, Canada will seek WTO authority to retaliate against U.S. agricultural and non-agricultural products, based on the list of U.S. goods proposed for targeting in June 2013, they said (111 WTO, 6/10/13).
 
Fast and Ritz issued a joint statement May 18 with Guajardo and Enrique Martinez y Martinez, its secretary of agriculture, livestock, rural development, fisheries and food welcoming the WTO ruling.
 
“The Canadian and Mexican governments will continue to work closely to resolve this important trade issue with the United States in order to protect our farmers and ranchers,” they said.
 
The Canadian cattle industry is pleased with the “historic and decisive” WTO ruling, which confirms that COOL discriminates against live imports of Canadian cattle and hogs, the Canadian Cattlemen's Association said May 18.
 
“Today is an incredibly important and historic day for Canada's cattle industry,” Dave Solverson, the lobby group's president, said in a statement. “With a final ruling from the WTO affirming the Canadian beef industry's right to fair market access firmly in hand, the CCA urges the U.S. Congress to finally repeal COOL.”
 
The group said it has spent C$3.25 million ($2.70 million) to date fighting the U.S. measures, but stressed that those costs pale in comparison to the impact of the measures on the overall industry. It urged the Canadian government to act without delay to seek retaliatory authority, noting that the original Canadian retaliation list targeted C$1.1 billion ($913 million) worth of U.S. goods but that the amount has grown significantly since May 2013.
 
 
EU, Russia progress in talks on friendly settlement of 2-3 WTO suits - Russian Economic Development Minister
 
BRUSSELS, May 18. /TASS/. The European Union and Russia have progressed in talks on friendly settlement of 2-3 suits within the World Trade Organization (WTO), the Russian Economic Development Minister Alexey Ulyukayev said Monday.

"There are disputes initiated by the European side, there are disputes initiated by the Russian side, we’ve progressed in providing pretrial settlement of those issues, at least of 2-3 of them," the minister said.

As was reported earlier, Russia filed two lawsuits against the EU to the WTO. The first one /December 2013/ concerned energy corrections while the second one /April 2014/ was related to the Third energy package.

In its turn, Brussels has applied to the World Trade Organization with four suits against Moscow. The first investigation was launched in 2013 regarding utilization fee for cars made abroad, while in April 2014 the European Union filed a lawsuit against Russia with relation to ban on pork imports from Europe. The third suit was tied with Russia’s antidumping import customs duties on light commercial vehicles from Germany and Italy. The fourth claim launched in October 2014 relates to the EU complaints on the size of Russia’s duties on paper, refrigerators and palm oil imports. On the latter dispute, despite the first three ones, a group of arbiters has not been created yet: currently, the two sides are negotiating its personal composition.
 
 
 
Norway Considering Aggressive Standardized Tobacco Labeling Rules
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, May 19, 2015
 
May 18 — The Norwegian Ministry of Health proposed new rules to standardize packaging for all types of tobacco products, according to a May 18 notification to the World Trade Organization.
 
The proposed rules would require a uniform layout and design on all tobacco packaging, as well as a ban on manufacturers' logos, trademarks, images, colors or other forms of advertising, the notice said.
 
If enacted, the proposed regulations will exceed the world's most aggressive tobacco labeling laws and open another front in the long-running WTO dispute over Australia's tobacco labeling laws.
 
The regulations will likely be considered at the June 17–18 meeting of the Technical Barriers to Trade Committee and at the next Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights Agreement (TRIPS) Council meeting June 9–10.
 
Comprehensive Rules
 
Norway's proposal seeks to amend its Tobacco Control Act and domestic tobacco labeling regulations to require tobacco packaging to have one solid color, with additional specific packaging requirements for certain tobacco products.
 
“The overarching objective of the proposal is to reduce the number of children and youngsters who begin smoking and using snus [a type of smokeless tobacco], in order to protect them from the harmful effects of tobacco use,” the WTO notification said. “More specifically the objective is to make tobacco products less appealing by limiting the advertising effect of the packaging, increasing the impact of the mandatory health warnings, as well as minimizing the risk that the packaging design gives misleading information about the harmful health effects of tobacco.”
 
Brand names and variant names, as well as manufacturer information, shall have standardized color, placement, font and size, the WTO notice said. The packaging shall retain the mandatory health warnings and other information in accordance with current legislation.
 
The Norwegian proposal would exceed Australian rules by extending standard labeling requirements to all tobacco products and smoking accessories, including the color of the cigarette paper and snus portions, the WTO notice said. Norway may also consider standardized packaging of tobacco surrogates like herbal cigarettes and herbal snus, among others.
 
WTO Dispute
 
The Norwegian proposal is likely to frustrate the five WTO members that are fighting Australia's plain packaging tobacco rules—the Dominican Republic, Ukraine, Honduras, Indonesia and Cuba.
 
The countries argue that such laws impose unfair restrictions on the use of trademarks, geographical indications and other markings in violation of the WTO TRIPS Agreement, the agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
 
The Dominican Republic previously said that it was concerned that other countries, like the United Kingdom and Ireland, were advancing proposals to mandate text and colors for tobacco packaging (22 WTO, 2/3/15).
 
The WTO's Dispute Settlement Body is not expected to issue its final decision on the complaints against Australia's tobacco labeling rules until the first half of 2016.
 
 
Taiwan and Japan should cooperate on food labels: Ma 
OBJECTIONS: Japan has protested against new regulations, saying they should be scrapped and that it would appeal to the WTO if they are not
Staff writer, with CNA
19 May 2015
Taipei Times
 
President Ma Ying-jeou yesterday proposed that authorities in Taiwan and Japan work together to trace the origin of false labels found on some food items imported from Japan as a way to resolve a dispute over Taiwans decision to tighten controls on Japanese food products.

Ma said that the measures imposed by Taiwan are not intended to impose trade barriers or damage relations between the two nations.

These are short-term measures. We hope the related agencies in Japan will cooperate with us fully, Ma said in response to a question at an informal gathering with the media.

The measures could be lifted as soon as the problem of false labeling is resolved, he said.

On Friday, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) implemented tighter controls on Japanese food imports, requiring documents that show not only the country of origin, but also the specific place within the country where the product originated.

The new regulations were imposed after it was found in March that products from five restricted areas in Japan had made their way into Taiwan using false labels.

Taiwan implemented a ban on food imports from the Japanese prefectures of Fukushima, Ibaraki, Tochigi, Gunma and Chiba following the Fukushima Dai-ichi nuclear power plant disaster in March 2011 after Japan was struck by an earthquake and tsunami.

Ma said Taiwan had planned to lift the ban on imports from Ibaraki, Tochigi, Gunma and Chiba before the false labeling was discovered.

Taiwan now requires that place-of-origin documents be issued by the Japanese government or an organization authorized or recognized by the Japanese government.

Also under the new regulations, imports of tea, baby food and aquaculture products from some areas of Japan, including Tokyo and Shizuoka Prefecture, must be accompanied by a certificate showing that they tested free of radioactive contamination.

The tests must be carried out by the Japanese government or internationally certified organizations, according to the FDA rules.

Japan has protested strongly against the regulations and threatened to take its complaint to the WTO if Taiwan does not withdraw the new rules.

Ma said the issue was legal, rather than scientific, in response to Japans calls for Taiwan to ease or scrap its rules based on a scientific perspective.

Taiwanese consumers enjoy Japanese foodstuffs very much, Ma said.

There is no reason for Taiwan to deliberately make things difficult for [Japan], he said.

Once the investigation into false and misleading food labeling is completed, local consumers confidence in Japanese food can be restored, Ma said.

 
WTO gets update on Thailand’s compliance with cigarette ruling 
By Louella D. Desiderio 
19 May 2015
The Philippine Star
 
MANILA, Philippines - The World Trade Organization’s (WTO) Dispute Settlement Body (DSB) is set to meet this week to get updates on Thailand’s compliance with a ruling issued on a cigarette tax case filed by the Philippines.

The WTO said in a notice posted on its website, an update on Thailand’s customs and fiscal measures on cigarettes imported from the Philippines is among the proposed items for discussion during the DSB’s meeting tomorrow.

The Philippines is set to provide a statement on Thailand’s compliance with the WTO ruling.  The WTO issued a decision in 2011 ordering Thailand to put in place reforms on customs valuations and taxes.

The decision was issued after the Philippines filed a case on behalf of Philip Morris Philippines against Thailand for the imposition of higher duties on cigarette exports from this country.

Thailand’s move to slap higher duties on cigarette imports from the Philippines was considered to be in violation of global trading rules.

While the order was issued, the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) earlier raised concerns on Thailand’s compliance with the ruling.

Among the issues raised was the decision of the Thai attorney general to prosecute an importer of Philippine cigarettes and several of its employees for alleged under declaration of customs values from 2003 to 2007.

To ensure the WTO’s ruling is complied with, the Philippine government wants to determine whether the customs transactions covered by the order are also part of the case Thailand wants to prosecute.

As concerns remain, the Philippines has two options: to continue surveillance in the DSB or to go to formal proceedings for dispute settlement.

The DTI said earlier the filing of a criminal case on entries affected by the WTO ruling may push the government to seek formal proceedings.

 
PHL to endorse action agenda on growing global SMEs, MEs in APEC MRT 
By Leslie D. Venzon
18 May 2015
PNA (Philippines News Agency)
 
BORACAY ISLAND, May 18 -- The Philippines will endorse to trade ministers of the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) an action plan aimed at fostering the participation of small and medium enterprises (SMEs) and micro enterprises (ME) in the global markets when they meet here on May 23 to 24.

In a press briefing, APEC Spokesman Charles Jose said the APEC Action Agenda on Growing Global SMEs and MEs identify priority actions that the 21-member APEC economies will undertake to facilitate the companies' access to overseas markets.

He noted that businesses face various barriers to tap the bigger markets abroad, foremost among them are burdensome trade procedures, overly complex customs rules and regulations, lack of innovative financing mechanisms and lack of market information.

While a good number of APEC activities to integrate SMEs in global value chains are ongoing in APEC, Jose stressed that these initiatives benefit mostly the medium enterprises.

'The Action Agenda' is designed to benefit small and micro enterprises since this is the sector that needs more support and intervention in APEC. It will provide the right balance and highlight SMEs' contribution and role in achieving inclusive growth,' he said.

Ambassador Laura del Rosario, 2015 chair of the APEC Senior Officials' Meeting, earlier said SMEs account for over 97 percent of all businesses and half of employment in APEC economies but less than 35 percent of exports.

She said it is thus imperative for APEC economies to enhance SMEs' competitiveness to enable them to expand into new markets.

The Philippines' proposed SME Action Plan intend to help SMEs and MEs improve their management capabilities, strengthen their access to financing and foster a business environment that encourages them to access overseas markets.

On the regional economic integration, Jose said the Ministers Responsible for Trade (MRT) meeting is expected to endorse the terms of reference of the collective strategic study on the issues related to the realization of the Free Trade Area of the Asia Pacific (FTAAP).

'The FTAAP has been a long-standing issue in APEC and last year, APEC Leaders agreed to a step-by-step process, beginning with a collective strategic study. The study is expected to be launched this year and be completed by November 2016,' he further said.

Jose is optimistic that many local businesses will benefit from the establishment of an FTA for the entire Asia-Pacific.

'Hand in hand, while we are helping the economies through forging FTAs, we also like to help the SMEs and MEs. This is aligned with our theme of building inclusive economies,' he added.

Further, Jose said the APEC MRT Meeting will also be a venue for APEC member economies to show its support to the multilateral trading system and the 10th World Trade Organization (WTO) Ministerial Conference that will be held later this year.

 
Dispelling worries, Iran renews WTO bid 
Tue May 19, 2015 5:14AM
Press TV Iran 
 
Iran’s bid for accession into the World Trade Organization has long faced US veto. 
 
Iran has set its bid for the WTO membership in motion again, with the trade minister saying reviewed policy documents have been prepared for submission to the body.
 
“Iran’s trade regime has been updated and reviewed and we hope we will be able to send its (documents) to the WTO's General Council in the near future,” Minister of Mine, Industry and Trade Mohammad Reza Nematzadeh said.
 
A trade regime is a system of tariff and non-tariff policies and export incentives which aim to protect domestic producers.
 
Iran’s bid for accession into the World Trade Organization has long faced the US veto. Washington agreed to drop its opposition as part of a preliminary nuclear agreement in November 2013.
 
“Correspondence has been made with all the ministries in order to pave the way for accession into WTO and we hope to advance work with the efficient councils as soon as possible,” Nematzadeh said.
 
The minister cited intellectual properties as one of the “very important” areas key to the WTO accession.
 
“In this regard, we are trying to fast-track our attention to intellectual properties with the removal of sanctions.”
 
Iran is currently in talks with the US and its allies over Tehran’s nuclear program amid hopes they would lead to a final solution.
Delegates gather for the opening session of the WTO ministerial conference in Geneva on December 15, 2011.
For the WTO membership, Iran has to radically restructure its economy, slash tariffs and reduce state ownerships.
 
Netmazadeh tried to assuage worries. “Certain individuals are worried about Iran’s membership in the World Trade Organization and harm to the country’s production.
 
“However, these worries are misplaced because the law has envisaged exceptions and if we realize that a certain production sector is being harmed we will definitely apply anti-dumping systems,” he said.   
 
The 161-member organization regulates international commerce, requiring member states to open their market to foreign goods which could threaten local producers. 
 
Membership is a lengthy process and also involves bilateral negotiations with the members. 
 
 
China levies measures on Japanese, U.S. fiber preforms 
 
BEIJING, May 18 (Xinhua) -- The Chinese Ministry of Commerce made a preliminary ruling on Monday that Japanese and U.S. companies are dumping optical fiber preforms and will impose provisional anti-dumping measures.

A probe, launched on March 19 in 2014, found that their dumping activities were damaging the interests of Chinese optical fiber producers, and that there was a causal link between the dumping and the damage caused.

The ministry told domestic importers of the products to pay cash deposits to customs. The deposit rate ranges from 7.8 percent to 39 percent of the value of their imports.

Optical fiber preform is a piece of glass used to make optical fiber.

 
Gov subsidies have forced US airlines out of India: Delta CEO 
From Lalit K Jha

Washington, May 19 (PTI) Government subsidies have forced major US airlines out of the Indian market, a top airlines executive has said.

"India is a very big country. It has a huge trade relationship with the US, particularly for IT, has huge agricultural trade between the two countries," chief executive of Delta Airlines Richard Anderson told reporters yesterday during a luncheon meeting at the National Press Club .

"But in essence we don't really have any aviation trade. We have exited the market completely," Anderson said.

"Because essentially what these carriers have done is with subsidised government strategies, come into the marketplace to basically shift the traffic off of us and take us out of the Indian market," he said.

"And think about it. US flag carriers ought to be in the Indian market. American and Delta should be in the Indian market. But it's not sustainable when you have that. When you have USD 41 billion worth of subsidy it's very difficult, if not impossible for us to be able to compete. And that harm is immediate," he added.

Anderson said a recent white paper by the American airlines industry has proved beyond doubt the subsidies provided by several governments like that of India.

"I mean those countries all required these airlines to file their financial statements. Oddly enough, in the US we don't require that. But other countries do," he said.

"And these are certified financial statements that show the subsidies. They're fully disclosed. So the work we did was not only that, but we also did research across all the financial documents we could find around the world, airport financings, financings by the government," he added.

"And we were able to build a really strong case," he said in response to a question.

"To put it in a legal framework, we proved subsidy beyond a reasonable doubt. And you can't refute the evidence. The evidence is overwhelming," Anderson said.

A long-haul wide--body 777 in the US, drives about almost 1,000 jobs per flight.

"When we put a 777 or a 74 or an A-350 or a 787 on a daily nonstop across the ocean, it drives almost 1,000 jobs for each one of these carriers. And those jobs aren't here," he said. PTI LKJ AJR AJR
 
 
China-backed AIIB founding members to meet in Singapore this week 
 
SINGAPORE, May 19 (Reuters) - Founding members of the China-backed Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) will hold a three-day meeting in Singapore this week to discuss operational policies for the establishment of the institution.

The gathering, called the 5th chief negotiators' meeting, will also discuss the draft articles of agreement for the AIIB in Singapore from Wednesday to Friday, a Singapore Ministry of Finance statement said on Tuesday.

The meeting will be co-chaired by Shi Yaobin, vice minister of China's Ministry of Finance, and Yee Ping Yi, deputy secretary of Singapore's Ministry of Finance.

A total of 57 countries have joined AIIB as its founding members, China has said, throwing together countries as diverse as Iran, Israel, Britain and Laos.

Among the Group of Seven (G7) industrialized countries, the United States, Japan and Canada remain absentees.

Washington had cautioned nations about joining the bank, seen as a rival to the U.S.-dominated World Bank, citing what it called a lack of transparency, doubts about lending and environmental safeguards, and concerns over Beijing's influence.

Beijing says it will not hold veto power inside the AIIB, unlike the World Bank where Washington has a limited veto.

Founder members will initially pay up to one-fifth of the AIIB'S $50 billion authorised capital, which will eventually be raised to $100 billion. (Reporting by Saeed Azhar; Editing by Raju Gopalakrishnan) 
 
 
Chocolate factory opens in cocoa king Ivory Coast 
18 May 2015
Agence France Presse
 
Ivory Coast, the world's largest cocoa producer, inaugurated its first industrial-scale chocolate factory on Monday, aiming to stimulate and support growing local consumption of the sweet treat.

Although the West African country has made cocoa its economic engine since it became independent from France in 1960, chocolate has not traditionally been part of national diets.

"We wanted to be able to... make chocolate for Ivorians, for Africans and especially West Africans," said President Alassane Ouattara, after a tour of the new facilities in Abidjan.

Ivory Coast, which produces more than 35 percent of global cocoa harvests and saw a record production of more than 1.7 million tonnes in 2014, wants to establish itself in other more lucrative sectors of the industry.

With an investment of six million euros ($6.7 million) for a production capacity of 10,000 tonnes per year, the new factory will produce chocolate "made in Ivory Coast" for the first time on an industrial scale.

"The arrival of a new chocolate factory in the world's largest cocoa producer... will also allow Ivorian planters to finally access the pleasure of chocolate", said Patrick Poirrier, chief executive officer of French chocolate company Cemoi, which owns the plant.

Cocoa, the "brown gold" for Ivory Coast, accounts for 22 percent of the country's gross domestic product, more than half of its exports and two-thirds of people's jobs and incomes, according to the World Bank.

Trade Minister Jean-Louis Billon said Ivory Coast citizens today had "more and more access to a product which is local product, which is sold worldwide, but which used to be forbidden".

During the 2013-14 season, Ivorian cocoa producers saw profits of 2.13 billion euros ($2.3 billion), according to Ivory Coast's coffee-cocoa council, while worldwide cocoa reaped some $13 billion in profits.

But those figures were dwarfed by the world's chocolate earnings, which were nearly 10 times greater that season, according to the International Cocoa Organisation (ICCO).

Billon said earlier this year that the country was "interested in exporting finished and semi-finished products".

Ivory Coast is set become the leader in cocoa bean processing, according to the ICCO.

 
Global energy subsidies fuel climate change, says IMF study 
Shawn Donnan, Washington 
18 May 2015
Financial Times (FT.Com)
 
Governments round the world will subsidise the cost of oil, gas and coal to the tune of $5.3tn this year, fuelling pollution and climate change, as they misallocate the equivalent of what is spent globally on public health, according to a new study.

The estimate published on Monday by economists at the International Monetary Fund represents their calculation of the gap between what businesses and consumers pay for energy and the "true cost" if environmental and health effects are factored in.

It amounts to a clarion call for higher taxes on energy and therefore higher energy prices for consumers at a time when much of the global economy remains in a fragile recovery.

The $5.3tn "true cost" of government energy subsidies that the IMF team arrived at is equivalent to 6.5 per cent of global economic output. It is also more than twice the $1.9tn cost calculated by IMF researchers just two years ago. At the time the fund itself called that estimate "staggering".

Almost the entire difference between the old and the new estimate is based on a radical re-accounting of what the study says are the real environmental costs of energy subsidies. It also amounts to a significant shake-up of the argument the IMF and others have made against the energy subsidies that have eaten up huge portions of government budgets in emerging economies such as India and Indonesia.

In the past economists have argued that energy subsidies were a waste of precious fiscal resources that often benefited the rich more than the poor. In the new study the IMF has made mostly an environmental argument and laid much of the blame on the world's biggest economies.

China, according to the IMF study, was by the far the biggest subsidy culprit, accounting for $2.3tn - or more than 40 per cent - of the total thanks to its heavy reliance on coal and widespread air pollution. The US will spend the equivalent of $699bn this year, or 13 per cent, while the EU will account for another $330bn in subsidies, or 6 per cent of the total.

"These estimates are shocking ... They have global relevance," Benedict Clements and Vitor Gaspar, two senior IMF officials, wrote in a blog post introducing the study.

What IMF economists had discovered, they said, was "one of the largest negative externalities [or economic side effects] ever estimated". At 6.5 per cent of global economic output it was also more than the 6 per cent of global GDP that the World Health Organisation says governments spend on public health each year, they said.

Were the subsidies to be eliminated this year they would raise government revenues round the world by $2.9tn, cut global CO2 emissions by more than 20 per cent and reduce the estimated 1m people who die premature deaths from air pollution by more than half. They would also raise "global economic welfare" by $1.8tn, or 2.2 per cent of GDP.

Because of the way they were measured, the IMF economists' estimates are likely to provoke intense debate and be disputed by some.

If environmental costs and the impact of oil-friendly tax rates were not included the actual global cost of "pre-tax" subsidies round the world would go down to $333bn this year, the IMF economists said, thanks largely to lower oil prices.

To arrive at their far larger $5.3tn "post-tax" estimate for subsidies this year, the economists added in the estimated costs of things such as health problems from air pollution and climate change.

More than half the total for 2015, or $2.7tn, came from an estimate of the cost of "local pollution", while a further $1.3tn was attributed to the price of global warming and $967bn apportioned to other local factors. The final $333bn represents the gap between what consumers pay and international supply costs.

 
Asia becomes world's largest investor region: UNCTAD 
 
GENEVA, May 18 (Xinhua) -- Asia has become, for the first time, the world's largest investor region with 440 billion U.S. dollars invested in 2014, followed by North America (390 billion U.S. dollars) and Europe (286 billion U.S. dollars), according to a report released Monday by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD).

The global investment trend monitor published by the UNCTAD showed among 20 largest investors, nine were either from developing or transition economies, while China became the third largest investor in the world.

The report said in 2014, transnational corporations (TNCs) from developing economies alone invested almost half a trillion U.S. dollars abroad -- a 30 percent increase from the previous year. Their share in global foreign direct investment (FDI) reached a record of 36 percent, up from 12 percent in 2007, the year prior to the financial crisis.

The report noted investments by TNCs in developed countries were largely flat at 792 billion U.S. dollars, with a modest rise in flows from North America and Europe more than offset by a 16 percent decline in Japanese investment abroad.

More than half of investments from TNCs based in developing economies were in equity, while as much as four-fifths of FDI outflows from developed country TNCs were in the form of reinvested earnings -- the result of record amounts of cash reserves in their foreign affiliates.

UNCTAD estimates that TNC investment appetite will improve, encouraged by better economic prospects, especially in the United States, proactive monetary policy in the euro zone and large cash holdings of companies.

However, TNCs remain guarded due to the fragility in some emerging markets, exchange rate volatility and increased geopolitical tensions, the report added.

 
ILO says only one-fourth of the world's workers have solid jobs 
Abhik CHANDA 
18 May 2015
Agence France Presse
 
Only a fourth of the world's workforce have stable contracts, leading to growing job insecurity, a UN report said Tuesday.

The International Labour Organization report revealed a clear shift away from reliable full-time jobs, as short-term contracts and irregular hours become more widespread.

ILO chief Guy Ryder said the shift was contributing to the "widespread insecurity" affecting many workers worldwide.

The dwindling share of steady jobs comes against the backdrop of soaring global unemployment, with 201 million people jobless last year -- 30 million more than before the 2008 financial crisis, ILO said.

The organisation's main annual report, covering more than 180 countries and 84 percent of the global workforce, said a full three-quarters of workers have temporary or short-term contracts, held informal jobs or were in unpaid family work.

Among workers who earn salaries, only 42 percent have permanent contracts, said the ILO's 2015 World Employment Social Outlook Report titled The Changing Nature of Jobs.

In such conditions, working is no guarantee of prosperity.

Many of the world's workers find themselves in dire poverty, with nearly a quarter of them last year living with their families on less than $2 a day, and 10 percent of the global workforce lived on earnings of less than $1.25, the report said.

This was however a vast improvement from two decades ago when half the world's workers lived below the $2 poverty line threshold.

But while the proportion of workers wallowing in poverty dwindled, Tuesday's report showed a clear rise in part-time work, especially for women, after the global financial crisis.

"These new figures point to an increasingly diversified world of work," Ryder said, calling the shift from standard jobs a "departure from long-term historical patterns."

"In some cases, non-standard forms of work can help people get a foothold into the job market," he said, warning though that the "emerging trends are also a reflection of the widespread insecurity that's affecting many workers worldwide today."

There were wide regional variations in terms of solid contract-bound employment with the figure standing at around 80 percent in developed economies and central and southeastern Europe but falling to about 20 percent in South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa.

The rest were self-employed or engaged in family jobs.

"The shift we're seeing from the traditional employment relationship to more non-standard forms of employment is in many cases associated with the rise in inequality and poverty rates in many countries," said Ryder.

"What's more, these trends risk perpetuating the vicious circle of weak global demand and slow job creation that has characterised the global economy and many labour markets throughout the post-crisis period."

Ryder said this was a pointer to the pressing need for governments to help spur job creation and try and ensure income security for people on temporary contracts, who tend to earn far less than their permanent contract counterparts.

ILO said the income gap between permanent and non-permanent workers had ballooned over the past decade, and now towered as high as 65 percent in Uruguay and 43 percent in the Philippines.

Global employment growth has meanwhile stalled at around 1.4 percent annually since 2011, down from 1.7 percent on average between 2000 and 2007, the report said.

It argued for the need for stronger labour regulation to protect workers from arbitrary or unfair treatment.

"In Europe, labour protection has generally decreased since 2008 when the global financial crisis started," it said.

Ryder said another problem was that "productivity is growing faster than wages in much of the world."
END
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.