
·         UPDATE 1-Rebounding from Ebola, Liberia gets clearance to join WTO 


·         Trade multilateralism is still our best bet


·         TPP(ing) point for India in global trade


·         Debunking the TPP myths 

·         TPP TRADE DEAL: WHO STANDS TO GAIN, SUFFER IN ASIA-PACIFIC 

·         Agencies continue to tweak India’s GDP growth forecast

·         Korea weighs impact of TPP without it or China 

·         Korea seeks to reach more free trade deals: official

 

 

 


UPDATE 1-Rebounding from Ebola, Liberia gets clearance to join WTO 


Reuters News

6 October 2015 19:53, 

By Tom Miles

GENEVA, Oct 6 (Reuters) - Liberia agreed terms to join the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization with the body's existing 161 members on Tuesday, clearing the final negotiating hurdle in time for ministers to rubber-stamp the deal at a meeting in December, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO said.

Liberia has been ravaged by the Ebola epidemic over the past 18 months, spurring the effort by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO and Liberia's Trade Minister Axel Addy to clinch a deal that should help build confidence in its weak economy and reduce poverty.

"My dream is that the work we have done here will pave the way for a better Liberia for all of us and our children so they too can exercise their potential," Addy told the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO working party on Liberia after it agreed on the membership terms.

President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf told Reuters last month that her country needed two years to regain its economic footing after Ebola, which has killed 4,800 people in Liberia and a total of 11,000 across West Africa. Liberia was declared free of the virus for a second time on Sept. 3.

Joining the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO involves a two-track process in which a candidate country must bring its laws into line with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO rulebook and also offer to cut barriers to trade, giving every existing HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO member an effective veto on each new joiner.

Least-developed countries like Liberia have been given an easier ride since 2011 in a bid to encourage them to join.

The working party chairman Joachim Reiter said the agreement was a win-win for such countries, for Africa and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO.

"Liberia's HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO accession is a strong, positive and clear signal of its commitment to engaging with the global economy in the framework of the rules-based trading system," Reiter said.

Twenty countries are still negotiating terms for membership, including seven that are classed as least-developed: Afghanistan, Bhutan, Comoros, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Sao Tomé & Principe, and Sudan.

Other countries that are not yet members include Algeria, Belarus, Iran, Iraq, Libya, Serbia and Uzbekistan.

Once HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO ministers give the Liberian deal their blessing at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO's biennial meeting in Nairobi in December, Liberia will still need to ratify the terms before June 15, 2016 and then will become a full member of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO 30 days later. (Reporting by Tom Miles; Editing by Mark Trevelyan) 

 

 

Trade multilateralism is still our best bet

Zaidi Sattar

Economic Analysis

The Financial Express Bangladesh

Posted : 07 Oct, 2015 

 

World leaders met last week in New York to launch the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) global agenda for development. Even as they celebrated the success of UN's multilateralism, hailing the success of the Millennium Development Goals (MDG) which ends this year, trade multilateralism as epitomised by the World Trade Organisation (WTO), and its predecessor the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), is facing the greatest challenge in its 70-year history.

 

There is no doubt that multilateralism in global trade has fallen on bad times, largely due to hardened positions between developed countries and some emerging market economies on the issue of agricultural subsidies. The Doha Development Round which began with a lot of fanfare in 2001 still remains inconclusive though at least one agreement, the Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA), has seen the light of day and is on way to being operationalised by most developing countries that have much to gain from modernising their trade infrastructure and logistics.

 

The global impact of the TFA, when fully implemented, is estimated at one trillion dollars of gross domestic product (GDP), with gains significantly favouring the developing and least developed countries which suffer from high trade costs on account of poor or inadequate trade infrastructure. There is no doubt that Bangladesh's competitiveness in many traditional and non-traditional export products would be significantly enhanced with modernised trade logistics and improved technological capacities in customs administration. It would be worthwhile for Bangladesh to seize the momentum of Aid for Trade in lifting its ranking in the World Bank's Trade Logistics Index enabling our exporters to become more competitive in the world market.

 

Make no mistake, Bangladesh is a significant beneficiary of the multilateral trading regime right from the beginning. So what seems to have gone wrong with the multilateral trading architecture? To understand its current predicament, a bit of historical perspective might be in order. Note that trade multilateralism was conceptualised in the aftermath of the "beggar thy neighbour" contagious tariff surges across countries during the Great Depression that left global trade in shambles. As world leaders gathered after the Second World War to reconstruct the war-ravaged economies, they were convinced that trade openness was essential to stimulate global growth in incomes.

 

Along with the Brettonwood Institutions -- World Bank and International Monetary Fund (IMF) -- global leaders therefore felt the need for an institution that would be instrumental in dismantling tariff walls and other trade restrictions while fostering a rules-based trading system. This led to the trade liberalising negotiations under the GATT which finally morphed into the WTO launched on January 01, 1995. The fundamental principle of the WTO was the equal treatment clause epitomised by MFN (most favoured nation). Acknowledging that among the WTO members there were developed and under-developed trading nations, and realising that open trade could inflict adverse outcomes on the less prepared trading partners, rules were framed to accommodate special and differential treatment (SDT) for the less developed members, to which Bangladesh belongs. Most important, though it is not beyond reproach, the WTO's dispute settlement mechanism remains the best option available to rich and poor nations alike for resolving trade-related disputes in an international forum.

 

It is fair to say that Bangladesh has been a major beneficiary of the SDT and, to its credit, has taken full advantage of the facilities accorded in terms of non-reciprocal grant of market access under various preferential arrangements, including duty-free quota-free (DFQF) access in several countries (e.g. Canada, Japan, Australia) and country groups (European Union or EU). Though occasionally rules of origin (ROO) requirements undermine the concessionality of preferences, they are still better than nothing. The departure from MFN obligations come under the rubric of the WTO's Generalised System of Preferences (GSP) which allowed member countries to establish systems of trade preferences for other countries, with the caveat that these systems had to be "generalised, non-discriminatory and non-reciprocal' with respect to the countries they benefited.

 

The EU's Everything But Arms (EBA) is a major concession to the least developed countries (LDCs) including Bangladesh allowing DFQF access, under the GSP umbrella. So are DFQF access offered to Bangladesh by Japan, Canada, Australia, and other countries. Exporters know of the gains in competitive advantage resulting from DFQF access when competitors face higher tariffs. Of the $245 billion that Bangladesh exported in the past 15 years, rough and ready estimates suggest that some $50 billion of these exports would have been the incremental contribution of preferential access.

 

Another benefit accruing to Bangladesh from the multilateral platform comes from the flexibility allowed for the LDCs in the Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) regime. By delaying the implementation of patent system provisions for pharmaceutical products for the LDCs until 2016, it allowed Bangladesh the scope to develop a vibrant pharmaceutical industry producing generic versions of a wide variety of patented drugs on the international market so much so that by now domestic production is able to meet close to 98% of all local requirement of medicines. Bangladesh is pushing for an extension of the facility beyond 2016 at the multilateral forum and chances are fair that the extension might be granted. Again, the WTO rules do provide the scope for an LDC member to apply for an extension of the transition period through a "duly motivated request", which Bangladesh has placed before the TRIPS Council in February 2015.

 

The combined benefits of just these two WTO compliant facilities could be evaluated at billions of dollars, not to mention the lives saved from cheap pharmaceutical drugs made available to Bangladeshi consumers and jobs created from the incremental export production. These benefits could continue at least until 2018 when Bangladesh will have qualified to graduate out of the LDC status, though it would still have a moratorium period until 2021. Thus the time is now for Bangladesh to make preparations in order to cope with stiffer competition in the context of "preference erosion" that will result from graduation out of the LDC status in the coming years.

 

That said, it must be acknowledged that the multilateral trade institution, the WTO, is going through rough times. Trade talks under the Doha Development Round, which began in 2001, made progress until 2008 when it stalled following strong disagreements between the USA and India on agricultural issues, of which subsidies related to food security appeared to be the deal breaker. The gridlock apparently was not cleared even at the Bali Ministerial Conference in December 2013.

 

No doubt there is a lot of disillusionment among the WTO members many of whom have lost interest in the multilateral route opting, instead, for bilateral and regional trade agreements to reduce trade barriers and seek improvement in trade and investment rules. What has become clear is the polarisation among North and South groups of countries on various issues that makes multilateral trade negotiations more protracted for anyone's comfort. For one, the consensus rule does not make WTO's decision-making process any easier if they have to be based on consensus of all 193 members -- a key guiding principle in the WTO. Another equally intractable guiding principle is the 'single undertaking' approach in negotiations which implies that every item in a negotiation is inseparable from the whole package.

 

Trade multilateralism is still our best bet

 

Small wonder that every round of negotiations is becoming more and more protracted and testing the patience of members. A quick glance at the periods taken by each round of the WTO negotiation (Table 1) will show that the rounds are taking longer and becoming open ended. As proof, the conclusion of the Doha Round is still up in the air after almost fifteen years of negotiations. Consequently, the global appetite for multilateralism is being seriously tested.

 

Rising from the shadows of seemingly moribund multilateralism in the WTO are at least two mega trading blocs - Trans Pacific Partnership (TPP) and Trans-Atlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP). Covering 60% of world GDP, the emergence of these two trading blocs could pose a serious challenge if not weaken the WTO further, according to most analysts of world trade.

 

While Bangladesh is unlikely to benefit from these trading blocs, there is a more promising trade and investment partnership emerging in its neighbourhood out of the ASEAN (Association of Southeast Nations) PLUS grouping (ASEAN + China, India, Australia, New Zealand, Japan, and S. Korea), which is expected to morph into a mega bloc under the title of Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership, encompassing much more than trade. Yet, to strike an association with this group will require the sort of eligibility that could take Bangladesh a while, given its current structure of tariffs and protection. Until then, making the best out of our WTO membership appears to be the only game in town.

 

Thus, for all its shortcomings, it would be too early to write the obituary of the WTO, a multilateral institution that has been driving the notion that trade, in the words of its Director-General Roberto Azevêdo, works to create jobs and lift people out of poverty, and it connects economies, business and people across the globe. That is still so true for developing economies like Bangladesh.

 

(Dr. Sattar, is Chairman, Policy Research Institute of Bangladesh, and anchor of FE-PRI Economic Analysis Unit. zaidisattar@gmail.com)

- See more at: http://www.thefinancialexpress-bd.com/2015/10/07/110800#sthash.ukTgytD3.dpuf


 


 


 


TPP(ing) point for India in global trade


India has to conclude its crucial FTAs. Enhanced market access from these FTAs can mitigate some of the export losses on account of the country’s exclusion from TPP


By: HYPERLINK "http://www.financialexpress.com/author/abhijit-das/"Abhijit Das | October 7, 2015 12:17 AM

The Financial Express India

 

With trade ministers from the US, Japan, Canada, Australia, Malaysia and seven other Asia-Pacific countries having successfully surmounted the final hurdles to the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) negotiations in Atlanta, it signals a significant achievement for the US in the arena of international trade negotiations. Apart from the benefits of free trade among the signatory countries that account for 40% of global GDP and more than 50% of global trade, the implementation of the TPP could also have consequences, in the short term, for the Doha Round negotiations at the WTO.

TPP negotiations were undertaken in considerable secrecy. Despite the talks having been concluded, the final text of the agreement is not yet in public domain. However, texts leaked during the negotiations indicate that the agreement covers liberalisation of trade in goods and services, strong rules for investment protection, strengthened protection of IPR for ensuring continued windfall monopoly profits for US pharmaceutical firms, opening of government procurement markets, restrictions on government support to state-owned enterprises, etc. With the US having driven TPP negotiations aggressively for the past 2-3 years, it is not surprising that the agreement is firmly cast in the mould of US commercial interests.

Not only does the US benefit from what it has secured in TPP negotiations, it is important to recognise that issues on which the US is on the back-foot in the WTO Doha negotiations, including reduction of farm subsidies, were excluded from TPP negotiations. From a strategic perspective, the TPP would entwine the economies of 11 countries more closely with that of the US, an outcome clearly aimed at reducing the growing dependence of these countries on trade with China. Given the twin gains, it is little wonder that US President HYPERLINK "http://www.financialexpress.com/tag/barack-obama/"Barack Obama invested considerable political capital at home, and diplomatic capital abroad, to ensure successful conclusion of these negotiations.

The stage is now set for the ratification of the TPP by the 12 signatory countries prior to the implementation of the largest free trade agreement. It is apprehended that at the ratification stage cold reality may hit some of the signatory countries. To illustrate, in Malaysia, the polity is deeply fractured on the issue of the country’s TPP engagement.

Mahathir Mohamad, the former Prime Minister and strong man of the country, has stridently criticised the current Prime Minister Najib Razak on this issue. Civil society organisations in Malaysia are also up in arms against the TPP.

Malaysia is not an isolated example of the absence of national consensus on the TPP.

In Canada, which goes to polls later this month, Thomas Mulcair, the leader of the New Democratic Party of Canada (NDP), is reported to have stated that he would not feel compelled to honour the provisions of the TPP if his party is voted to power. Dissenting views opposing the TPP are also growing louder in Chile and Peru. Crucially, in the US itself, Hillary Clinton, along with a large number of influential political leaders, has expressed strong reservation on the TPP.

Assuming that the TPP is eventually ratified by signatories despite the lack of domestic consensus, how will its implementation affect non-signatory countries such as India? Should India have made efforts to join TPP negotiations? What should India do to mitigate the adverse impact of being excluded from the TPP?

With TPP signatories enjoying duty-free access into each other markets, price competitiveness of India’s exports could get eroded. Consequently, there is a likelihood of diversion of exports from India in favour of TPP countries. In particular, in the face of competition from Vietnam, India’s exports of textiles and clothing as well as leather products are likely to take a hit. However, this adverse impact would be confined mainly to the US market. In some of the major TPP economies, including Japan, Malaysia, Australia and Canada, India’s exports may not suffer a tariff disadvantage as India already has FTAs with some of these countries or is at an advanced stage of concluding an FTA with others.

While attempts at quantifying the impact of trade diversion on the account of an FTA can become a speculative exercise, nevertheless it is instructive to note that an important think tank in the US has estimated that, by remaining outside the TPP, India would lose exports marginally to the extent of about 0.3% by 2025—which translates to $3-7 billion. While there could be some investment diversion as well, its quantification is not available.

Overall, the extent of trade diversion does not appear to be alarming.

Turning to the question of whether India should have made efforts to join TPP negotiations, it is important to examine the provisions on protection of IPRs and investment. Many of the provisions relating to the protection of IPRs in the TPP are aimed at facilitating evergreening of patents, thereby delaying the entry of generic medicines into the market. With patented drugs continuing to remain monopolies in TPP countries for longer periods, pharmaceutical prices are likely to rise steeply in these markets—a fact widely disseminated by Nobel laureate Joseph Stiglitz. The choice before India was clear—remain outside the TPP and live with a loss of a few billion dollars of exports, or join the TPP and face steep hike in prices of medicines. Given its public policy imperatives and health needs, the country has wisely chosen the first option.

As far as investment provisions in the TPP are concerned, expecting these to result in increased investment appears to be more a matter of faith rather than being based on conclusive evidence. On the other hand, the regulatory chill that gets induced by international investment provisions and the financial compensation that has to be paid by governments in investor-to-state disputes are dangers that could not be ignored by India. Again, a safe choice exercised by the government.

On the question of what should India do to mitigate the adverse impact of being excluded from the TPP, action is required domestically and at the international level too. Within the country, efforts must be made to enhance the competitiveness of India’s exports. On the external front, India needs to get its act together and conclude some of its crucial FTAs, including India-EU Bilateral Trade and Investment Agreement and the ongoing mega FTA negotiations under the auspices of Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership. Enhanced market access resulting from these agreements could mitigate some of the export losses on account of India’s exclusion from the TPP. Of course, India must safeguard its core interests in these FTA negotiations.

Turning to the question of the likely impact of the TPP on Doha negotiations at the WTO, it is no secret that the US finds it inconvenient to abide by some of the commitments agreed in the course of these negotiations in 2008.

Consequently, it has shown extreme reluctance, if not outright opposition, to conclude the Doha deal. Successful conclusion of the TPP provides it an excuse, at least temporarily, to disengage in these negotiations. However, this should not induce developing countries, including India, to make concessions to get the US back to the negotiating table.

It is also likely that as part of the pay-off for returning to the negotiating table, the US would insist on using TPP provisions as a template for initiating negotiations at the WTO on the so-called 21st century issues. Again, this must be strongly resisted by India and other developing countries, who may not find the outcome of negotiations on the new issues to be mutually beneficial.

The successful completion of the TPP is a feather in the cap of President Obama. However, any attempt to use its provisions as a blueprint for WTO negotiations could have extremely divisive consequences for the multilateral trading system. As far as the countries excluded from the TPP are concerned, the onus is on them to come up with an alternate template for global trade rules.

The author is head, Centre for WTO Studies, Indian Institute of Foreign Trade. Views are personal

 

 

 

Debunking the TPP myths 


ByRemy Davison, 

Business Spectator - Online

7 October 2015

The road to ratification will be tough, but Australia can't afford to be left behind in the cut-throat business of international capital, trade and investment.

The Conversation

Eight years in total of protracted negotiations. Twelve countries. The largest multi-continental trade agreement since APEC in 1989. The Trans-Pacific Partnership is complete.

Almost.

But the road to ratification will be rough. American unions, together with environmental and public health lobbies, are amongst those opposed, which guarantees TPP will have a tough time getting through US Congress.

Some 22 years ago, US President Bill Clinton faced a similarly-implacable union movement and a hostile legislature when he sought to pass President George Bush Snr’s legacy, the North American Free Trade Agreement, through Congress. “Tell your President,” America’s most powerful union leader told Labour Secretary Robert Reich, “to forget about NAFTA.”

Wrong. Clinton used the power of the presidency to push NAFTA through, although he had to make some domestic concessions. But on January 1, 1994, NAFTA was duly promulgated.

President Barack Obama has faced similar difficulties. He finally obtained fast-track Trade Promotion Authority from Congress in June 2015. But TPP may yet fall at the final hurdle.

If TPP is passed, what will it mean for Australia? Here, we examine two of its most contentious aspects: Investor State Dispute Settlement (ISDS) and pharmaceutical intellectual property under the mooted TPP agreement.

Investor State Dispute Settlement

The TPP will incorporate controversial investor state dispute settlement provisions that enables corporations to litigate against governments in off-shore international fora.

Such provisions are not a new phenomenon; there are over 150 signatory countries to the UN Convention on International Trade Law (UNICTRAL) establishing ISDS. Currently, there are more than 2,700 international agreements that include ISDS provisions.

Judging by the available TPP material, the ISDS provision in the agreement is in line with other Bilateral Investment Treaties. All non-sensitive case information will be made public. Within the TPP, awards are specifically limited to monetary damages.

It can take up to 18 months for a case to be heard by a tribunal, under a process that actively encourages both governments and firms to mediate. There are also numerous country-specific exceptions, as many governments have opted to include financial and foreign investment protections. Moreover, the Transatlantic Business Council asserts that “over 90 percent of the nearly 2,400 BITs in force have operated without a single investor claim of a treaty breach.”

Safeguards are in place to protect governments from being sued when they legislate in policy areas such as public health, education and the environment. During the TPP negotiations, the Australian government sought specific exclusions: tobacco companies have been explicitly identified as ineligible to utilise ISDS provisions. Australia is currently party to 26 ISDS provisions under existing trade and investment agreements (27, once the China Australia Free Trade Agreement is in force).

In Australia’s case, ISDS provisions have only been employed once: by Philip Morris Asia over tobacco plain packaging, utilising an Australia-Hong Kong BIT. The Australian High Court has already rejected Philip Morris’ arguments, while Ukraine, which brought a case before the WTO against Australia with four other plaintiffs, has withdrawn from the WTO hearing.

Although the other four litigants, (which have received funding from Philip Morris) remain, it is highly unlikely that either the WTO or the ISDS tribunal would deliver outlying judgements at variance with the reasoning of the High Court.

While many are fearful over corporations’ ability to sue governments, the reality is that in a total of 608 ISDS cases globally (as of December 2014), only 87 ruled in favour of corporate litigants (that is, a poor success rate of 14 per cent).

On average, corporations were awarded financial compensation of less than 10% of the dollar amounts they sought. Of these 608 cases, European corporations were responsible for more than half (327).

In 2013, 117 cases were brought against EU member states; most these (75 per cent) were internal (intra-EU) disputes brought by investors in one member state against EU member governments, governed by internal bilateral investment treaties and the Energy Charter Treaty. In addition, Spain and the Czech Republic were by far the worst offenders, accounting for 42 per cent of all cases.

Environmentally sensitive ISDS cases have often drawn considerable attention. On occasions where governments have sought to settle cases outside tribunals, such as Ethyl v. Canada (1998), the Canadian government was, bizarrely, attempting to circumvent its own regulatory regime.

In other ISDS cases, such as Metalclad v. Mexico (2000), the NAFTA tribunal made its first arbitral award to a corporation of $US16 million. However, the Mexican government petitioned the High Court of British Columbia, which partially set aside the award.

For TPP members, such as Australia, Japan and the US, such provisions are entirely manageable. However, it is true that less developed countries may face considerable costs if ISDS provisions resulted in more frequent litigation. What mitigates against this is the exceedingly limited level of success for corporations under existing trade and investment regimes, which suggests ISDS will be no more controversial under TPP than under any previous agreements.

Pharmaceutical Intellectual Property

One of the most divisive components of the TPP are the pharmaceutical intellectual property (IP) provisions. However, Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull claims the TPP will not change Australia’s IP laws.

The US and Japan have long been pushing for a clause to include “evergreening”, when the owners of a patent create a variation of the drug – which adds little or no value – to extend the life of a patent. This prevents any generics derived from that drug from entering the market, effectively enabling the producer to maintain a monopoly on the drug.

Patent protection has become critical for pharmaceutical companies. Between 2002 and 2011, R&D investment by the world’s top 500 pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies is estimated to have increased by 93 per cent, even as the number of new drug launches in the US remained stagnant at an annual average of 25.

Critics of both ISDS and pharmaceutical IP provisions within the TPP frequently cite the current HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Eli Lilly v. Canada case (2013) involving patents on Strattera (an attention-deficit disorder pill) and Zyprexa (an anti-psychotic treatment), which were invalidated by Canadian courts in 2011–12. According to one of the foremost authorities on IP law, Ruth Okediji, Eli Lilly is advancing a weak claim.

Okediji states that “the United States and Canada are party to the same intellectual property agreements, and Lilly was not denied protection for any category of intellectual property.” HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Eli Lilly has lost at every level of the Canadian legal system; its NAFTA action is likely to suffer the same fate.

Following the conclusion of the TPP negotiations, there has been no announcement regarding whether evergreening will remain in the final text. The final days of the TPP talks saw Japan and the US isolated on the issue, with all ten other members opposing the inclusion of evergreening. Watch this space.

The major sticking point that forced TPP negotiations to be extended was biologics: new pharmaceutical drugs that are derived from biological resources. Australia and the US were divided, with the powerful US pharmaceutical lobby pressing hard for 12 years’ protection for medicines. A 12-year protection period would prohibit the entry of cheaper, generic “biosimilar” vaccines, cancer treatments and other life-saving medicines.

Australia, with support from other TPP member countries, insisted upon five-year data exclusivity; extending the data protection to eight years, as Washington had insisted originally, would have cost the Commonwealth government’s Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme hundreds of millions of dollars annually.

US concessions enabled the TPP stalemate to end. Although the precise language of the pharmaceuticals IP deal remains unknown, TPP member countries will have the option of providing either a minimum of five years data exclusivity, or eight years of biologic exclusivity. It is not yet known what option other TPP countries will select.

There will be losers, NGOs such as Medecins sans Frontieres claim developing countries will pay more for pharmaceuticals. The TPP, the MSF argues, will “cost lives” and the TPP pharmaceutical chapter will impact heavily upon future trade agreements. Generic pharmaceutical manufacturers stand to lose as well, if IP is ring-fenced for eight years in some TPP markets.

Keep calm and carry on

The fact is that governments have effectively handed significant arbitral autonomy to international organisations for decades. Australia was a foundation signatory to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT, 1947) and the WTO (1994), as well as the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (1958), which spawned the International Tribunal on the Law of the Sea (ITLOS, 1982).

Australian corporations may apply for remedies under the single market legal regime governed by the European Court of Justice. The lesson is clear: “hard” international law provides certainty and security for business, government and consumers. The TPP consolidates existing international trade law and extends the network of FTAs signed by successive governments since 1984, that integrate the Australian economy more closely with New Zealand, Singapore, the US, Thailand, ASEAN, Japan, South Korea and China.

Contrary to the hyperbole, the Australia-US FTA (2005) did not cause the sky to fall. Australia needs bilateral and plurilateral agreements like the TPP to apply the blowtorch of liberalisation to its trade partners who would otherwise keep their protectionist barn doors well and truly shut. The 1957 Australia-Japan agreement reignited a trade relationship that World War II had terminated.

Gough Whitlam understood that slashing protectionism in 1973 lit a fire under the fat, lazy, inefficient manufacturing sector. In the 1990s, APEC, the EU Single Market and NAFTA compelled Asian economies to abandon tariff walls and monopolist, crony capitalism, in order to transform the Asian region into the world’s most dynamic production hub.

You can pine for the 1970s if you want to: replete with stagnation, stagflation, Jeremy Corbyn and morbid unemployment rates. The 1970s: when Australia’s share of world trade was slashed by half. But you cannot avoid the realities of the cut-throat business of international capital, trade and investment. Australia’s FTAs and the TPP are strategic responses to the forces of globalisation. As Renato Ruggiero, the late WTO Director-General once noted, “it is not whether you globalise that matters. It’s how you globalise.”

Jessi Canny, from Politics and International Relations at Monash University, co-authored this article.

 

 

 

 

TPP TRADE DEAL: WHO STANDS TO GAIN, SUFFER IN ASIA-PACIFIC 

Bloomberg News 

October 6, 2015 — 5:08 AM CEST 

Updated on October 6, 2015 — 6:26 AM CEST 

•              Japanese Automakers Among Big Winners on Improved U.S. Access

•              China Welcomes Agreement, Hopes Deal Will Benefit Growth

 

The Trans-Pacific Partnership is the biggest trade agreement in history, reducing tariffs and other forms of protectionism in a dozen countries making up about 40 percent of the global economy with economic output of almost $30 trillion.

The White House estimates it will eliminate 18,000 tariffs on U.S.-manufactured goods, while giving everyone from Vietnamese shrimpers to New Zealand dairy farmers cheaper access to markets across the Pacific. Critics, particularly in the U.S., say it will kill American manufacturing jobs, reduce environmental standards and raise drug prices.

The deal sealed Monday in Atlanta came after more than five years of negotiations between the TPP nations -- the U.S., Canada, Japan, Australia, Brunei, Chile, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore and Vietnam.

The agreement must still be ratified by lawmakers in the TPP nations before it can take effect and President Barack Obama is likely to face a fight to secure passage by the U.S. Congress.

Japan:

*Japanese car and auto-parts makers may be the biggest winners, as they get cheaper access to the U.S., the industry’s biggest export market

* Japan was forced to reduce some of the protections granted to its rice farmers, creating a non-tariff import quota of one percent of its total consumption

* Livestock farmers may be harder hit as tariffs on beef will be cut to 9 percent over 16 years from 38.5 percent, while pork tariffs will also be slashed

Australia:

* The deal will remove about A$9 billion of import taxes from Australian trade, Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull said

* Australia will gain access to the U.S. sugar market while Japan will

also reduce levies on the product and the cut in the beef tariff will help Australian ranchers

* Seafood and most horticulture products will see tariffs dropped, while preferential quota access will be created for grains, cereals and rice

* Australia and New Zealand successfully pressured the U.S. to compromise on the amount of time pharmaceutical companies would get protection for new biotech drugs, granting companies a minimum of five years rather than the 12 years of protection pushed by the U.S. That could lead to cheaper drug prices and more competition

* Reduced tariffs on everything from iron and steel products, to pharmaceuticals, machinery, paper and auto parts will help Australian manufacturers

New Zealand:

* Tariffs due to be eliminated on 93 percent of New Zealand’s trade with its TPP partners representing annual savings of about NZ$259 million ($168 million), Trade Minister Tim Groser said.

* The dairy industry, which accounts for about a quarter of exports, will see savings of about NZ$102 million a year. Some tariffs to remain in key markets such as the U.S., Japan, Canada and Mexico. Though New Zealand will get preferential access to new quotas, Canada only agreed to set foreign quotas for 3.3 percent of it dairy market over five years

* Tariffs on beef exports will be eliminated with the exception of Japan where they will drop to 9 percent from 38.5 percent, he said. Tariffs on all other exports including fruit, seafood, wine and sheep meat will be eliminated

* “While I am very disappointed that the deal falls far short of TPP’s original ambition to eliminate all tariffs, there will be some useful gains for New Zealand dairy exporters in key TPP markets such as the U.S., Canada and Japan,” John Wilson, chairman of Fonterra Cooperative Group Ltd., the world’s biggest dairy exporter, said in a statement.

Vietnam:

* Vietnam to be among the biggest winners, according to the Eurasia Group, with the agreement potentially boosting GDP by 11 percent by 2025, with exports growing 28 percent in the period as companies move factories to the low-wage country, the report said.

* Reduced import duties in the U.S. and Japan will benefit country’s apparel manufacturers, whose low labor costs have enabled them to grab business from China. Still, impact may be limited as Vietnam will still face strict rules-of-origin on materials.

* Fishing industry to benefit from elimination of import tax on shrimp, squid and tuna, now averaging 6.4%-7.2%

* Eliminating import taxes on pharmaceutical products from the current average of about 2.5% will lead to tougher competition between Vietnamese domestic companies and foreign companies. TPP will also increase patent protection, restricting Vietnam companies access to new products as well their ability to produce new drugs.

Malaysia:

* Malaysia’s state-owned enterprises may suffer from the deal which calls for equal access to government procurement

* Electronics, chemical products, palm oil and rubber exporters are among beneficiaries. Malaysia is the world’s second-biggest palm oil producer and one of the biggest growers of rubber

China:

* The world’s second-biggest economy may be among the biggest losers as it failed to join the TPP, allowing the U.S. to tighten trade ties across the region and advance the Obama administration’s so-called pivot to Asia. After initially dismissing TPP, Chinese officials have now indicated some interest in possibly joining in the future 

* "China has an open attitude towards system building that complies with WTO rules and is conducive to economic integration in the Asia-Pacific region, and hopes the agreement and other free trade arrangements in the region can be mutually beneficial, so that they can make contributions to trade, investment and economic growth in the Asia-Pacific region," China’s Foreign Ministry said in a statement.

* Chinese exporters may lose some market share in the U.S. and Japan to developing countries such as Vietnam, according to Bloomberg economist Fielding Chen

* China will push its "one belt, one road" strategy of resurrecting trade routes from Asia to Europe and its new development bank and try to reach more free-trade deals with other countries, especially in Asia, Chen said. “While opening up its own door, China doesn’t want to see other countries are closing their doors,” Chen said.

(A previous version of this story was corrected to show economic output of almost $30 trillion, not $30 billion.)

 

 

 

Agencies continue to tweak India’s GDP growth forecast

Agencies predict India’s gross domestic product will grow between 7% and 7.5% for the year

Mint, Nidhi Sinha 

Last Modified: Wed, Oct 07 2015. 11 53 AM IST

 

The IMF has marginally lowered its 2015-16 growth forecast for India to 7.3% this year, lower than the 7.5% it projected in July. Photo: Bloomberg 

New Delhi: Since the beginning of last month, forecasts on India’s economic growth by various agencies have been mostly negative; yet, the overall picture does not look grim. Agencies predict India’s gross domestic product (GDP) will grow between 7% and 7.5% for the year. 

Earlier, on 30 June, data released by the Central Statistics Office showed India’s GDP growth slowed to 7% in the April-June quarter from 7.5% in the January-March quarter as measured at market prices.

With the International Monetary Fund (IMF) cutting the outlook for India on Tuesday, here’s a look at who else is wavering about India’s growth and why.

IMF

The IMF has marginally lowered its 2015-16 growth forecast for India to 7.3% this year, lower than the 7.5% it projected in July. But it expects growth to accelerate to 7.5% the following year. It also added that India will remain the world’s fastest growing major economy. The Washington-based multilateral institution attributed the lowering of India’s growth forecast to the weakening of global external demand and the consequent impact on Indian exports. HYPERLINK "http://www.livemint.com/Politics/Puwo4XzazcHApN5n1JK0eI/India-to-remain-the-worlds-fastest-growing-economy-IMF.html"Read more 

Speaking in Washington on 30 September, IMF chief Christine Lagarde said “global growth will likely be weaker this year than last, with only a modest acceleration expected in 2016”.

World Bank

The World Bank has maintained India’s growth forecast for the year when other multilateral agencies and even the Reserve Bank of India think the global situation will drag down the country’s growth, reports The Economic Times. In its twice-a-year South Asia Economic Focus released on 4 October, the World Bank said India will grow 7.5% in the current fiscal, same as its earlier June forecast, but warned delays in the adoption and implementation of key reforms could affect investor sentiment. 

Reserve Bank of India 

While releasing its monetary policy on 30 September, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) revised downwards its real GDP forecast for 2015-16 to 7.4% from the earlier expectation of 7.6%, saying that growth is expected to pick up in the latter part of the fiscal. The baseline outlook, however, is subject to considerable uncertainties surrounding commodity prices, monsoon and weather-related disturbances, volatility in seasonal items and spillovers from external developments through exchange rate and asset price channels.

Fitch Ratings

A day after the RBI revised downwards its real GDP forecast for 2015-16 to 7.4%, Fitch Ratings has lowered India’s GDP growth estimate for the current fiscal to 7.5% from 7.8% on average monsoon, but said the country is poised to grow at 8% next fiscal on the back of reform push.

In its Global Economic Outlook report, Fitch said India took over as the fastest growing BRIC this year with 7.5% GDP growth, driven by structural reforms and higher investment,, but added that GDP growth in the first (April-June) quarter was “disappointing” as it slowed to 7% from 7.5% in the preceding quarter. 

Asian Development Bank 

On 22 September, Asian Development Bank (ADB) pared India’s growth estimate for 2015-16 by 0.4 percentage points to 7.4% for 2015-16 from 7.8% predicted earlier, owing to economic slowdown in industrial countries, a weak monsoon and stalled action on key structural reforms. The report said a pick-up in the pace of investment and kickstarting the pending reforms will be vital to boost growth momentum.

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 

The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) also trimmed its growth estimate for India in 2015 to 7.2% from 7.3% predicted earlier, but just like IMF, maintained that the country will still be the fastest growing major economy over the coming two years. The organization noted on 16 September that the main exception to the worsening global economy is India, “where growth is supported by strong consumer spending and public investment in infrastructure”.

“The slowdown has been sharpest in countries heavily dependent on commodities and/or with close trade links to China, notably in east and south-east Asia. The main exception to the worsening picture is India, where growth is supported by strong consumer spending and public investment in infrastructure,” it said in its report. 

Moody’s

On 8 September, Moody’s Investors Service said the Indian economy would grow at 7% in the current fiscal on the back of slow recovery in industrial output and investment. It added that country’s current account deficit may remain low, supported by declining oil prices. “We have also reduced our projections for India to 7% in 2015 and 7.5% in 2016, from 7.5% and 7.6% based on high frequency indicators suggesting that the recovery in industrial output and investment is slow, and bank credit growth still subdued,” it said. 

UBS

Earlier in September, Swiss brokerage UBS revised downwards India’s GDP growth projection for the current fiscal to 7.1% from 7.5% earlier, on account of weaker external demand prospects, reported PTI. The global financial services firm has also lowered its growth projection for financial year 2016-17 to 7.6% from 8.3% earlier. The downward revision in growth projection comes despite lower oil prices which were expected to provide a boost to Indian growth.

“Weaker external demand prospects and slow progress on balance sheet repair leads us to curtail our growth forecast in spite of cuts in UBS’ Brent oil price projections to an average of $57.5 in calendar 2016 (from $70),” UBS said in a research note.

 

 

 


Korea weighs impact of TPP without it or China 


Korea JoongAng Daily

6 October 2015, 

JOONAI, 

© 2015 DRAMAHOUSE & J CONTENTHUB. 



Korea’s exporters may face escalated competition against Japan as negotiations among 12 countries to join the U.S.-led Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) reached an agreement Monday local time in Atlanta.

Since Korea is not a member of the mega-free trade agreement (FTA), local manufacturers could lose the competitive edge they gained with bilateral free trade pacts, particularly the one with the United States. Some rival Japanese products could be cheaper in the U.S. market after the TPP goes into effect.

The TPP is intended to eliminate tariff and non-tariff barriers on traded goods and services as well as investments among the 12 member countries: the United States, Canada, Japan, Singapore, Vietnam, Australia, New Zealand, Brunei, Malaysia, Chile, Mexico and Peru. It does not include China and is often called the “anti-China FTA.”

Korea has been ambivalent about the TPP, particularly as it negotiated an FTA with China. It could be able to join in the future.

According to a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Korea Trade-Investment Promotion Agency (Kotra) survey released Monday, 20 Korean companies operating in the United States said that some major Korean export products like automobiles, auto parts and textiles are likely to face tougher competition from TPP member countries that have similar product lines and similar technology levels.

The United States has reportedly offered Japan a deal to immediately eliminate tariffs on 80 percent of Japanese auto parts.

But Korean manufacturers with production lines in the U.S. are likely to be shielded from tougher competition, Kotra explained. The report added that the TPP is likely to encourage Korean manufacturers to move production lines to countries like Vietnam, a bilateral FTA partner of Korea and a TPP member.

Korean televisions and refrigerators may lose price competitiveness and Japanese brands may gain it if the TPP goes in effect, Kotra said.

But major Korean export items like smartphones and other premium electronic products like semiconductors are already traded with zero tariffs with 52 HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO) members under the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO’s Information Technology Agreement.

Other industries like steel, oil, chemicals, electronics and construction materials are expected to see limited damage from the TPP because Korea’s rival in these sectors is China, and its technology level is higher. Korea does not compete with Japan on such exports.

The Korean government said on Monday that it welcomes the good news on the TPP negotiations.

“The deal establishes an Asia-Pacific economic bloc that accounts for almost 40 percent of the world’s gross domestic product,” Kim Hak-do, an assistant minister at the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy, said at a press conference on Monday. “Korea will consider participating in the TPP in pursuit of the national interest after analyzing the economic impact of the mega-FTA on the local economy.”

The Korean government expressed its willingness to join the TPP in 2013, but it failed to join and focused on working on the Korea-China FTA. But Korea, which is a free trade partner of 10 TPP members, excluding Japan and Mexico, has continued holding preliminary negotiations with the 12 TPP members.

Trade experts and the government expect the TPP to go into effect in 2017 at the earliest, considering many member countries are scheduled to hold major elections between now and then.

However, the Korean government said it cannot estimate when Korea can join the bloc because the TPP still lacks rules for accepting additional members or requirements each potential members should meet. Korea and three other countries have shown interest in joining later.

Trade analysts advise that the Korean government should make decisions carefully, because joining the bloc as a latecomer may have some disadvantages.

“Existing TPP members, including the United States, are likely to welcome Korea joining the mega-FTA, as it is already a bilateral FTA partner of 10 members,” said Je Hyun-jung, a senior researcher at the Institute for International Trade under the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Korea International Trade Association. “However, the Korean government should never rush, because the existing members may ask Korea to liberalize rice imports and some agricultural and fishery markets, which are sensitive issues for Korea.” 

 

Korea seeks to reach more free trade deals: official


Yonhap, 2015-10-07 09:55 

South Korea is seeking more free trade pacts and is committed to the establishment of a global value chain, the country's vice trade minister has said.

Speaking at a two-day G-20 trade ministers meeting which ended in Istanbul on Tuesday, Vice Minister Moon Jae-do said that following the 2008 global financial crisis, heightened uncertainty and volatility have become the "new normal" on the international stage.

"Asia's fourth-largest economy is seeking to reach more free trade agreements with partner countries that can facilitate trade, and pushing to vitalize electronic commerce around the world," Moon was quoted as saying.

Due to such developments, leading economies should consider the repercussions their various national policies can have on other countries, he said, adding countries must act cautiously and think comprehensively.

Seoul already has FTAs with the United States, the European Union, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and is waiting ratification of its open trade agreement with China.

Moon said that with half of South Korea's exports being industrial parts and materials that require technology transfers, the country is "naturally" contributing to that global value chain that is critical for helping small and medium enterprises.

"South Korea, as the leading member of the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation SME working group, is doing its part to include more smaller businesses into the global value chain," he said.

The official said that South Korea supports the implementation of the Bali Package and will continue to back efforts by the World Trade Organization that is striving for more open trade.

The Bali Package reached in 2013 aims to lower global trade barriers and is the first agreement by the WTO that has been approved by all its members.

The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy said that officials at the latest trade minister meeting agreed on the need for all WTO members to ratify the Trade Facilitation Agreement and to do more to roll-back standstill measures that have been cited for hindering trade in the past.

 

 

 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.
