HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "Europeans Applaud Ukraine's Latest Bid to Join WTO Government Procurement Pact
·         HYPERLINK \l "China's high agricultural stockpiles complicate reform efforts
·         HYPERLINK \l "Indonesian government proposes jump in biodiesel subsidies
·         HYPERLINK \l "Egypt's cotton growers hanging by a thread after subsidy withdrawal; Farming
·         HYPERLINK \l "Subsidies, Countervailing Measures Panel to Meet
·         HYPERLINK \l "ATMA urges govt to raise import duty on tyre to 20%
·         HYPERLINK \l "Japan TPP negotiator: Not ready for Japan-U.S. ministerial trade talks
·         HYPERLINK \l "Obama tells Democrats no currency in TPP
·         HYPERLINK \l "Trade: Vietnam Not to Hesitate to Open Market as Commitment to AEC: Minister
·         HYPERLINK \l "‘Decades of Swiss banking secrecy have left their mark’
 
Europeans Applaud Ukraine's Latest Bid to Join WTO Government Procurement Pact
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, February 4, 2015
Feb. 3 — Ukraine has taken a “major step” in its bid to accede to the World Trade Organization's Government Procurement Agreement (GPA), according to members of the European Free Trade Association.
 
Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway and Switzerland said they “very much appreciate the improvements” Ukraine made in its second revised offer to join the GPA, according to a joint Feb. 3 statement. Ukraine's second revised offer circulated among members on Oct. 28 and has not yet been made public.
 
Members said they are optimistic that Ukraine's accession could be concluded sometime in the first half of 2015, according to the Government Procurement Committee's latest report.
 
Members of the WTO Government Procurement Committee likely will discuss Ukraine's latest bid at their next meeting scheduled for Feb. 11.
 
Addressing Concerns
 
Ukraine's latest proposal sought to counter members' concerns about thresholds, general notes and some other aspects of the country's first revised offer.
 
GPA members had asked Ukraine to provide indicative lists specifying all central government, sub-central government and other entities that will be covered under the agreement (86 WTO, 5/3/13).
 
Members asked Ukraine to set a threshold for goods and services procurement by other entities at 400,000 Special Drawing Rights (SDR) ($606,000).
 
Members further asked Ukraine to clarify whether it intends that all services procured by listed entities will be subject to GPA requirements and asked Ukraine to justify or remove most of the requested exceptions for specific types of procurement.
 
Ukraine has since notified GPA members that it brought into force a new public procurement law that takes into account the rules of relevant European Union directives and the GPA requirements. Ukraine said it expects the legislation will enable it to lower its proposed thresholds and to eliminate some of its general notes.
 
Feb. 11 Meeting
 
The goal of the GPA is to open up government procurement deals to international trade and competition, while ensuring transparency and a commitment to good governance. Last year, members revised the GPA to modernize certain aspects of its rules and to expand its scope.
 
The GPA is a “plurilateral” agreement, meaning that the market access concessions are only granted to suppliers in those countries that have acceded to the agreement.
 
There are 43 parties to the GPA, including: Armenia; Canada; the European Union, with its 28 member states; Hong Kong; Iceland; Israel; Japan; Korea; Liechtenstein; the Netherlands with respect to Aruba; Norway; Singapore; Switzerland; Taiwan and the U.S.
 
Ukraine is among 10 WTO members negotiating accession to the GPA. Those members also seeking accession are Albania, China, Georgia, Jordan, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Montenegro, New Zealand and Oman.
 
 
China's high agricultural stockpiles complicate reform efforts 
Lucy Hornby 
3 February 2015
Financial Times (FT.Com)
 
Chinese stockpiles of agricultural commodities have hit historically high levels, according to the country's most senior agricultural adviser. He said the stockpiles were complicating efforts to phase out state buying policy without causing a steep fall in prices.

Government buying of cotton, wheat, corn, soya, sugar and rice at above market prices has encouraged Chinese farmers to grow strategic crops. But this has led to bloated warehouses, smuggling and an increase in cheaper imports from overseas producers.

This has led to the ballooning of Chinese stockpiles. For example, China has amassed 60 per cent of the world's cotton stocks, prompting an announcement by Beijing last year that it would release its cotton holdings.

The bigger Chinese stockpiles grow, the harder it is for Beijing to extricate itself without dumping the glut into the market. The move will reverberate into the international markets as China has become a large buyer of agricultural commodities.

Chinese policy makers fear that releasing its inventories would depress prices and push farmers towards more lucrative cash crops, ultimately increasing China's reliance on imports.

China's grain harvest has risen every year for more than a decade, as high prices encouraged farmers to grow strategic crops. However, costs have remained high and the agricultural sector is uncompetitive compared with other countries.

"Since last year we haven't raised the minimum price [for wheat and rice]: that sends a signal to the farmers," said Chen Xiwen, director of the office of the central rural work leading group, at his annual press conference to explain rural policies for the year.

By capping the state-set minimum purchase price as costs continue to rise, the government hopes that it will come into line with market prices, Mr Chen said. He noted, however, that the steep drop in oil prices means growers should still have comfortable margins this year. "We just want it to stabilise, that's all."

A pilot policy to replace minimum prices with direct payments to cotton and soyabean growers who would then sell at market prices is still being evaluated, Mr Chen said. Depending on its success, the decision can then be made whether it can be extended to other crops.

Beijing currently makes payments of roughly Rmb600/tonne ($96) to cotton farmers in ethnically divided Xinjiang, where much of the crop is produced by the Xinjiang Production and Construction Corps, a paramilitary group of Han Chinese settlers along the Central Asian border. Cotton farmers in central China get less. The amount is supposed to "close the gap" between market prices of about Rmb13,600/tonne and the state purchase price of Rmb9,800/tonne.

The government has also asked cotton growers to reduce acreage this year to help alleviate the surplus, Mr Chen said.

Among the inadvertent consequences of the guaranteed prices paid by the state reserves system is that traders, including state-owned firms, can import rice and other commodities bought at lower prices overseas and then use the imports as collateral for other loans, which can then be ploughed into China's shadow banking sector.

 
Indonesian government proposes jump in biodiesel subsidies 
 
JAKARTA, Feb 3 (Reuters) - Indonesia's government plans to introduce a more than threefold increase in its biodiesel subsidies, an energy ministry official said on Tuesday, a move aimed at protecting Indonesia's fledgling biofuel industry against lower crude prices.

An increase in subsidies could potentially boost demand for palm oil, although the government plan still has to get parliamentary backing before becoming law.

If passed, such a law would be a timely fillip for crude palm oil prices that have lost more than a quarter from their 2014 peak in March last year.

Southeast Asia's biggest economy and the top producer of tropical palm oil introduced an ambitious regulation in August 2013 to boost the use of palm-based biodiesel and cut its oil import bill.

Logistical and infrastructure problems have hindered the implementation of the regulation, and global crude oil prices that have tumbled up to 60 percent since last June are a further impediment to biofuel development.

President Joko Widodo's government has proposed an increase of the biodiesel subsidy to 5,000 rupiah (40 U.S. cents) per litre, from 1,500 rupiah per litre presently, said Dadan Kusdiana, director of bioenergy at the Energy and Mineral Resources Ministry.

"We give biodiesel subsidies to show government support for the development of renewable energy," Kusdiana said. "We expect consumption of renewable energy to increase."

On Jan. 1, Widodo's government stopped subsidising gasoline prices altogether and moved to setting prices according to global oil markets - creating a fiscal windfall for social services and infrastructure projects.

Indonesia's biodiesel demand was about 1.7 million tonnes last year and that's set to climb to 2.8 million tonnes in 2015, according to industry estimates.

A recovery in palm oil futures this year will hinge on Indonesia's biodiesel mandate, leading vegetable oil analyst Dorab Mistry said late in 2014.
 
 
Egypt's cotton growers hanging by a thread after subsidy withdrawal; Farming 
By Heba Saleh in Cairo 
4 February 2015
Financial Times
 
A byword for luxury, Egyptian cotton is famed the world over. In Egypt itself, the so-called "white gold" has been celebrated in songs and films, funded family weddings and allowed the settling of debts in the fertile Nile Delta.

But the former mainstay of Egypt's economy, and the source of many a trader's fortune, has been declining for years owing to changing government policy, a shrinking domestic market and the vagaries of international cotton prices.

Now a decision by the Egyptian government to end a subsidy to cotton growers introduced only last year has angered farmers and prompted warnings they may stop growing the crop.

"After the statement by the minister [last month], farmers will choose to plant anything else," said Mohamed Farag, who heads the Independent Farmers Union. "I think there will be less cotton planted and the price will go up next season."

The subsidy was worth about $200 per feddan, an area slightly larger than an acre, and the government hopes its abolition will encourage farmers not to grow the crop unless they have a contract for it. But for Egypt's poorly-organised farmers, who have little negotiating power, the subsidy was a valuable incentive to grow cotton.

Egyptian cotton is rivalled only by American Pima. It is marked by its long and extra-long staples or fibres that can be spun into fine yarns and used to weave luxury fabrics.

The US and Egypt dominate the niche market for superior cottons, each with a market share of 40 per cent. Superior varieties account for 90 per cent of the cotton grown in Egypt. The remaining 10 per cent is medium staple.

Even before the subsidy was abolished, production and exports were falling. According to US Department of Agriculture figures, Egypt exported 221,000 tonnes of cotton in 2006. Last year exports were only 50,000 tonnes, according to Mefreh al Beltagui, head of Alcotexa, the exporters' association. About 50 per cent of Egypt's crop is exported, with the remainder used in domestic production.

"The area under cultivation is shrinking because the crop is less profitable to farmers than alternatives," said Mr al Beltagui. "All cotton-producing countries, even the US, operate some form of subsid y."

Domestic demand for high-end Egyptian cotton is low, said Adel El-Beltagy, agriculture minister, as he announced the end of the subsidy. The local textile industry relies on imports of cheaper short and medium staple varieties, which are more suited to the production of T-shirts and denim that form the bulk of Egypt's garment output.

A surplus of high-end cotton in 2013 meant that last year the government also had to subsidise spinning and weaving companies - many of them cash-strapped public-sector buyers - in order to offload unsold stocks. According to farmers and exporters, last year's surplus was because foreign buyers rejected some of the harvest as it had been mixed with lower-grade varieties.

But the government insists that subsidies are not the way forward for growers, and that they should instead negotiate prices in advance with buyers.

"The shape of the industry has changed," said Ali Ismail, an agriculture ministry official. "Those who want cotton for export should pay a decent price for it. We have 260 companies that work in cotton, and when the crops come out they put pressure on farmers [to depress the price]. We want them to agree with the growers in advance."

But Mr Beltagui, of the exporters' association, said it was impossible for his members to offer farmers an agreed price in advance because there is no futures market in long-staple cotton.

"It could prove damaging to the farmer or the seller," he said. "If the market price ends up being higher than that agreed, the farmer will pull out from the sale, if it is lower, the buyer will disappear."

He wants the government to offer farmers a subsidy if prices fall below an agreed threshold.

Experts argue that the crop's domestic woes should not detract from the fact that high-quality cotton still has an international market. "I think there will always be room for Egyptian cotton imports, even in China and India, which are also cotton-exporting countries," said Andrei Guitchounts, director of trade analysis at the International Cotton Advisory Committee, a US-based association.

"If Egyptian production doubles, it will still be possible for the international market to absorb it," he said.

 
Subsidies, Countervailing Measures Panel to Meet
WTO Reporter, February 4, 2015

Feb. 3 — The World Trade Organization's Committee on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures scheduled its next meeting for April 27.
 
When the committee met in October, U.S. officials said they were concerned India hadn't met a requirement to phase out its export subsidies for domestic textile and apparel producers.
 
U.S. officials also said they were concerned China had failed to properly report the extent of its subsidies and questioned Canada's alleged subsidization of a cement facility.
 
Other countries criticized the U.S. for its countervailing subsidy rates and domestic renewable energy subsidies programs.
 
 
ATMA urges govt to raise import duty on tyre to 20% 
George Joseph 
3 February 2015
Business Standard
 
Tyre industry has urged the government to increase the customs duty on Tyres from basic rate of 10 per cent at present to 20 per cent and putting imports of tyres under negative list in all trade agreements.

The industry has asked for increasing import duties on tyres to bring them at a par with natural rubber, the principal raw material so as to provide a level-playing field to the domestic manufacturing.

In its pre-budget submission, Automotive Tyre Manufacturers' Association (ATMA) has stated that the import duty on natural rubber (NR) currently is 20 per cent while tyres can be imported at a rate of 5 per cent or even nil rate of duty under various Trade Agreements. It said that under SAFTA, tyres can be brought in at 5 per cent duty from Pakistan and Sri Lanka. For other SAFTA countries there is nil duty.

"For successful implementation of Make in India campaign and to promote domestic manufacturing, it is important that import of finished products attract duties at least as much, if not more, than what is levied on raw materials", said Dr Raghupati Singhania, Chairman, ATMA.

Although tyres can be imported into India at preferential/ concessional duties under various trade agreements, the corresponding concessional duties for NR do not exist since NR falls in the negative list across most trade agreements. Tyre is perhaps the only finished product on which 'duty inversion' not only continues but has actually aggravated in recent years. This needs to be addressed and corrected on priority, states ATMA.

In line with the capacity creation in the auto sector, the tyre sector has added/expanded capacity pan India. Recent investments by Tyre Industry have been to the tune of over Rs. 26,000 crore in green field projects as also major expansions.

However, low import tariffs in India have encouraged large and growing volume of tyre imports, despite adequate domestic capacity already in place. For instance, in case of Truck & Bus radial tyres (TBR), for which new capacities have come up, imported tyres have come to account for an estimated 20 per cent of the total domestic market. Quoting data from International Trade Advisory Services (ITAS), ATMA states more than 60 per cent of TBR import is taking place from China at an average unit value of $106 which is lower than raw material price. This is causing huge injury to the domestic tyre manufacturers.

Hence, based on compelling need and circumstances, the Government of India can increase the customs duty on tyres without any corresponding action / explanation to WTO.

Further, ATMA has stated that duties on raw materials where domestic production falls short of domestic consumption need to be reduced as imports are inevitable to meet the domestic industry's requirements. Domestic production of important raw materials such as Nylon Tyre Cord Fabric, Rubber Chemicals, Steel Tyre Cord, Polyester Tyre Cord and Polybutadine Rubber (PBR) falls short of domestic consumption by 46%, 27%, 55%, 66% and 49% respectively.

Similarly, Butyl Rubber, EPDM and Styrene Butadiene Rubber (Tyre Grades) have no domestic production and imports are the only source. ATMA has asked for full exemption from customs duty on these raw materials. Hefty import duties on raw materials where India has a shortfall in production or have no domestic production at all are affecting the cost competitiveness of Indian industry, states ATMA.
 
 
Japan TPP negotiator: Not ready for Japan-U.S. ministerial trade talks 
 
Feb. 4 (Reuters) - Japan's deputy chief trade negotiator, Hiroshi Oe, said there had been some progress in two-way trade talks with the United States but the timing was not yet right for a ministerial-level meeting. 
 
He made the comment in Washington D.C. on Tuesday after talks with counterpart Wendy Cutler, acting deputy U.S. trade representative, and chief agricultural negotiator Darci Vetter. 
 
Japan and the U.S are working on two-way trade deal, which is a key part of the broader 12-nation Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP). 
 
"There was a certain amount of progress but there are issues that remain to be worked on at official level," Oe said. 
 
"We acknowledge market access talks between Japan and the U.S. need to be closed before the overall TPP ministerial meeting...but we need, at least, another set of official-level talks as the next step." 
 
Oe said he did not know whether ministerial talks between the two nations could be held this month because such a meeting would need preparatory work by officials to be complete. 
 
U.S. negotiators are hoping to complete work on the TPP within months and lawmakers expect soon to consider legislation to streamline the passage of TPP deals through Congress. 
 
 
Obama tells Democrats no currency in TPP
By Doug Palmer | 2/2/15 6:22 PM EST
POLITICO
President Barack Obama told lawmakers at the House Democrats’ retreat in Philadelphia last week not to expect rules against currency manipulation in a massive Asia-Pacific free trade agreement, two sources familiar with the discussion have told POLITICO.
Obama raised the issue without prompting, one of the sources said. He told members it was not possible to address currency concerns in the Trans-Pacific Partnership agreement, but the administration would continue to use other tools to press countries to move toward market-determined exchange rates.
The president’s statement came just a few days after U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman acknowledged to lawmakers that the United States has not pressed for currency provisions in the 12-country TPP pact despite widespread support in Congress for such a provision.
At back-to-back hearings with the Senate Finance and House Ways and Means committees, Froman outlined steps the administration has taken to push China and other countries on the currency issue but referred additional questions to U.S. Treasury Secretary Jack Lew, whose department has jurisdiction over the matter.
Lawmakers will have that chance when Lew testifies before Ways and Means on Tuesday and Finance on Thursday on the administration’s fiscal 2016 budget request.
Reached for comment, a Treasury representative said ensuring that U.S. workers and businesses can compete on a level playing field is a top priority for the administration, and the department is engaging Congress and other interested parties on how best to achieve that policy objective — including in multilateral and bilateral settings.
“We have secured commitments from the G-20 member countries to move more rapidly to a more market-determined exchange rates, avoid persistent exchange rate misalignments, refrain from competitive exchange rate devaluations, and not target exchange rates for competitive purposes,” the representative said. “The Treasury Department remains focused on making more progress.”
A White House spokesperson emphasized Obama’s personal attention to the issue over the years and his interest in working with Congress on their concerns.
“The President has long shared the concerns of many members of Congress about currency or foreign exchange misalignment,” the spokesperson said. “He has made clear that it is inappropriate for any country to try and grow its exports based on a persistently undervalued exchange rate and his Administration is working to address the issue directly with our international partners in bilateral and multilateral settings.
“As discussion continues on Capitol Hill regarding trade legislation, the President has directed the Treasury Department to engage with Congress on the most effective tools to address unfair currency practices.”
In 2013, 60 senators and 230 House members signed letters urging Obama to include strong and enforceable disciplines against currency manipulation in future trade agreements, including the TPP. Without such rules, countries could drive down the value of the currency to give their export companies an unfair price advantage and to protect their domestic producers by increasing the cost of imports, the lawmakers said.
The White House did not respond to a request for comment on Obama’s remarks. But in his testimony to Congress last week, Froman said it has been “a top priority” of Obama and the administration to prod other countries, particularly China, toward market-determined exchange rates.
As a result of that pressure, Froman said the Chinese yuan has risen about 15 percent in real terms against the dollar since June 2010.
“That’s not fast enough, not far enough,” Froman said. “We keep on pushing toward a full market-determined exchange rate, but we are making progress.”
The administration’s reluctance to address currency in TPP comes as it is trying to bring those talks to a close after nearly five years of negotiations. It also wants lawmakers to approve legislation known as trade promotion authority, which would allow the White House to submit trade deals to Congress for straight up-or-down votes without any amendments.
Rep. Dan Kildee (D-Mich.) said it was hard for him to understand why the administration thinks it is too complicated to include currency in the pact. Detroit-based automakers have been among the most vocal in pushing for a currency provision as one way of keeping auto imports from Japan in check.
“This is going to be a complicated agreement,” said Kildee, whose district includes the birthplace of General Motors in Flint, Michigan. “It’s not like the other areas are uncomplicated. It’s very complicated, especially when you have the number of states that are included in the negotiation. It’s complex by definition.”
Kildee conceded that he was likely to vote against TPA, but said he was still hoping to improve the Asia-Pacific trade pact by keeping pressure on the administration to address currency concerns.
“Currency is a particular challenge in the auto sector,” Kildee said. “So for those of us who have significant problems with both process and the substance [of TPP], we still want to make the agreement better if we can. So we still have an obligation to stay involved on all the issues.”
Meanwhile, proponents of including a currency provision in TPP are driving home their point by dredging up statements Obama made on currency manipulation when he was in the Senate.
In a letter to then-U.S. Treasury Secretary Hank Paulson in June 2007, Obama faulted the Bush administration for failing to label China a “currency manipulator” in a semi-annual report on foreign currency practices.
The Obama administration in its six years in office has also declined to label China a currency manipulator in the report, which is due to be released again on April 15.
However, Obama’s letter to Paulson still resonates because of a point that he made about trade promotion authority, which back then was set to expire in just a few weeks.
“The administration’s refusal to take strong action against China’s currency manipulation will also make it more difficult to obtain congressional approval for renewed trade promotion authority, as well as additional trade agreements,” Obama said. “Treasury’s refusal even to acknowledge the costs of Chinese currency manipulation justifies the fear of many Americans that this administration lacks the will to stand up against trade abuses and labor or environmental violations that create an unfair playing field for American workers.”
A number of lawmakers in both the House and the Senate have been working on currency legislation that could be incorporated into a broader TPA bill. In recent years, both chambers have passed bills that would allow the Commerce Department to slap duties on goods from countries with undervalued currencies, but none of those measures ever reached all the way to Obama’s desk to be signed into law.
The TPA bill being negotiated by leaders of the Senate Finance and House Ways and Means committees is already expected to include a negotiating objective on currency, based on an earlier version of the legislation that was unveiled last year.
In making the case for TPA, Froman has argued the bill’s negotiating objectives are how Congress gives the administration its “marching orders.” But on currency, it seems like the administration and Congress could be marching to the beat of different drummers.
 
 
Trade: Vietnam Not to Hesitate to Open Market as Commitment to AEC: Minister 
4 February 2015
Vietnam News Brief Service
 
Vietnam will not hesitate to open domestic market for member of the 10 ASEAN member countries when the ASEAN Economic Community (AEC) is formed by the end of this year, said Minister of Industry and Trade Vu Huy Hoang.

Opening domestic market is a principle of reciprocity. The principle is created based on the fact that two or more sides involved are trying to get the core benefits of trade in goods.

If Vietnam increases exports to a given market, it must also have an open door policy for commodities of other countries, the minister made the speech at a Q&A session on Feb 1.

Therefore, Vietnam asked trading partners to open up their markets for Vietnamese products while negotiating on free trade agreements. In contrast, Vietnam also pledged to open its market for export items of these countries.

However, Vietnam has always had a clear roadmap, especially in terms of sensitive goods of which domestic production capacity is limited.

For instant, Vietnam has made possible the application of tariff quotas without causing a negative impact on domestic production, while keeping up with WTO commitments, he added.

Commenting on the risk facing Vietnamese goods when the AEC is established, as thousands of imported items enjoying tax reductions may enter Vietnam following the establishments of foreign-owned retail facilities, the minister said that Vietnam will open its market gradually and cautiously.

Besides, for each commodity, Vietnam has a different degree of opening. Therefore, if we take prudent steps, Vietnamese firms should not be afraid of the establishment of the AEC, the minister stressed.
 
 
Interview
‘Decades of Swiss banking secrecy have left their mark’
By Samuel Jaberg
Swissinfo.ch
Feb 3, 2015 - 17:00
 
Switzerland, along with around 100 other countries, will put an end to its treasured practice of banking secrecy when the treaty on automatic exchange of information between tax authorities comes into force in 2018. 
 
The country is hoping that being proactive in the implementation of the new rules will both shield it from new attacks and enable it to help shape the laws into something it finds palatable. 
 
But decades of shady banking practices and the country’s initial reluctance to end banking secrecy after the 2009 financial crisis have left their mark on the country’s reputation. It is not always easy to convince others of Switzerland’s good intentions, says Jacques de Watteville, State Secretary for International Financial Matters, and the man in charge of Swiss efforts in the area. 
 
swissinfo.ch: Switzerland has always been protective of its banking secrecy and only reluctantly changed its stance at the last moment. In the context of the automatic exchange of information, the country is now actively collaborating in framing these rules. What has it obtained in exchange? 
 
Jacques de Watteville: All the criteria Switzerland fought for were accepted and included in the new rules which around 100 countries have agreed to adopt. The automatic exchange of information should apply to everyone in the same manner on the basis of reciprocity. Information can only be exchanged for clearly defined purposes and will be subject to data protection. Finally, transparency will apply equally to trusts and other legal entities. 
 
Another important element is that all the main financial centres have agreed to put the automatic exchange of information into practice. So, we can now fight on equal terms with Luxembourg, Austria, Singapore, Hong Kong or Jersey. The list of “non-cooperative” countries is being considerably reduced. There are still a few shady areas, but they will not be able to resist the current developments. 
 
swissinfo.ch: The automatic exchange of information seemed unthinkable two years ago. Have you been surprised by these developments? 
 
J.d-W.: Everybody has been surprised by the speed of these changes. Two years ago nobody thought we would be here today, including those in the OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). There has been very strong momentum in favour of this major development. 
 
The crisis of 2009 reinforced international cooperation in fighting tax evasion and marked a real turning point. 
 
That year, Switzerland first decided to provide administrative assistance - not only in cases of fraud but also for tax evasion - and then we developed a strategy designed to ensure Swiss banks only held declared funds. Following that, rejection by the German parliament of the ‘Rubik’ accord on taxation between Switzerland and Germany coincided with the international push for the automatic exchange of information. 
 
To avoid being marginalised and subjected to increased pressure, and to maintain our competitiveness, we had to take on these measures at the same time as the others. But the attitude of the Swiss banks was also decisive. Whereas previously they had done everything to stop it, they subsequently came out in favour of the automatic exchange of information and invested a lot of resources in lobbying for it. 
 
swissinfo.ch: The government seems set on the path of automatic exchange, but in the event of a referendum are the parliament and the people ready to completely abandon banking secrecy for foreign clients of Swiss banks? 
 
J.d-W.: The debate will be intense but most of the political players have accepted the issues and the international developments underway. Within the population, a concerted effort at communication is needed. The automatic exchange of information allows for more transparency and equality in taxation matters. It reduces the possibilities of fraud, something which is in the interests of all honest taxpayers in this country. 
 
swissinfo.ch: The automatic exchange of information is a model for the future but it does not resolve the problems of the past, such as the legalisation of undeclared funds parked in Swiss banks. There are still a lot of unanswered questions. 
 
J.d-W.: There is a mutual interest in resolving this problem. For example, we have reached an agreement with Italy, which wants to avoid a massive exodus of taxable capital. It has offered citizens with undeclared funds in Switzerland an attractive solution to regularise their affairs before the automatic exchange of information comes into force. 
 
Our banks also have an interest in finding a solution which will allow them to continue to manage these funds. Significant progress has been achieved with regard to other neighbouring countries. Most of the German funds in Switzerland have already been regularised, as has a good portion of French funds. 
 
swissinfo.ch: Several countries have attacked Swiss banks, forcing them to pay huge fines, in addition to legal and administrative fees. Is Switzerland not paying a heavy price for its staunch defence of banking secrecy and its belated commitment to international norms? 
 
J.d-W.: It’s not only Switzerland’s slow pace in adapting to international norms that is to blame, but also the attitude of certain banks which continued to help American clients avoid their fiscal obligations even when they knew it was illegal. These banks bear a heavy responsibility for what happened next. 
 
swissinfo.ch: In February, the OECD Global Forum will assess Switzerland’s readiness to move on to the second phase of evaluation. Do you think it will meet with a favourable response? 
 
J.d-W.: We have put a lot of effort into making sure the results of this evaluation will be positive. In our view, the efforts we have made justify our promotion from phase one to phase two. But the decades of Swiss banking secrecy have left their mark. Some countries question whether Switzerland is really sincere. It’s up to us to vanquish these doubts and demonstrate that our actions are serious. 
 
Automatic exchange of information, how does it work? 
 
According to the system designed by the OECD, banks will collect data on their clients and transfer it to their national taxation authorities, which then forward it in encrypted form to the authorities in the respective countries. The name, address, account number and balance will be divulged, as well as interest payments, dividends and the purchase and sale of securities. 
 
The rules apply to private citizens as well as businesses, including the beneficiaries of trusts or foundations. The automatic exchange of information concerns banks, but also negotiators, investment funds and assurers. It applies only to financial data. Elements of fortunes such as works of art or real estate are not covered.
END


  ________________________________  
Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.