APEC members ready to reach progress at WTO ministerial conference - Russian Ministry of Economic Development
Trade ministers to meet next month in Paris on WTO
Tanzania, Kenya enter WTO deal
TRADE: Round table on environmental goods
S. Korea, Japan discuss fisheries import ban issue
Russia to be guided by national interests in deciding on whether to lift food embargo - Medvedev 
Solarworld wants duties on Chinese solar goods in U.S. extended - magazine
Chinese dominance worries Nigeria's textile traders
Between a rock and hard place after collapse of trade talks
 
APEC members ready to reach progress at WTO ministerial conference - Russian Ministry of Economic Development
BORACAY / PHILIPPINES., May 24 /TASS/. Participants in the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation Forum /APEC/ have confirmed their desire to reach maximum progress by the World Trade Organization's ministerial conference to be held in Nairobi in December, Russian Deputy Minister for Economic Development told TASS on Sunday after a meeting of APEC ministers of trade and economy.
They discussed ways of strengthening a multilateral system. "All the participants confirmed readiness to achieve tangible results, the deputy minister stressed. He noted that Russia was interested in this process because "it would mean better rules of trade and conditions of access to foreign markets and decreasing trade barriers."
The two-day meeting of the trade ministers of APEC member states is wrapping up on the Boracay resort island on Sunday.
The Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation Forum /APEC/ unites 21 global economies, including Russia, Australia, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Canada, China, the United States, Malaysia, the Republic of Korea, Singapore and Japan. The APEC countries account for 57% of world GDP; 48% of world trade volumes; over 40% of direct foreign investments and for over 40% of global population.
 
Trade ministers to meet next month in Paris on WTO
New Delhi, May 24 (PTI) A crucial meeting of trade ministers of key WTO member countries including India and the US will take place in Paris next month to discuss the pending issues of the Doha Round and finalise the agenda for the Nairobi ministerial meeting in December.
It will be held on the sidelines of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development meeting in Paris on June 4 or 5, said a senior official at the Commerce Ministry.
India has recently expressed concern over slow progress in finalising the agenda for the Nairobi ministerial meeting of WTO members to resolve the pending issues of the Doha Round.
Trade ministers of about 15 countries including India, the US, EU, Australia, Brazil, South Africa and China are expected to attend this crucial meeting. WTO Director General Roberto Azevedo will also participate in the deliberations.
India will present its views on bringing back issues related to the long-stalled Doha Round including agriculture (export subsidies, cotton and fishery subsidies), market access and services, the official said.
The ministers will finalise the agenda for the Ministerial Conference, which is the highest decision making body of the World Trade Organisation (WTO), scheduled from December 15-18 in Nairobi, Kenya.
The Doha Round of negotiations launched in 2001 have remained stalled since July 2008 due to differences between the rich and the developing nations mainly over the subsidies given to farmers.
As per estimates, successful conclusion of the Doha Round could boost global trade by up to USD 200 billion a year.
Besides attending the WTO deliberations, Commerce and Industry Minister Nirmala Sitharaman would meet European Union Trade commissioner Cecilia Malmström on June 4.
Both the leaders will discuss trade related matters including the proposed free trade agreement.
"EU is expected to talk about resumption of the Broad- based Trade and Investment Agreement (BTIA). India may invite them for the talks," the official added.
In May 2013, India and the 28-nation bloc had failed to bridge differences over critical differences including data security and visa liberalisation related matters. After that, no formal round of talks have been held.
India and the EU are negotiating BTIA that will include trade in goods, services and investments since June 2007. Commerce between the two sides was USD 101.5 billion in 2013-14. PTI RR SA MKJ
 
Tanzania, Kenya enter WTO deal
CHRISTABEL LIGAMI, TEA Special Correspondent
23 May 2015
The East African
Kenya and Tanzania have now joined Rwanda and nine other African countries committed to implementation of the World Trade Organisation Trade Facilitation Agreement (WTO TFA) by submitting their Category A notifications.
The other countries are Botswana, Cote d'Ivoire, Egypt, Gabon, Morocco, Nigeria, Republic of Congo, Senegal and Tunisia.
The trade agreement is expected to enter into force by the WTO's 10th Ministerial Conference in Nairobi this December.
Full implementation of the TFA would reduce trade costs by up to 15 per cent, directly benefiting small and medium-sized farmers and exporters.
According to EAC Director General for Customs & Trade Peter Kiguta, the trade deal will see East African partner states get access to a bigger market for their products.
 "It will be an improvement on the existing international trade deals for duty-free access for goods sold by the East African partner states," said Mr Kiguta.
The deal also seeks further reductions in farm subsidies, tariffs on industrial goods and barriers to international trade in services and more.
The agreement will cut barriers to global supply chains and red tape by half, and expand the world economy by 4.5 per cent ($1 trillion), according to the WTO.
 "The TFA sets out binding obligations for all WTO members to improve and harmonise their import-export and Customs procedures," said Mr Kiguta.
Andrew Luzze, East African Business Council executive director, however said that developed economies like the US will not reduce their huge financial support to farmers and agribusiness companies.
 "The European Union, too, has got a waiver. It does not need to make any cut in agricultural subsidies from the existing level. Nor will the export subsidies be removed for another 10 years or so," said Mr Luzze.
The WTO trade agreement was concluded in 2013 at the Bali Ministerial Conference. It contains provisions for expediting the movement, release and clearance of goods, including goods in transit.
It also sets out measures for effective co-operation between Customs and other appropriate authorities on trade facilitation and customs compliance issues. It further contains provisions for technical assistance and capacity building in this area.
The agreement is in three categories: Category A is for those that could be implemented readily and immediately upon the TFA coming into force; Category B obligations require a transitional period; and, Category C require a transitional period as well as technical assistance.
However the TFA will only come into effect once two-thirds of the 159 member states have ratified.
So far only China, Korea, Russia, Mauritius and the US have ratified the protocol.
The agreement creates a binding commitment across the 159 member countries to expedite movement, the release and clearance of goods.
Under this last category, an innovative mechanism ensures that assistance arrangements be notified by donor countries before LDCs would be obligated to notify their definitive implementation date, therefore linking implementation obligations to the provision of technical assistance and capacity building.
However the TFA will only come into effect once two-thirds of the 159 member states have ratified.
So far only China, Korea, Russia, Mauritius and the US have ratified the protocol.
As per the WTO practices to which the EAC adopt, developing countries and LDCs are allowed to self-define their implementation period within three categories of implementation modalities.
The WTO trade facilitation agreement creates a binding commitment across the 159 member countries to expedite movement, the release and clearance of goods.
Uganda, Ghana and Zambia will submit their notification soon.
 
TRADE: Round table on environmental goods
Brussels, 22/05/2015 (Agence Europe) - The European Commission Directorate General for Trade will hold a round table debate in Brussels on Wednesday 3 June on the on-going plurilateral negotiations on agreement on liberalising trade in environmental goods and services (green goods initiative).
NGOs, consumer associations, trade unions, professional organisations, industry and business associations, regional and local authorities, the European Parliament and EU member states have been invited to attend. Trade Commissioner Cecilia Malmström and her colleague at Energy and Climate Miguel Arias Canete, French Foreign Trade Minister Matthias Fekl, Costa Rican Ambassador to the EU Istvan Alfaro Solano are among the distinguished guests alongside the high-ranking experts from the trade, environment and sustainable development departments within DG Trade, the WTO, and representatives of key countries in the negotiations, including Denmark and China.
The Commission's stated aim is to foster substantial progress in the negotiations ahead of December's UN climate conference in Paris and the 10th WTO ministerial conference in Nairobi.
Negotiations on liberalising trade in environmental goods and services moved into their second phase at the 6th round of talks in Geneva from 4 to 8 May, with the finalisation of the list of environmental goods to be included in the agreement. A list of nominated environmental goods products falling into ten categories was drafted in the first five rounds of negotiations. Talks are focusing on products, services and technologies which contribute to green growth, protection of the environment, climate action and sustainable development, such as products and technologies for the generation of renewable energy, water treatment, waste management, monitoring air pollution et al. Negotiators want to be sure that the list of products enjoying duty-free access is easy to implement by customs officials and industry.
Following a commitment by the APEC, the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum, 2012 to reduce customs duties on 54 environmental goods, the EU and 13 other WTO countries (Australia, Canada, China, Cost Rica, Hong Kong, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Singapore, South Korea, Switzerland, Taiwan and the US) launched this initiative in July 2014. The negotiations focus first on goods, but the objective is to create a "living agreement", which will evolve according to future needs and, in the long term, to tackle other obstacles to trade in environmental goods and services, such as non-tariff barriers, local content requirements and investment restrictions.
For the moment, around 40 WTO members have chosen to take part in the talks. However, once a critical mass of WTO country members is reached for obtaining an agreement, the advantages of this plurilateral initiative will be applied to all WTO members according to the most favoured nation principle. Ideally, the agreement will be part of the package of WTO agreements so that other members of the organisation might open up their own markets. (Emmanuel Hagry)
 
S. Korea, Japan discuss fisheries import ban issue
SEJONG, May 24 (Yonhap) -- Trade ministers from South Korea and Japan have discussed the recent move by Tokyo to take the Seoul's fisheries ban issue to the World Trade Organization (WTO), the government said Sunday.
Minister of Trade, Industry and Energy Yoon Sang-jick met with his Japanese counterpart Yoichi Miyazawa on Saturday to bring up the issue on the sidelines of the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation meeting in Boracay, the Philippines, the ministry said.
"Minister Yoon expressed regret over Japan's action," the ministry said. "He also called on Tokyo to lift restrictions regarding the transportation of live flounder in Japan."
The talks come days after Japan said South Korea's ban on importing fish from eight prefectures near Fukushima violates global trade rules.
The ban has been in effect since September 2011 when it was announced that the Fukushima nuclear power plant, which was crippled by a massive earthquake and tsunami, dumped large quantities of radioactive materials into the ocean.
The disaster has been regarded as the worst nuclear incident in history along with the Chernobyl nuclear plant catastrophe of 1986.
The trade ministry, meanwhile, said the bilateral meeting marks the first time in 25 months that trade ministers from the two countries have met formally.
Ministerial level talks occurred regularly in the past, before the fraying of relations triggered by Japan's move to deny its colonial and wartime atrocities put an end to most official discussions.
 
Russia to be guided by national interests in deciding on whether to lift food embargo - Medvedev 
MOSCOW. May 23 (Interfax) - Russia is so far not planning to lift the food embargo it imposed on a number of Western countries in August 2014, and although it will be lifted sooner or later, the government will be guided by national interests in making decisions on the matter, says Russian Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev.
"Naturally, we are oriented toward our relations with a particular state. But this doesn't mean that we can decide now that, for instance, imports from one state be allowed, while imports from another be banned," Medvedev said in an interview in an analytical program hosted by Sergei Brilyov, shown on Rossiya-1 television channel on Saturday.
"We will make these decisions proceeding from our national interests, if you forgive me this pompous phrase," he said.
The prime minister pointed out that Russia had been prompted to impose the embargo because of certain steps by its trade partners.
"It were not we who started this, so to speak. Therefore, it's necessary to see what decisions they make. And then we will decide in August - because these restrictive countermeasures have been imposed for one year - whether to keep them in place, or change something partially, or lift them altogether," Medvedev said.
"It would be much easier and at the same time more useful" to think about setting up joint ventures with states "with which we perhaps do have closer and warmer relations now," he said.
"This is what would be absolutely right to do - [to set up] production facilities on Russian territory where our partners could ship their products so that they should be processed on Russian territory," Medvedev said.
While Russia's relationship with the EU countries and the European Commission is not the best now, the European Union is an important partner for Russia, Medvedev said. "Our trade turnover is virtually $400 billion. This is our trade partner number one, even amid sanctions," he said.
"Second, there are WTO rules, and we are following them, including in introducing restrictive countermeasures," he said.
Over the time the embargo has remained in effect, Russia "has managed to bolster our domestic potential quite significantly," he said.
"This very import substitution which people like to talk about so much, it has really taken shape," he said.
A lot of agrarians are taking up loans, despite high interest rates, expecting to be able to sell their products inside the country and expecting that "their products would not be ousted by cheap and low-quality imports," he said.
"And I believe in this respect that, even in case these restrictive measures are lifted - and it's understandable that this will be done sooner or later - we would be unable to and should not return to what had been before they were imposed," he said.
 
Solarworld wants duties on Chinese solar goods in U.S. extended - magazine
FRANKFURT, May 23 (Reuters) - German solar manufacturer SolarWorld will apply to the United States for an extension of duties on Chinese panel imports that are due to end this year, weekly Euro am Sonntag said.
Chief Executive Frank Asbeck justified his intention by saying Chinese panel makers would still receive unfair state subsidies, according to the magazine.
It was based on this reasoning that the German solar energy pioneer succeeded in getting the duties imposed in the first place.
Solarworld plans to sell more than 60 percent of its panels in the United States this year, compared with 41 percent in 2014.
Solarworld, which was on the brink of insolvency two years ago, by now says it has a 10 percent share in what is the world's third-biggest solar market after China and Japan, a fact that could help it this year to post its first operating profit since 2011.
The United States could install up to 20 gigawatts (GW) of solar capacity over the next two years, about a fifth of the total global market, according to estimates from industry association SEIA and GTM Research, compared with about 7 GW in 2014. (Reporting by Kirsti Knolle; Editing by Alison Williams)
 
Chinese dominance worries Nigeria's textile traders
Aminu ABUBAKAR
24 May 2015
Agence France Presse
Nafiu Badaru, a junior civil servant in northern Nigeria's biggest city Kano, doesn't make much money and it takes some cash to look good so he tends to buy made-in-China fabric.
"A piece of high-quality brocade (cloth) costs around 10,000 naira ($50, 47 euros), which is way too expensive for me," he told AFP.
"With the same amount of money I can buy six pieces of cheap Chinese brocade which cost only 1,500 naira a piece and still keep some change."
The proliferation of Chinese-made textiles is a boon for consumers like Nafiu, with Kano and the wider north struggling with unemployment and economic constraints.
But traders in the city -- a centre of weaving and textile manufacturing dating back centuries -- say such cheaper imports have been disastrous.
Factories have shut and trade in home-spun fabrics has dwindled, prompting calls for foreign investment within Nigeria rather than cheap, mass importation, as well as better regulation.
Fatuhu Gambo's business is one of many in dire straits. For the past two weeks he has not sold a single fabric in his shop in the Kantin Kwari textile market -- the largest in West Africa.
"The Chinese have effectively edged us out of business, leaving us with nothing but huge debts and heaps of goods in our shops," he said.
Talk in the market -- a colourful rabbit's warren of shops and stalls that draws traders from Nigeria, Niger, Chad, Cameroon to Mali and the Central African Republic -- is of unfair competition.
"The Chinese have taken over the importation and distribution of textiles in Kano and now they are into retail trading, which is putting our traders out of business," said traders' union head Liti Kulkul.
The troubles began a decade ago when Chinese textile merchants started the massive importation of textiles to Nigeria after Africa's most populous nation opened its doors to foreign trade.
The World Trade Organization deal gave the Chinese unfettered access to Nigeria's textile market, although Nigerian laws prohibit foreigners from retail trading.
Traders talk of locals being recruited to conduct business on behalf of the Chinese in return for a cut of the profits.
There have been occasional crackdowns, like in May 2012, when immigration officials arrested and deported 45 Chinese nationals over retail trading after repeated complaints.
Earlier this month, customs officials arrested four Chinese traders for smuggling mass-produced fabrics and sealed 26 warehouses containing goods on which import duties had not been paid.
Hundreds of textile dyers then staged street protests against what they view as a Chinese takeover of their trade that threatens to put 30,000 artisans out of business.
The dyers, many of whom still use methods dating back more than 500 years, accused the Chinese of faking their products and selling inferior cloth at a fraction of the price.
The situation is just one aspect of the struggle facing Nigeria's crude-dependent economy, which has been hit hard by the slump in global oil prices since mid-2014.
There is little domestic manufacturing to speak of, forcing goods from cars to foodstuffs to be imported.
The local Muslim religious leader the Emir of Kano, Muhammadu Sanusi II, met China's ambassador to Nigeria at his palace recently and called on Beijing to set up factories in the country.
"Our over-reliance on foreign products is hurting our economy and the only way to stop this trend is to tackle the problems in the manufacturing sector," said Sanusi, a former central bank governor.
Sa'idu Adhama, a former textile factory owner, said Nigerian traders cannot compete with their Chinese counterparts, who can get bank loans at single digit rates over a longer term.
"The Chinese are here legally, so we can't send them packing but we can regulate their trading," said Adhama, who studied in China in the 1970s.
That could include quotas, stricter enforcement of import regulations, duties and taxes as well as fuel subsidies to boost local manufacturing and help home-grown businesses, he added.
Long-term investment in the power sector to stabilise the currently woeful electricity supply could also revive moribund factories, he said.
In the meantime, the debate is immaterial to people like Badaru, with cheaper foreign imports satisfying demand for a growing consumer society, whether it is clothing or electronics.
"For me and most low-income earners, Chinese textiles are a blessing. They give us the opportunity to appear neat and elegant with little money," he said.
 
Between a rock and hard place after collapse of trade talks
23 May 2015
Saturday Star
THE collapse of the Doha trade negotiations has pitted the US against China in a bid to dictate new global terms of trade, with developing countries like South Africa being caught in the middle.
South Africa's former ambassador to the World Trade Organisation (WTO), Faizel Ismail, told a colloquium on China and Africa relations at the University of Cape Town yesterday there was "a massive global competition for the ability to make new rules in the world trading system".
The rules had been set in 1947 by the victors in World War II, the US and the UK, and much later the EU.
Since the collapse of the Doha round of negotiations towards a new system, the US had begun to "move on its own" - launching direct negotiations with selected countries.
These were contained in the Trans-Atlantic Trade and Partnership Agreement with the EU and Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement with countries like Japan, Mexico and Canada.
"If you like, it's the alliance of the willing," Ismail said, referring to the coalition put together by the US in the first Gulf War.
"It's hoping it can create a whole new set of rules on trade that will include all sorts of disciplines that it will eventually use to reduce China's competitiveness," Ismail said.
"By design, these negotiations are to isolate China.
"We know this from the literature, the statements that have been made, and even today, if you read the press in the US, the Congress people who were discussing this say these other negotiations are to isolate China so they, not China, can create the rules for the next few decades in the world trading system."
For example, the rules set up counter-subsidies for goods from countries, like China, where state-owned enterprises were involved in production.
"Never mind a whole slew of other rules on intellectual property rights, environmental rules and so on."
Professor Lin Jiang, of Lingnan College's department of public finance and administration, said China's response had been its One Belt, One Road strategy for regional integration with Central Asia along the historic Silk Road corridor, stretching into Europe, and with Southeast Asia and East Africa by sea.
Infrastructure projects and financing would form the backbone of this strategy, Lin said. Examples of this strategy were plans for a Chinese-built high-speed railway in India and the reception of Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi by Chinese President Xi Jinping earlier this month.
When China sought entry to the WTO in 2001, it had been willing to play by its rules, but now it wanted to determine its own.
Ismail added that the challenge facing the Brics countries - Brazil, India, China and South Africa - was to "mobilise their own alliance of developing countries, offer an alternative vision about a set of rules for the world trading system which will be superior to the ones offered by the US". They would offer more opportunities for balance, sustainability, and development.
Developing countries had little choice but to work with China to try to establish a fairer trade system.
"The way forward, in my view, is working together with China, building on a value system based on mutual benefit and respect and solidarity, which you don't get in the WTO, where the EU and US tend to dominate," Ismail said.
END




Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.