IMF slashes 2015-2016 world growth forecast
China Economic Growth Is Slowest in Decades
Government may challenge World Trade Organization’s order to lift ban on US poultry imports
WTO membership- a major contributor to exports and economic growth of Vietnam
China 2014 cotton imports hit five-year low
UN warns of growing inequality and joblessness
Swiss franc fallout claims more casualties
 
IMF slashes 2015-2016 world growth forecast 
Paul HANDLEY 
20 January 2015
Agence France Presse
 
The International Monetary Fund on Tuesday sharply cut its 2015-2016 world growth forecast of only six months ago, saying lower oil prices did not offset pervasive weaknesses around the globe.

The IMF said poorer prospects in China, Russia, the euro area and Japan will hold world GDP growth to just 3.5 percent this year and 3.7 percent in 2016.

The forecasts were lower than the 3.8 percent and 4 percent growth for 2015 and 2016 respectively given in the previous World Economic Outlook in October. The cut underscored the steady deterioration of the economic picture for many countries, due to sluggish investment, slowing trade and falling commodity prices.

While the United States will remain the one bright spot among major economies, Europe will continue to struggle with disinflation, the IMF said.

Meanwhile, China's growth -- which Beijing said Tuesday had slowed to 7.4 percent in 2014, its weakest for 24 years -- will decelerate further, hit by poor export growth and a real estate slump, the organization said.

The IMF forecast that the United States, the world's largest economy, will expand by 3.6 percent this year, up a half-percentage point from the previous outlook.

But the economy of China, the global number two, is expected to grow 6.8 percent this year, the IMF said -- 0.3 percent slower than previously expected -- and 6.3 percent in 2016.

The last time Chinese growth fell below seven percent was in the crunch of 1990, when it slowed to 3.8 percent.

"Lower growth in China will have an adverse effect on its trade partners, in particular on the rest of Asia," Oliver Blanchard, the IMF's chief economist, said at a briefing in Beijing, as the organisation also downgraded growth prospects for other Asian countries.

For the eurozone and Japan, it said, "stagnation and low inflation are still concerns" requiring sustained monetary easing and other measures to keep interest rates from rising.

In the eurozone, where the region's central bank is expected to decide to boost stimulus this week, low oil prices and the depreciated euro are a help to growth. But it will also struggle with low investment levels and poorer demand for the region's exports from emerging economies.

The region is expected to expand 1.2 percent in 2015, and 1.4 percent next year.

Japan's stimulus has not worked as well as expected, and the IMF expects it to expand just 0.6 percent this year, picking up to a still-sluggish 0.8 percent in 2016.

"At this stage potential medium-term growth in Japan is very very low," Blanchard said.

"So far both private domestic and foreign demand have disappointed."

Russia, already pressed by sanctions over its support for secessionists in Ukraine, is particularly hurt by lower oil prices. The IMF now says the Russian economy will contract 3.0 percent this year and 1.0 percent in 2016. In October the IMF was still predicting slight growth for the country.

The world's crisis lender warned that continued volatility in markets, partially a product of the US beginning to tighten monetary policy, pushing the dollar higher, will challenge governments and central banks around the world for some time to come.

And while the halving of crude prices is a net positive for the world, the strong dollar partially negates that effect for many oil importers using weakening currencies. And the impact of slower growth in trade, low commodity prices and market turbulence will all but erase the gains from cheap oil.

"New factors supporting growth -- lower oil prices, but also depreciation of euro and yen -- are more than offset by persistent negative forces, including the lingering legacies of the crisis and lower potential growth in many countries," said Blanchard, the IMF's chief economist.

It meant "good news for oil importers, bad news for oil exporters" he added. "Good news for commodity importers, bad news for exporters... Good news for countries more linked to the euro and the yen, bad news for those more linked to the dollar."

The IMF stressed that countries need to persist in restructuring, reform and investment despite the weaker conditions.

"Raising actual and potential output is a policy priority in most economies... There is an urgent need for structural reforms in many economies, advanced and emerging market alike," even as they face different choices and needs in their overall economic policies, it said.

It included in that prescription the need for governments to take advantage of lower oil prices to cut subsidies to strengthen their budgets for the long term.

 
China Economic Growth Is Slowest in Decades
20 January 2015
Dow Jones Institutional News
  By Mark Magnier, Lingling Wei And Ian Talley 
 
BEIJING--China's economic growth slowed to 7.4% in 2014, downshifting to a level not seen in a quarter century and firmly marking the end of a high-growth heyday that buoyed global demand for everything from iron ore to designer handbags.

The slipping momentum in China, which reported economic growth of 7.7% in 2013, has reverberated around the world, sending prices for commodities tumbling and weakening an already soft global economy.

China's economy grew 7.3% in the fourth quarter from a year earlier, the National Bureau of Statistics said, buttressed by targeted moves to ease borrowing. But it continued to face a housing glut, soaring debt and overcapacity in many industries, factors likely to erode growth in 2015.

Beijing had said it expected "about" 7.5% growth in 2014. The chief of the statistics bureau said Tuesday the rate was within that range.

Chinese stocks rose on the news, a day after their largest one-day drop in more than six years following a crackdown on margin trading.

While 7% growth would be the envy of most economies, Beijing says at least this level is needed to create enough jobs for China's huge population. The Communist Party sees social stability as an essential component in maintaining its grip on power.

The results follow decades of growth that has hovered around 10%, one of the broadest, most rapid economic ascents in history that helped raise Chinese living standards and propel global growth and trade to new heights. Slipping economic momentum in China has had far-flung implications, squeezing Australian government budgets and Chilean copper mines that grew increasingly dependent on China's ascent.

The slowdown comes at a vulnerable time for the world economy. The eurozone is at risk of a third recession in six years. Abenomics policies have failed to lift Japan out of stagnation.

And output in many major emerging markets-that provided most of the impetus for global growth over the past decade-is slowing faster than expected. The U.S. economy remains the one global bright spot, but it will struggle to make up for growing weakness elsewhere.

Economists see the slowdown of 2014 as the prelude to an extended deceleration of growth. The often bullish International Monetary Fund on Monday forecast 6.8% growth for China in 2015, a number below the 7.0% target economists expect Beijing to set.

"The housing slowdown is more serious than we thought earlier," said IMF chief economist Olivier Blanchard in an interview.

Others are even more downbeat. Oxford Economics predicts 6.5% and says it expects this year will be the last time China's growth exceeds 6%.

Leaders since mid-2014 have emphasized a "new normal" of slower growth. As the government tries to manage expectations, Premier Li Keqiang signaled Monday the economy would continue to face downward pressure this year.

How China addresses the slowdown matters to the leadership's goal of restructuring the economy so it is powered by domestic consumption and service industries. Reliance on real estate, construction and smokestack industries has reached its limits, as evidenced by rising debt and polluted skies over much of the country.

Now President Xi Jinping and other leaders find themselves with constricted options to shore up the economy as they seek to avoid the missteps of large economic stimulus after the 2008 global financial crisis. Then, the leadership opened the credit taps to cushion a falloff in foreign demand and investment.

Now, the problems are at home, and many are hangovers from the earlier binge, as are a plethora of white-elephant projects, such as nearly empty malls, ghost cities and bridges to nowhere.

"This time around, they're not giving money away," said ING economist Tim Condon. "They don't want to do that again."

"Sure, they'd like to regain economic momentum," said Royal Bank of Scotland economist Louis Kuijs. "But at the moment I don't think anyone expects that."

It is getting harder for the government to target credit to specific sectors, such as agriculture, and transportation, as banks balk at adding more nonperforming loans and borrowers hesitate.

LD Forge, a maker of forged valve components in Wenzhou, is among the companies that say its customers face cash-flow problems. "We are facing quite a lot of delays in payment," said Yu Mingliang, the company's vice president of business development. "We ended up suing one company."

Even if it wants to ramp up spending, Beijing is bumping up against tapped-out local governments. That is partly by design: Much of what's ailing the economy now is the result of rampant local-government borrowing via vehicles created for the purpose with little oversight. New policies have been aimed at reining in such loans.

As Beijing tries to speed up investments in airports and other infrastructure projects, these policies could leave the municipalities and provinces unable to find funds to see the plans through.

Funding constraints have already forced some cities to slow down big-ticket investments. In Wuhan, an industrial city in central China, the city government has halted construction of a bridge across the Yangtze River since last year due to insufficient funds, according to local officials familiar with the matter. The bridge, with a planned investment of about 8 billion yuan, could help ease local traffic congestion. Press officials in the city government didn't respond to a request for comment.

An aggressive anticorruption campaign, which the government deems essential to maintaining the Communist Party's grip on power, is also dragging down spending and, some analysts say, impeding government decision-making. Lu Ting, a China economist at Bank of America Corp., has estimated the austerity push has pared between 0.6 and 1.5 percentage points of growth from China's GDP.

The World Bank has already downgraded its outlook for the global economy. In a report released last week it estimated the world economy would grow 3% this year, compared with the 3.4% projection it made last June. It said a slowdown in business investment in China alone could shave 0.3% to 0.5% from global economic output.

Speaking to an investor conference last week, General Motors Co. President Dan Ammann called China "the major engine of growth" for the global auto industry for the past decade and a half.

He said the auto maker still sees big opportunity in lower-profile cities in China, but "we're no longer in an environment where you can just build something and expect to sell it."

In recent months, as growth in China's residential real estate has slowed, United Technologies Corp. has said it is coping thanks to stronger orders for government infrastructure and large commercial projects, like an order for 103 elevators and escalators for a new tower in the northern city of Tianjin.

Meanwhile, its Otis Elevator business has also been trying to boost the percentage of service contracts it maintains for elevators already installed in China, which can provide steady earnings even when construction growth slows.

The global effects of China's slowdown have hit unevenly, with the World Bank projecting that emerging markets, whose economies rely more heavily on trade with China, will be hit the hardest. The World Bank estimates economic output in Brazil will expand just 1% in 2015, down from a June forecast of 2.7%.

Commodities importers, on the other hand, might receive some secondhand benefits as the price of imported shipments decline. The U.S. could be among these beneficiaries. The World Bank raised its estimate of U.S. economic growth to 3.2% from 3.0%.

Should growth decline precipitously in coming months, economists say Beijing has a number of options, including deeper interest rate cuts, faster spending on infrastructure projects and sequential reductions in the capital that banks must hold on reserve with the central bank. The risk, however, is that if pursued too aggressively such measures could worsen overcapacity and pile up more debt.

"If things start to deteriorate rapidly, they might have to shift their policy approach," said Julian Evans-Pritchard, an economist with research firm Capital Economics. "But if it doesn't, I don't expect much change in policy."
 
 
Government may challenge World Trade Organization’s order to lift ban on US poultry imports
Dilasha Seth 
20 January 2015
The Economic Times
 
NEW DELHI: Competitively priced American frozen chicken legs may take longer to hit the Indian market as the government is set to challenge the World Trade Organization’s October order asking it to lift a ban on poultry imports from the US.

Simultaneously, the government is brainstorming with stakeholders on ways to protect the growing domestic poultry industry from the inflow of US chicken legs, which are cheaper by about Rs 100 per kg. India banned US poultry imports on account of avian influenza in 2007, a decision the WTO called ‘unscientific’ in its judgment.

“We are ready with our argument and will be filing an appeal in a day or two to the appellate body. We are expecting an improvement in the dispute settlement panel decision, which will help us in future,” a government official said. “We are committed to protect the industry with huge employment potential and are looking at various measures to that effect. We have had a meeting with the poultry industry and breeders.”

India is the fourth-largest producer of chicken in the world, after the US, China and Brazil, with an annual production of 3.5-4 million tonnes.

Last week, China banned the import of US poultry and eggs after the detection of an avian flu strain in the Pacific Northwest. More than 20 countries, including members of the EU, South Korea and South Africa, have imposed curbs on poultry from certain US states or the entire country.

With US consumers preferring chicken breasts, the less-favoured chicken legs are frozen for export to other markets at highly competitive prices. “As Russia has also banned American poultry, they are really eyeing the Indian market to sell chicken legs frozen for the last four-five years at may be Rs 40-50 a kg compared to Rs 160 -170 a kg price prevailing in India,” said another official privy to the matter.

The department of commerce called a meeting that was attended by representatives of the All India Poultry Breeders’ Association and others to suggest ways to protect the domestic industry and assess the grounds on which other countries have banned US poultry. But as per WTO rules, national treatment must be accorded, which means the domestic industry must be subjected to the same rules as the foreign seller.

Given that the US will export chicken legs that are four to five years old, India could restrict imports to products that are not more than six months old, said a poultry expert. “For this, FSSAI (Food Safety and Standards Authority of India) can come out with standards,” he said. According to experts, India could also look at options such as anti-dumping duties to curb imports and use the argument that the chicken are fed with genetically modified food.

“US chicken is given genetically modified feed, which is not allowed in India. They are also injected with a lot of hormones,” said an expert who asked not to be identified.The EU banned US chicken on account of chlorine treatment. An anti-dumping case could be possible but difficult.“

If India files an anti-dumping case, it will have to allow US chicken for a year to assess the dumping margin or else dumping analysis can be done by apprehending the price at which US sells to different markets, which will be difficult,” said the expert.
 
 
WTO membership- a major contributor to exports and economic growth of Vietnam 
19 January 2015
Vietnam News Summary
 
In a recent interview granted to a Radio Voice of Vietnam (VOV) reporter, International Monetary Fund (IMF) Chief Representative in Vietnam Sanjay Kalra touched upon limitations and challenges facing Vietnam in its international integration process after it joined the WTO eight years ago.

The results achieved after 8 years of Vietnam’s entry to the world largest trade body are of paramount importance as the nation has become an attractive destination for foreign investors. More and more major foreign enterprises and groups are bent on investing in Vietnam to take advantage of incentives investment policies.

Increased foreign investment has significantly contributed to export growth and economic stability of Vietnam over the past years. On a more positive note, Vietnam’s drastic changes in laws and institutions have helped simplify procedures and improve the business and investment environment, he said.

The Southeast Asian nation’s underway commitments after its admission to the WTO such as cutting taxes, opening the market for goods and services have offered Vietnamese consumers plentiful opportunities to enjoy better products at cheaper prices, the IMF official noted.

Regarding Vietnam’s sustained efforts for international integration by conducting negotiations and signing bilateral and multilateral agreements, Sanjay Kalra said the international economic integration process is an inevitable trend for Vietnam. Free trade agreements provide a wealth of opportunity for both consumers and businesses, helping Vietnamese goods and services have easier access to the most demanding and potential markets.

“I hope that Vietnam will speed up negotiations and is likely to conclude important free trade agreement (FTA) agreements and the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) Agreement in the time ahead and the international economic integration is a long process.” he added.

Concerning measures to cope with challenges and capitalize on the advantages presented by the WTO, Sanjay Kalra underlined the need to reform and improve the competitiveness of Vietnamese enterprises both domestically and internationally in a bid to make better use of the advantages of the WTO.

There is much that needs to be done in connection with institutional and procedural reforms, infrastructure improvement and investment cost reduction for businesses. But the forefront is the necessity to improve the capacity and skills of Vietnamese workers, enabling them to grasp better employment opportunities and keep pace with the waves of foreign investment coming to Vietnam.

Talking about prospects for Vietnam's economy in 2015, the IMF representative said the national economy would continue its steady growth since 2014 with low inflation, relatively stable exchange rates and deeper economic integration. However, future challenges require the Vietnam Government to make stronger reforms for 2015- 2016.

For example, banking reform will help stabilize the financial market while reform and equitization of State-owned enterprises (SoEs) will help attract more capital and improve business governance and reduce the burden on the state budget.

It is essential take into account the impacts of the global economy in 2015 as declining oil prices benefit the economy but will affect Vietnam’s budget revenues.

Generally, the outlook for 2015 is positive but the nation needs to spare no effort to maintain macroeconomic stability and improve infrastructure facilities, he noted. (VOV News – January 18)

 
China 2014 cotton imports hit five-year low 
By Dominique Patton

BEIJING, Jan 19 (Reuters) - China imported 264,500 tonnes of cotton in December, down 57 percent from the same month a year ago, while full-year imports dropped 41 percent to 2.4 million tonnes, a five-year low.

The annual number is the lowest since 2009 when imports for the year came to 1.5 million tonnes.

Demand for cotton in the world's top consumer of the fibre is a major driver of global prices. A government stockpiling scheme from 2011-2013 pushed domestic prices well above the international market, causing imports to surpass 5 million tonnes in 2012.

But an overhaul of that policy pressured domestic prices, reducing the premium over New York futures and undercutting the incentive for imports. Beijing gave out fewer import quotas last year as well, further tempering demand.

"Since September some imports have also been replaced by domestic cotton," said a trade source, who declined to be identified.

Chinese cotton prices plunged in September, tracking a drop in the international prices to five-year lows.

Demand has picked up recently, with U.S. sales figures showing strong buying from the world's No. 2 economy last week, surprising the market.

Still, traders expect full-year imports for 2015 to drop further as the government keeps a tighter grip on import quotas.

Beijing will issue 894,000 tonnes of low tariff import quota for 2015, according to its WTO commitments, but it will not issue additional quotas unless the market falls short of supply, officials have said.

China's cotton imports in 2015 will fall to around 1.5 million tonnes, according to the latest estimate by the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
 
 
UN warns of growing inequality and joblessness 
Abhik CHANDA 
20 January 2015
Agence France Presse
 
Unemployment will rise by 11 million in the next five years due to slower growth and turbulence, the UN warned on Tuesday.

More than 212 million people will be jobless by 2019 against the current level of 201 million, the International Labour Organization said.

"The global economy is continuing to grow at tepid rates and that has clear consequences," ILO head Guy Ryder told reporters in Geneva.

"The global jobs gap due to the crisis stands at 61 million jobs worldwide," he said, referring to the number of jobs lost since the start of the financial crisis in 2008.

The ILO World Employment and Social Outlook -- Trends 2015 report said an extra 280 million jobs would have to be created by 2019 to close the gap created by the financial turmoil.

"This means the jobs crisis is far from over and there is no place for complacency," Ryder said.

The job scenario improved in the United States, Japan and Britain but remains worrisome in several developed economies of Europe, the report said.

"The austerity trajectory... in Europe in particular has contributed dramatically to increases in unemployment," Ryder said.

The report said eurozone powerhouse Germany could see unemployment rise to five percent in 2017 against 4.7 percent at present, while it was expected to fall just under the double-digit in number two eurozone economy France.

The worst-hit segment globally were those aged between 15 and 24, with the youth unemployment rate touching 13 percent in 2014, almost three times the rate for adults.

The UN agency said the steep fall in oil and gas prices would hit the labour market hard in producing countries in Latin America, Africa and the Arab world.

But one of the rare bits of good news was that the middle class comprised more than 34 percent of total employment in developing countries from 20 percent in the 1990s, Ryder said.

However extreme poverty continues to affect one out of 10 workers globally who earn less than $1.50 a day, he added.

A widening chasm between the haves and have nots and an uncertain investment climate have made it difficult for countries to rebound from the crisis, the report said.

Cutting wages has been a key element in the international bailouts of eurozone members.

But there are concerns that exceptionally low price rises in the 18 countries sharing the euro could augur a long period of slow growth and falling prosperity.

"If low wages lead people to consume less, and investment remains subdued, this obviously has a negative impact on growth," Ryder said.

"Income inequality in some advanced economies now approach levels observed among emerging economies," he said.

The ILO said the income gap was set to widen, with the richest 10 percent earning 30 to 40 percent of total income, and the poorest 10 percent earning between two and seven percent of total income.

"These trends have undermined trust in government and kept the risk of social tensions high," it said.

Social unrest worldwide declined in the 1990s and 2000s along with the global employment rate but shot up in 2009 during the global crisis and is now 10 percent higher.

"There is massive human waste, suffering and misery stemming out of unemployment," Ryder said, urging governments to do more to address the problem.
 
 
Swiss franc fallout claims more casualties
Philip Stafford, Caroline Binham and Miles Johnson in London
Financial Times
Last updated: January 19, 2015 6:14 pm
 
A leading European foreign exchange broker filed for administration on Monday and a Danish bank conceded it faced heavy losses as the UK’s market regulator stepped in to assess the damage wreaked on the industry by last week’s violent swing in the Swiss franc.

The Financial Conduct Authority sent letters to an unspecified number of currency brokers on Friday asking them to update the regulator about any impact the Swiss move could have had on their balance sheets, according to a person familiar with the situation.
 
Global markets were left reeling last Thursday when Switzerland unexpectedly abandoned its currency ceiling against the euro. In one of the most damaging currency swings in the modern trading era, the Swiss franc soared in value, leaving investment banks across the world with big losses and hitting foreign exchange brokers particularly hard.

Alpari became one of the biggest casualties when a last-minute rescue ended in failure. Meanwhile, Denmark’s Saxo Bank was forced to admit on Monday that it was likely to suffer losses.

The fallout of the Swiss franc’s move has heightened scrutiny of a lightly regulated industry in which customers are often offered large amounts of leverage by companies to entice them to trade. London has been the venue for many of these brokers as it remains the world’s main hub for currency trading.

Punters deposit money with the broker and use it as collateral to borrow a much larger amount and magnify their trading positions. In London it is customary to offer 100-200 times the amount deposited into an account, although higher sums are available.

Some brokers had a policy of covering client losses beyond their deposit in the short term, thus allowing customers to gear up their accounts. Violent market moves — such as that of the Swiss franc last week — mean investment prices fluctuate substantially and can trigger immediate calls for large payments of margin from customers, who may not be able to pay immediately.

Some brokers such as IG Group, CMC Markets, Swissquote, Oanda and Interactive Brokers, survived the Swiss franc’s violent gyrations, but sustained losses. US-based FXCM, which handled a record $1.4tn in trades made by individuals last quarter, took a $300m cash lifeline from Leucadia National, owner of investment bank Jefferies, to ward off fears it would breach its capital requirements while New Zealand’s Global Brokers was forced to close.
 
Saxo Bank said it would fulfil all of its regulatory capital requirements though it would also be likely to incur some losses from customers unable to pay their debts. The group doubled its margin requirements for Swiss franc trades last September to 8 per cent, which effectively halved the amount of leverage available to customers to around 12.5 times.

Meanwhile KPMG was appointed as special administrator to Alpari (UK) Ltd after the group failed over the weekend to agree a rescue takeover deal. “We have had a number of enquiries from interested parties in relation to the company’s business,” said Richard Heis, one of the KPMG administrators. “We will be speaking with these parties and others over the next few days, and hope to secure a deal to preserve the business and jobs as far as possible.” 
 
Alpari, which employs about 170 people in London, has nearly $100m in client money which has been segregated under FCA rules.

The FCA is in the middle of a root-and-branch review of the retail forex sector, still under wraps. Its so-called thematic review last year looked into 40 banks, brokers and asset managers, including providers of contracts-for-difference. It found that firms were failing to get the best terms on client trades, leaving customers millions of pounds out of pocket.

It shares similar concerns, according to FCA insiders, to France’s Autorité des Marchés Financiers, which published a paper last year outlining that 85 per cent of customers lost money through retail-forex trading. It is still unclear what proposals, if any, might result from the FCA’s ongoing review, and whether it may result in action.
