Thousands rally against New Zealand's involvement in TPP trade deal
USA regulations: Inverted logic
Roundtable on BRICS perspectives held
The IMF should stick to its remit and let the eurozone bail out the Greeks
It’s time for Groser to drive on TPP publicity
U.S. Poultry Case To Be Hard-Fought
Indian Trick

 
Thousands rally against New Zealand's involvement in TPP trade deal
15 August 2015
Xinhua News Agency
 
WELLINGTON, Aug. 15 (Xinhua) -- Thousands of New Zealanders turned out in cities around the country Saturday to urged the government to walk away from the controversial 12-nation Trans- Pacific Partnership (TPP) trade deal. 
 
Media reports put the crowd at the biggest rally in Auckland, where the weather was wet and overcast, at 2,000 to 5,000 people. 
 
Opposition politicians and campaigners against the secrecy surrounding the TPP negotiations addressed the crowd in downtown Auckland before they marched on to the U.S. Consulate building. 
 
Large turnouts were also reported outside the parliament in Wellington, and in Christchurch, Hamilton and Dunedin, while smaller crowds were seen in other provincial towns and cities. 
 
No incidents were reported during the demonstrations. 
 
The protests were given extra publicity on Friday when the U.S. Consulate in Auckland put a notice on its website and reportedly e- mailed Americans in New Zealand, warning them to stay away from the Auckland rally. 
 
"We urge citizens to avoid the protest march route as even demonstrations intended to be peaceful can turn confrontational," said the notice. 
 
Opponents have objected to the secrecy surrounding the TPP talks and claim many of the provisions will undermine New Zealand' s sovereignty and allow transnational corporations undue influence over the country's laws and regulations. 
 
Four days of talks in Hawaii to finalize the deal stalled earlier this month after countries failed to reach agreement, but New Zealand Prime Minister John Key said last week he expected it to be signed by the end of this year.


 
 
 
USA regulations: Inverted logic
15 August 2015
Economist Intelligence Unit - ViewsWire
 
Corporate tax in America: Inverted logic
 
Tax inversions are a symptom of much bigger problems with America's corporate-tax regime
 
IT IS the corporate equivalent of burning the American flag. A "tax inversion" is a manoeuvre in which a (usually American) firm acquires or merges with a foreign rival, then shifts its domicile abroad to reap tax benefits. A spate of such deals last year led Barack Obama to brand inversions as "unpatriotic". The Treasury formulated rules to stamp out the practice.
 
That stemmed the flow of inversions for a while. Now a flurry of deals has put them back in the spotlight (see "Tax inversions: All my bags are packed"). This month alone, Terex, a cranemaker, has announced a deal with Konecranes that will move its headquarters to Finland; and CF Industries, a fertiliser-maker, and Coca-Cola Enterprises, a bottler, have unveiled transactions in which they will redomicile in Britain. Policymakers are talking about making inversions even harder. The perverse consequence would be to make it more likely that taxes and jobs will leave America.
 
The boardroom case for inversions stems from America's tax exceptionalism. It levies a higher corporate-tax rate than any other rich country--a combined federal-and-state rate of 39%, against an OECD average of 25%. And it spreads its tentacles worldwide, so that profits earned abroad are also subject to American taxes when they are repatriated. To this problem, the tinkering of officials is no answer at all. Making it hard for American firms to invert does precisely nothing to alter the comparative tax advantages of changing domicile; it just makes it more likely that foreign firms will acquire American ones. That, indeed, is precisely what is happening.
 
Salix, an American drugs firm that was seeking to invert before last year's saga, has since been bought by a Canadian company called Valeant, which reckons it can save more than half a billion dollars in tax over five years by changing Salix's domicile. Shire, an Irish drugs firm, has turned from prey to predator: once the target of an American company called AbbVie, it is now hunting Illinois-based Baxalta and dangling tax savings as part of the rationale for the deal. Since the start of the year foreign firms have announced acquisitions of American targets worth $315 billion, according to S&P Capital IQ, a data provider. The annual record, set in 2007, is $326 billion.
 
Getting territorial
 
Tax is not the only factor in these deals, but it plays a big part. At the moment, the earnings that American firms keep abroad ($2.1 trillion and counting) act like a magnet for tax-advantaged acquirers. Research suggests that the higher the amount of these locked-out earnings, the more likely it is that an American firm will be snapped up by a foreign one. If American policymakers really worry about losing out to lower-tax environments, they should get rid of the loopholes that infest their tax rules, drop the corporate-income tax rate and move to a territorial system.
 
That would have three effects. First, trapped foreign earnings would be more likely to come back to America. Second, American firms would be more likely to buy than be bought: a 2013 paper reckoned that switching from a worldwide system of taxation to a territorial one would result in a 17% jump in cross-border acquisitions by American firms. Third, jobs would be less likely to flow abroad. Moving domiciles may once have been about moving the office nameplate, but as attitudes to tax avoidance harden, changes of corporate control will increasingly involve senior people upping sticks.
 
It is hard for American politicians to explain to voters that taxing firms' foreign earnings is a poor idea. So Mr Obama has instead proposed taxing foreign profits at a lower rate, whether or not the money is repatriated. Alas, that would only cement the advantages of foreign ownership. How unAmerican.
 
 
 
 
 
Roundtable on BRICS perspectives held
15 August 2015
The Hindu
 
Chennai,TAMIL NADU A roundtable interaction on “Results of UFA Summit and perspectives of BRICS countries” was organised here on Thursday by the Russian Centre of Science and Culture jointly with Indo-Russian Chamber of Commerce and Industries and BRICS Generation.
 
Speaking on the occasion, N Ram, Chairman of Kasturi and Sons Limited, said in the past India did not put all its efforts in participating and strengthening of BRICS as it should have.
 
“Not that we stayed away (from BRICS). But not in the way Russia and China did. It is Russia and China that really gave a lot of initial energy and creativity to the BRICS organisation. Then Brazil also contributed and South Africa came in later,” he said while addressing a round table interaction on “Results of UFA Summit and perspectives BRICS countries” organised by Russian Centre of Science and Culture jointly with Indo-Russian Chamber of Commerce and Industries and BRICS Generation.
 
The BRICS summit was held on July 8-9 in the Russian City of Ufa in Bashkortostan. During the summit there were several discussions on the New Development Bank whose primary focus was lending to infrastructure projects.
 
The bank will have an initial capital of USD 50 billion, which will be scaled up over time. Mr. K. V. Kamath who served as chairman on the Infosys board is the chief of the New Development Bank of BRICS. “The New Development Bank which is going to be an alternative to the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund is backed by resources equally by the five partner countries. India and Russia will play and integral part in this,” said Mr. Ram.
 
Concerns were expressed on lack of reform of IMF and in particular the need to have greater representation from developing countries was flagged at the summit, Mr. Ram pointed out.
 
Dr. Sergey L Kotov, Consul General, Russian Consulate General in South India said, “For the Russians here in Chennai this is a very interesting issue.” Dr Sergey along with Mr. Ram suggested that BRICS language institutes can be started here.
 
Concerns were expressed on lack of reform of IMF and in particular the need to have greater representation from developing countries was flagged at the summit
 


 
 
 
The IMF should stick to its remit and let the eurozone bail out the Greeks
15 August 2015
© Times Newspapers Limited 2015   
 
What do Jamaica, Colombia, Romania, Pakistan, Ukraine and Greece have in common? The clue, as you doubtless spotted, was at the end. All of them are receiving emergency assistance from the International Monetary Fund. With the Greek crisis rumbling towards a conclusion, it is easy to forget that the fund has obligations beyond Athens. But it does. Greece is one of about twenty countries on an IMF lifeline.
 
The IMF is not a bottomless pit of ready finance for feckless governments. It has $600 billion of facilities from its 188 members, of which $340 billion has been committed in bailouts. More than half its members, just over 100, are developing nations that, through their IMF quota subscriptions, have been underwriting rescues for far richer northern states such as Greece, Ireland and Portugal. Since 2010, those emerging markets have also been driving the global recovery. Unsurprisingly, they are asking why should the IMF bail out Athens for a third time?
 
Greece, with its seemingly endless demands for help and the special treatment it has received, has become an existential threat to the IMF. Five years ago, the fund broke its own rules, providing loans on soft conditions that left victims of the Latin American and Asian debt crises in the 1980s and late 1990s gasping.
 
From the IMF’s point of view, the new €85 billion rescue deal is worse than ever. By 2020, Greece’s debt to GDP ratio will have fallen by only nine percentage points to 166 per cent, way off its “sustainability” target of 120 per cent.
 
The IMF has said that it will not get involved on those terms, leaving the eurozone to pick up the tab alone. Only once “Greece’s European partners make decisions on debt relief” will the IMF “make an assessment of its participation in providing any additional financing”, it said on Thursday.
 
The European Commission and the European Central Bank agree that Greece needs considerable debt restructuring, a point that was obvious eight months ago before the crisis flared up. Even if Greek debts are restructured, though, it’s not clear why the IMF should put more money on the line. The fund’s articles state that its “primary purpose is to ensure the stability of the international monetary system of exchange rates and international payments that enables countries (and their citizens) to transact with each other”.
 
In 2010, the crisis in Greece threatened to unravel the euro, with desperate consequences for global stability. There was no doubt an intervention was within its remit, albeit one that should have included a very large private sector debt write-off. Times have changed. The past eight months, in which Greece came closer to the euro exit than ever, have proved that the spillover effects can be contained.
 
Moreover, the eurozone has the capacity to fund the full €85 billion rescue without €15 billion to €20 billion from the IMF. What the Europeans crave, above all, is the credibility that the fund’s involvement provides. Yet the IMF is quite capable of contributing without financial assistance. One of its main roles is to help countries to build the institutions of government, such as effective tax collecting. It also conducts annual monitoring of all members, making policy recommendations that could just as easily be enforced by the eurozone. Sticking to those would be an informal extension of what the IMF is already doing in Greece.
 
Developing nations can rightly feel aggrieved at the prospect of the IMF sinking more money into Greece. In 2010, a deal was struck that would give emerging markets a greater influence over IMF decisions, a reflection of their increased economic might. Their voting share would rise from 40 per cent to 45 per cent under the plan. It has not happened, because the United States has a blocking vote of more than 15 per cent and refuses to ratify the agreement.
 
As much in frustration as anything else, China has set up regional rivals to the IMF and the World Bank in the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) and the New Development Bank, which threaten to end the Washington-dominated global economic order that the Bretton Woods institutions embody. Germany, Italy, France and Britain are hedging their bets and are on board with the AIIB.
 
Apart from anything else, the developing world would like the IMF to keep its powder dry. The big global economic risks are now in emerging markets, where foreign capital inflows have caused debt explosions. Greece is Europe’s problem. The fund, facing its own internal troubles, should leave it that way.
 
Skills shortage is delivering a painful lesson
 
In the three months to June, employment in the UK fell by 63,000 — yet the number of non-UK workers rose by 117,000. Cue an outcry over foreigners stealing British jobs. Yet the figures are a depressing indictment of the British education system. Britons simply don’t have the skills employers need, so they are hiring overseas.
 
According to the latest regional survey from the Bank of England, recruitment bottlenecks are worse than in the peak of 2007’s boom and the number of unemployed per vacancy is at its lowest in seven years. How to square that with a rise in joblessness, though? The Bank has an answer: “The recession has resulted in a higher degree of mismatch between the skills of the unemployed and the skills that companies are seeking.”
 
The OECD’s international student assessments — or Pisa tests — have shown that Britain is falling behind its rivals at a time when demand for specialism is on the rise. The Bank found that companies were struggling to recruit in IT, engineering and accountancy, “with the range of skill shortages broadening . . . Reliance on migrant workers was increasing.”
 
The jobs are there, but can Britons fill them?
 
Philip Aldrick is Economics Editor of The Times. Twitter: HYPERLINK "https://twitter.com/PhilAldrick" @PhilAldrick
 


 
 
 
It’s time for Groser to drive on TPP publicity
15 August 2015
The New Zealand Herald
 
Japan, Canada and US are united in pushing NZ to ditch its demands for better dairy export access to their protected markets
 
Tim Groser has been spruiking an interesting new line within senior business circles about the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) being the “mother of all diversification”.
 
Groser is coming under what he labels “intense pressure” to cave in on New Zealand’s demands for better access for dairy exports to three heavily protected markets — Japan, Canada — and to a lesser extent the United States — so negotiators from all 12 TPP nations can quickly nail a deal.
 
In New Zealand — as was apparent with CEO responses to the 2015 Herald Mood of the Boardroom survey — business concern is strong that moves to diversify the economy should be accelerated to offset the dairy slump and a potential over-reliance on the slowing China market.
 
Groser reckons the CEOs are off-key: The services sector is a major driver for the New Zealand economy with, for instance, the drop in the exchange rate acting as a drawcard for more tourists. The over-reliance on the China market, which (to a degree) was sparked by the ground-breaking 2008 bilateral free trade agreement, will naturally reduce if the TPP is signed, giving NZ greater access to major markets such as Japan. Hence the ability for Kiwi exporters to more adequately spread risk through increasing their exports to major markets such as Mexico, Japan, and the United States under more favourable conditions.
 
That may be so. But to run that line successfully, New Zealand needs the TPP deal to be signed off.
 
Right now it looks as if Japan, Canada and the US have ganged up on New Zealand with some advance blame-storming singling out Groser in particular as the potential fall guy if agreement is not reached within the separate conversations that have been taking place on the remaining sticking points: cars and dairy.
 
Another sticking point — biologics — has now been solved, according to informed sources.
 
The big country gang-up — which is implied through news reports out of Japan and Canada and (more obliquely) through trade journals with strong access to the US Trade Representative’s officials and major business and agricultural lobbies — must be strongly contested.
 
In Australia — where Trade Minister Andrew Robb is not averse to some full-on sledging in that country’s interests — the rhetoric has been strongly in favour of getting Australia’s negotiating lines fulfilled.
 
But Groser (so far) has resisted megaphone diplomacy. Pity. As there is a lot to trumpet on where NZ’s negotiating lines are falling.
 
In Parliament this week, Groser took the battle to the anti-free trade bogeymen. He made it clear that the Government is not signing up to a TPP deal which includes an investor-state dispute settlement provision that does not protect the right of future Governments to regulate in the public interest. Nor will it sign a deal that allows non-transparent and unfair procedures to apply, or one that would encourage “frivolous claims by foreign corporations that would have no merit in the legal sense”.
 
He also made the point to NBR that a TPP deal will create new opportunities for New Zealand services exporters, including the rapidly expanding ICT sector which already generates nearly $1 billion in exports: “It will help make it easier for online entrepreneurs to do business across borders by reducing barriers that require exporters to invest offshore in order to do business, and by making it easier to transfer information around the TPP region.” In other forums Groser has dismissed concerns that NZ software and ICT entrepreneurs will find their ability to do business constrained by US-style IP protections.
 
So back to dairy. It is clear Groser reckons the Japanese and Canadians leaked NZ’s position on dairy to fuel domestic concerns and help advance their own positions when talks resume. The point is that Japan, Canada and the US through their media advance their bottom lines.
 
In Australia, Robb acknowledged that multi-party agreements are hard: “Yet, with no WTO deal in two decades, in the modern era, as a country you’ve got to row your own boat in cutting bilateral trade deals, or risk your economy missing coming waves of growth. Waves can be caught, or if you leave your run too late, you can miss the cut.”
 
It is time for Groser — and also John Key — to advance the arguments clearly and grab the news agenda instead of leaving it to the megaphones of the TPP protesters.
 


 
U.S. Poultry Case To Be Hard-Fought
15 August 2015
Saigon Times Weekly
 
The Southeastern Region Livestock Association late last month requested agencies to conduct anti-dumping investigation against imported U.S. chicken legs. However, experts say for formal proceedings, companies in the industry have to make specific preparations, which requires a lot of effort and resources, as the target involves U.S. enterprises which have extensive experience in trade defense lawsuits.
 
Usually, an anti-dumping case is quite complicated and often lasts 12-18 months, requiring careful studies to provide well-founded arguments for the petitioner’s arguments throughout the investigation process, said lawyer Nguyen Hai from Mayer Brown JSM. Basically, to proceed with the lawsuit, Vietnam’s livestock industry should concentrate on proving four following points.
 
First, it is to prove the capacity of the petitioner. A prerequisite to filing a lawsuit is the petitioner must be qualified as a representative of the domestic industry. In other words, those companies wishing to initiate the case must produce or represent a volume or value of goods that accounts for at least 25% of the total production volume or value of the whole industry.
 
If the petitioner is an association, such association must represent businesses of the same production. In addition, in case there were any livestock enterprises objecting to the lawsuit, the total volume or value of goods produced or represented by those supporting the case should be greater than that of those who protest.
 
“As far as I know, in this case, Vietnamese businesses have achieved unanimous consensus on filing a lawsuit,” Hai said.
 
Second, it is to prove dumping is a reality. It means the animal husbandry industry should prove U.S. products are being dumped into Vietnam, Hai said. Normally, if the U.S. producers sell their goods in Vietnam at lower prices than stateside, it is indeed an act of dumping, and thus it is possible to conduct an anti-dumping lawsuit.
 
Third, it is to prove damages can be seen. It is to say the petitioner must show the domestic livestock industry is in trouble, as reflected by the economic indicators such as decline (or at least no increase) in revenue, profit, market share, production capacity and price. The economic indicators that need to be proven are defined in the Anti-Dumping Agreement of the World Trade Organization (WTO) and its relevant case law.
 
Fourth, it is to indicate a causal relationship between the dumping and damages. In other words, the petitioner must prove the cause of “economic losses” is no other than “dumping prices.” For example, if production in Vietnam recorded an absolute or relative reduction in the past three years while imports kept rising, it would consolidate the livestock association’s argument that the animal husbandry of Vietnam is suffering “economic losses” due to the U.S. imports.
 
Businesses should be active
 
“I’ve learned that businesses have sent a request to the authorities for investigation into this case of dumping. In this regard, although in theory, the Vietnam Competition Authority has the right to conduct investigations, it is an uncommon practice in the world that investigation agencies do this job themselves. Therefore, enterprises should determine this is their job, which is closely associated with their core interests, to be active in the proceedings,” Hai said.
 
Moreover, to pursue the lawsuit, businesses should prepare sufficient resources, including the money to hire a lawyer and to have a team to work with the lawyer during the case. It is crucial to select an appropriate legal counsel and representative.
 
In a trade defense case, the first thing businesses should pay attention to is to prepare the dossier, which is not simple, said the Trade Remedies Investigation Division of the Vietnam Competition Authority (under the Ministry of Industry and Trade) at a workshop on trade remedies held in HCMC last year.
 
For instance, in the case of Posco VST and Hoa Binh Inox bringing a lawsuit against cold-rolled stainless steel imports from China, Malaysia, Indonesia and Taiwan in May 2013, though Posco VST has considerable experience in this issue since it has been sued for anti-dumping abroad, it took the company a year to complete the dossier for submission to the Vietnam Competition Authority.
 
As of end-2014, the Vietnam Competition Authority had conducted pre-trial investigations for 11 cases, but so far only three cases have been initiated and two cases faced anti-dumping tax imposition. This suggests that many businesses wish to use trade defense measures, but they are discouraged by the complexity and difficulty.
 
A source from the Vietnam Competition Authority with extensive knowledge about the trade defense cases of domestic firms said livestock enterprises once looked to file a lawsuit against chicken imports, but the information back then was only preliminary so the case did not proceed. This time, the information from the Southeastern Region Livestock Association is more specific and complete.
 
If the livestock association actually wants to go ahead with the lawsuit, it should note that the defendant, U.S. companies, have been too accustomed to anti-dumping cases, said Hai. This will be a great challenge for the local animal husbandry industry and require the participation of experts with experience in this field, especially experience in cases involving Americans. However, the U.S. chicken (feet and legs) has been sued and are now subject to relatively high anti-dumping duties in many markets including China, South Africa and Mexico. This helps strengthen the confidence of Vietnamese companies on the chance of winning.

 
 
Indian Trick
31 August 2015
South Asia

 
Indian enthusiasm about BRICS " the acronym created with the first letters of member states - Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa " was reflected in Narendra Modi's 10-Steps-for-Future presented at the seventh summit hosted by Russia's Bashkortostan in Ufa, alongside the 15th Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) Summit on July 8-9, 2015. The Indian Premier suggested holding the first ever trade fair of the five members of BRICS.
 
The BRICS countries represent almost three billion people or approximately 40 percent of the world's population. BRICS accounted for over 17 percent of global trade, 13 percent of the global services market and 45 percent of the world's agricultural output in 2014. The combined GDP (purchasing power parity) of the five BRICS countries surged from $10 trillion in 2001 to $32.5 trillion in 2014.
 
In the latest parleys, the grouping, though looking odd due to diversity, showed commonality on many issues. All the five countries displayed significant interest in working together, finding synergies and exploring new vistas of cooperation. It dispels skepticism that BRICS is still a non-starter.
 
The view that India now feels constrained to break away from BRICS and pursue development on its own was also proven unfounded. To the contrary, the Indian Premier proposed what he called Das Kadam' [Ten Steps] for future cooperation. This includes establishing a Railway Research Centre, cooperation among audit institutions, a Digital Initiative and an Agricultural Research Centre.
 
Modi appeared excited that BRICS New Development Bank' eventually became a reality with an Indian, MV Kamath as its head. He proposed cross-BRICS collaboration and said the $100 billion BRICS Contingency Reserve Arrangement would help calm the economies. He said customs arrangement among the BRICS nations would be a major step in boosting trade and that economic cooperation among the five countries of Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa was very important and would give a boost to manufacturing.
 
Leaders of BRICS on July 7, 2015 created a Shanghai-based development bank and a reserve fund seen as counterweights to Western-led financial institutions. The leaders of BRICS agreed to launch the institutions to finance infrastructure projects and head off future economic crises.
 
Ahead of the Summit, Chinese President Xi Jinping met Modi and described their first encounter as a "very fruitful meeting." The most important victory for India was acceptance of its demand of equal shareholding for all member countries in the $50 billion BRICS Development Bank to avert domination of any one shareholder. India's insistence on equal shareholding was meant to avoid a repeat of the distortions that have crept into Bretton Woods institutions like the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank, in which rich countries like the US and Japan have a stronghold. The BRICS Development Bank would be set up with an initial corpus of $50 billion, with scope for expansion to up to $100 billion as new members are added.
 
In the final document of the Ufa declaration released on July 10, 2015, leaders of BRICS countries, after marathon rounds of talks, noted with anxiety the fragile recovery of global growth, expressing uneasiness about potential spillover effects from the unconventional monetary policies of the advanced economies." The United States' refusal to ratify the IMF voting reforms remained a core concern, said the group. We remain deeply disappointed with the prolonged failure by the United States to ratify the IMF 2010 reform package, which continues to undermine the credibility, legitimacy and effectiveness of the IMF," said the document.
 
The Ufa declaration also asserted that the NDB (New Development Bank") shall serve as a powerful instrument for financing infrastructure investment and sustainable development projects in the BRICS and other developing countries and emerging market economies." The BRICS Bank will approve its inaugural investment projects in the first quarter of 2016, working closely with the China-led AIIB. All five BRICS countries are members of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB). The Central Banks of the five countries have also signed cooperation agreements with the New Development Bank. An Action Plan" that maps the 2016 trajectory of the group was also adopted.
 
China and Russia have also said that they support the UNSC aspirations of Brazil, South Africa and India. BRICS leaders have vowed to work closely with the UN to uphold international treaties: We emphasize the need for universal adherence to principles and rules of international law in their interrelation and integrity, discarding the resort to double standards" and avoiding placing interests of some countries above others," said the document. BRICS countries have regularly criticized Washington's interventionist foreign policy approach, including air strikes in Middle Eastern countries, like Syria and Iraq. In a major breakthrough for Russian President Putin, his BRICS counterparts continue to rally behind Moscow by opposing Western sanctions against Russia over the Ukraine conflict.
 
We condemn unilateral military interventions and economic sanctions in violation of international law and universally recognized norms of international relations. Bearing this in mind, we emphasize the unique importance of the indivisible nature of security and that no State should strengthen its security at the expense of the security of others," added the Ufa communiquACopyright.
 
The bloc reiterated its stance on the two-state theory for the Palestine-Israel conflict. The BRICS called for East Jerusalem to be established as the capital of the state of Palestine and an end to Israeli settlement building. We oppose the continuous Israeli settlement activities in the Occupied Territories, which violate international law and seriously undermine peace efforts," said the document. The Ufa communiquACopyright also said that the BRICS strongly condemn human rights violations by all parties to the conflict" in Syria.
 
For India, breaking away from BRICS is not feasible as most foreign investors do not seem to consider this affiliation as repulsive or negative for them. India's growth potential, the diversified nature of its economy and its structure, and the democratic nature of its polity means that it has to be judged on different parameters. Secondly, many of the basic issues and needs taken for granted in other emerging countries are yet to be fulfilled in India given its huge population size, widespread disparities and income inequalities. Even after being part of BRICS, there are certain compulsions for India for thinking beyond. India's growth opportunities and the robustness of its private sector place it in a league different from that of Russia or South Africa. It is not an economy dependant on the commodity global super cycle. Its entrepreneurs have forged ahead in different industries building businesses of lasting value.
 
Its strong services sector, consumption growth, demographics and engineering and technological prowess gives it an edge over its BRICS peers. In a recent study by Morgan Stanley it was found that business models of Indian private sector companies are among the best in the world. Chris Wood of CLSA recently reiterated his overweight stance on India despite widespread investor concerns over economic growth and reforms.
 
According to Jayati Ghosh, Professor of Economics at Jawaharlal Nehru University in New Delhi, ultimately, sustainable economic diversification to higher-value-added and ecologically viable activities remain the key to growth and development not just in the BRICS countries but in other developing countries as well. India is no exception. For India and other countries like Pakistan the ongoing period of global flux provides a valuable opportunity to encourage and develop new ways of taking such strategies forward through cooperation.
 
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.