HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "Roberto Azevêdo (Directeur général de l'Omc) - "La première conférence sur le continent, à Nairobi, doit avoir des résultats concrets pour l'Afrique"
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO Chief Urges Members to Redouble Negotiating Efforts as July Deadline Approaches
·         HYPERLINK \l "Challenges Remain as WTO Services Negotiations Enter Substantive Phase
·         HYPERLINK \l "Doha Work Program Held Up Over U.S.-China Deadlock On Ag Subsidies
·         HYPERLINK \l "Fearing Collapse, Tech Industry Pushes For ITA Conclusion This Summer
·         HYPERLINK \l "Easing trade, MSMEs to get spotlights on APEC's trade ministers' meeting
·         HYPERLINK \l "US Farm Subsidy Levels for Corn, Soya Draw Scrutiny from Brazil
·         HYPERLINK \l "Chinese Agricultural Support Trends Increasing in Latest WTO Notification
·         HYPERLINK \l "Russia files two WTO lawsuits against EU, Ukraine - Medvedkov
·         HYPERLINK \l "India asks EU to lift import ban on some vegetables
·         HYPERLINK \l "US accuses EU of undermining global food security
·         HYPERLINK \l "China's draft national security law calls for cyberspace 'sovereignty'
 
Roberto Azevêdo (Directeur général de l'Omc) - "La première conférence sur le continent, à Nairobi, doit avoir des résultats concrets pour l'Afrique"
7 May 2015
All Africa
 
May 07, 2015 (Fratmat.info/AllAfrica Global Media via COMTEX) -- Le Kenya accueillera, et c'est une première en Afrique, la 10e Conférence ministérielle du 15 au 18 décembre 2015.

La 10e Conférence ministérielle de Nairobi (Kenya, 15 - 18 décembre 2015), la première du genre en Afrique, qui rassemblera les ministres du Commerce des 161 pays membres de l'Organisation mondiale du commerce (Omc), est le plus grand rendez-vous annuel de cette institution intergouvernementale créée le 1er janvier 1995.

Et qui célèbre donc cette année son vingtième anniversaire. En effet, c'est à cette date que les ministres - plus haute instance de décision des organes de l'Omc- (et pourrait aussi voir la participation des Chefs d'Etat) espèrent conclure un accord final dans le cadre des négociations du cycle de Doha, entamées depuis 2001 et qui sont dans l'impasse.

En attendant, le comité de négociation devra présenter des résultats fin juillet soit dans trois mois.« Pour la première conférence ministérielle qui se tient en Afrique, il est important d'avoir des résultats concrets pour l'Afrique », a-t-il plaidé le Directeur général de l'Omc, Roberto Azevêdo face aux ambassadeurs des pays membres.

Il a exprimé l'espoir en cette réunion de haut niveau. « Chaque fois que nous verrons ce logo, nous penserons à tous ceux qui, en Afrique et partout dans le monde, comptent sur nous pour obtenir, à Nairobi, des résultats concrets qui contribueront à la croissance et au développement au niveau mondial dont nous avons tant besoin ».

Et le résultat concret attendu, c'est la conclusion du cycle de Doha. Vu que les négociations sont laborieuses, le Dg avait estimé, le 27 avril, devant le comité de négociation, qu'il fallait mettre l'accent sur « ce qui est faisable » car le temps presse, à peine trois mois de fin juillet.

C'est dans la perspective de la préparation de la Nairobi 2015 que le logo de la 10e conférence ministérielle (MC 10), a été lancé le 5 mai, par le directeur général de l'Omc, Roberto Azevêdo, au cours de la session du Conseil général, au siège, à Genève. Un événement qu'est déroulé simultanément dans le pays d'accueil dans un cadre festif, selon l'ambassadeur du Kenya à Genève.

Et qui a non seulement exprimé la gratitude de son pays pour cette marque de confiance aussi a dit être disposée à apporter les informations et le soutien nécessaire aux pays pour les préparatifs. Cela, en collaboration entre le Comité local et le secrétariat général de l'Omc.

Une séance d'information est même prévue à cet effet pour faire le point des progrès des préparatifs du MC 10 qui se déroulent actuellement sans obstacle.

La diplomate a souhaité que le rythme de travail soit accéléré pour la conclusion de l'accord post-Bali (2013).Les Seychelles, 161e pays membreL'autre point à l'ordre du jour du Conseil général était l'accueil des Seychelles comme 161e Etat membre de l'organisation. Il a été admis le dimanche 26 avril 2015.

L'ambassadeur de ce pays constitué d'îles dans l'Océan indien et rattaché au continent africain, SEM. Mateo, n'a pas caché sa joie d'être enfin membre à part entière de l'Omc après de multiples difficultés pour satisfaire aux procédures.

Pour lui, c'est « l'aube d'une nouvelle ère dans la marche des Seychelles ». Convaincu que désormais, cela permettra à son« économie d'être plus stable et plus attrayante », des créer des emplois pour les populations et transformer son économie par la croissance.

En prenant appui sur l'innovation et la recherche avec le soutien des pays membres à travers leurs technologies pour faire prospérer son ambition de développement qui est « l'économie bleu ».

En entrant dans l'économie mondiale, le pays espère « autonomiser son secteur privé et ses Pme ». La protection de l'environnement, la pêche et le développement durable sont les préoccupations de ce pays insulaire classé dans le registre des « pays à économie vulnérable ».

Outres les Seychelles, le Dg de l'Omc a souhaité la bienvenue à tous les nouveaux ambassadeurs accrédités auprès de l'organisation.Des journalistes francophones en formation à l'Omc.

La session du Conseil général du 5 mai a été ouverte à une délégation de journalistes francophones d'Afrique et de l'Océan indien. Qui séjourne à Genève dans le cadre du séminaire de formation pour journalistes francophones sur le thème: « Commerce mondial et développement durable » (4 - 8 mai 2015).

Un séminaire co-organisé par l'Omc et la Fondation allemande Friedrich- Ebert-Stiftung (Fes). Douze journalistes, spécialisés ou responsable du desk économie y prennent part (Bénin, Cameron, Côte d'Ivoire, Madagascar, Maurice, République démocratique du Congo, Sénégal, Tunisie).Cette session s'inscrit dans le cadre des formations annuelles dispensées par l'Omc aux médias.

La présente a été précédée du séminaire à l'intention des journalistes de pays anglophones et hispanophones, les trois langues utilisées par l'organisation. 
 
 
WTO Chief Urges Members to Redouble Negotiating Efforts as July Deadline Approaches
Bridges
7 May 2015
 
The ongoing efforts to craft a Doha Round work programme have seen “positive engagement” in recent weeks, WTO Director-General Roberto Azevêdo said on Tuesday. However, the global trade chief warned that members need to “redouble” their efforts and start tackling certain “gateway issues” if they are to meet their July deadline.

“While progress has been difficult, this was clearly to be expected, and there are reasons to be positive,” Azevêdo said at the 5 May meeting of the General Council, which is the organisation’s highest decision-making body outside of the ministerial conference.

In the weeks and months ahead, members must now work on finding an overall balance across the various negotiating areas, Azevêdo continued, with the WTO chief reaffirming his statement from last week’s Trade Negotiations Committee (TNC) meeting that he would be looking at ways to facilitate talks on possible horizontal trade-offs.

Core areas

While the three core areas of this planned work programme are understood to be agriculture,  non-agricultural market access (NAMA), and services, one of the concerns that has come to the fore over the past several weeks is the apparent de facto sequencing that has emerged between them.

At last week’s TNC, Ambassador Remigi Winzap of Switzerland, who chairs the Negotiating Group on Market Access, noted that there is “difficulty for some members to conceive outcomes on NAMA market access in the absence of visible progress in agriculture.”

Ambassador Gabriel Duque of Colombia, who chairs the services negotiations, said at the same meeting that some delegations similarly questioned at a recent open-ended discussion the need to advance the services talks, given the limited movement to date on agriculture and other Doha Round areas.

Meanwhile, New Zealand Ambassador John Adank, who chairs the agriculture trade talks, reported that his assessment of the overall situation in that negotiating area “is a sombre one.”

“In key areas we are, as yet, far from convergence on certain threshold issues. This in turn inhibits progress on other issues,” he said at the 27 April TNC meeting.

Among the more difficult areas, he said, were the discussions within the domestic support pillar of the agriculture talks, specifically over the nature and extent of disciplines on overall trade-distorting support, as well as how to treat de minimis support, seen as the most trade-distorting among WTO rules.

The debate over whether the negotiating area of rules – which covers disciplines relating to anti-dumping duties, subsidies, and countervailing duty measures, as well as fisheries subsidies – should also be considered a “core issue” remains unresolved, sources say.

A meeting of the rules negotiating group earlier this week saw members discuss what role that area should play, following an informal “refresher” session on the history of the talks. While Japan and fellow members of the Friends of Anti-Dumping Negotiations have tabled a paper on recalibrating the anti-dumping talks, proposing that core deliverables in this area be due process and transparency, Australia has suggested that this paper has set unrealistic goals.

Brazil, Canada, and India were among those saying at the rules meeting that this area cannot advance ahead of the three core issues, while the US reportedly said that it is difficult to determine what is “doable” in rules when it is unclear what will occur in agriculture, NAMA, and services.

Recalibration?

The ongoing debate over whether and how to “recalibrate” certain core areas of the Doha Round trade talks has seen little sign of resolution, with members sparring particularly over how much to build off of the past draft texts in agriculture and non-agricultural market access, known respectively as Rev. 4 and Rev. 3.

At last week’s TNC, some officials, such as US Ambassador Michael Punke, repeated earlier warnings about the potential pitfalls of not recalibrating the ambition of the Doha Round talks.

"We cannot bury our head in the sand and wish reality away, and in April 2015, our choice is clear:  either we adapt our collective expectations significantly and quickly, or the WTO must begin to confront the prospect of a definitive failure,” Punke said.

The US official specifically referred to the discussions on domestic agricultural support, acknowledging that Washington’s call for other major agricultural subsidisers to sign onto new disciplines in the area of trade-distorting support may be difficult.

However, Punke questioned some members’ push to adhere closely to the 2008 draft texts. “We find this misguided, since those texts never found consensus. And indeed the very reasons that prevented consensus in 2008 have grown more profound in the seven years since, namely the changed role of emerging economies.”

In his intervention at last week’s TNC, Chinese Ambassador Yu Jianhua countered that the negotiations should not move away from previous negotiating mandates, while calling for Rev. 4 and Rev. 3 to serve as the “basis and benchmark for negotiations.”

“As a matter of principle, whatever the new approaches may be, it is always important to ensure all members to move in the same direction. In other words, we cannot afford having a scenario where some members are given more flexibilities, while some other members are having less or even required to do more than what is required by the 2008 modalities,” the Chinese official said, warning that this is indeed what is occurring in the domestic support pillar of the agriculture discussions.

China and India have been among those pushing back against the calls for recalibration in the Doha Round talks, citing concerns over the push by some members for so-called differentiation among developing countries.

Implementing Bali outcomes

With the December ministerial conference in Nairobi in their sights, one other element that has been deemed a potential determinant of its success is the level of progress in implementing the outcomes from the previous such meeting in Bali, Indonesia almost two years ago.

Along with reaching a formal agreement on trade facilitation, the December 2013 ministerial had yielded a series of decisions relating to agriculture and development issues.

The committee on rules of origin (ROO), for example, met last week to discuss the progress to date in implementing the Bali decision setting non-binding multilateral guidelines for WTO members in developing their ROO frameworks for least developed countries (LDCs).

At that meeting, Bangladesh submitted a paper on behalf of the LDC Group urging fellow WTO members to advance the implementation of that decision, outlining six specific questions to preference-giving countries on how they run their ROO schemes. (For more details on the ROO discussions, see Bridges Africa, 6 May 2015)

Another Bali outcome was a decision on putting into operation a previously-agreed waiver granting preferential treatment for LDCs services and services suppliers.

While only one country to date – Canada – has submitted a formal notification of the sectors and modes of supply where it will give preferential treatment, General Council Chair Fernando De Mateo, Mexico’s WTO Ambassador, affirmed on Tuesday that other various members are working to complete their necessary domestic processes in other to submit their own notifications ahead of a July target.

Regarding the WTO’s Trade Facilitation Agreement, four members have submitted instruments of acceptance. For the deal to enter into force, at least two-thirds of the organisation’s 161 members must ratify it domestically.
 
 
Challenges Remain as WTO Services Negotiations Enter Substantive Phase
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, May 8. 2015
 
May 7 — World Trade Organization members made notable headway in their negotiations to liberalize trade in services as part of their latest effort to conclude the Doha round, said participants at a May 7 special session meeting of the WTO Services Council.
 
The chairman of the WTO's negotiating group on services, Ambassador Gabriel Duque of Colombia, said that members had definitely started a more substantive, in-depth discussion as to what elements of the services negotiations should be included in their July work program.
 
The WTO's proposed work program would outline a clear path to liberalize trade rules for three primary pillars—agriculture, non-agricultural market access (NAMA) and services.
 
The breakthrough in services negotiations marks a departure from the last seven years, when negotiations failed to advance past the 2008 Signalling Conference, which was intended to provide countries with a level of comfort through exchanging “signals” on market access issues.
 
New Proposals
 
The services negotiations are aimed at modernizing and clarifying international rules regarding the trade in services—like telecommunications, banking, insurance, construction, distribution and transportation.
 
The WTO's services negotiations include four major areas: 
• market access;

• domestic regulation;

• General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS) rules on emergency safeguard measures, government procurement and subsidies; and

• implementation of a services waiver for least-developed countries (LDC) under GATS Article IV:3.

The talks gained momentum last month when WTO members offered new proposals to create a positive and negative list of services areas that would be subject to new multilateral commitments. At the April 20 meeting, the U.S. and Australia said that members could begin identifying the range of services commitments included in their various free trade agreements (76 WTO, 4/21/15;75 WTO, 4/20/15).
 
At the May 7 meeting, members considered other proposals, like a Canadian suggestion to examine members' current offers in the Doha talks; an Australian proposal to focus on what is “doable and realistic” in regards to domestic regulation; and Hong Kong's proposal for an informational briefing on the domestic regulation discussions.
 
Key Differences Remain
 
The issue of sequencing one or two pillars of negotiations over another remains a difficult issue for some WTO members in the services negotiations.
 
Members' continued disagreement over new disciplines for agricultural domestic support and tariff reduction formulas have threatened to sink ambitions in other negotiation realms like NAMA and services.
 
The U.S. delegation said that it was disappointed that members seemed unlikely to achieve a more ambitious services package and asked members to reduce the gap between current WTO market access commitments and actual practices.
 
China acknowledged that the final services were likely to be more “toned-down ”in ambition.
 
 
Doha Work Program Held Up Over U.S.-China Deadlock On Ag Subsidies
Inside U.S. Trade - 05/08/2015
 
Negotiations by World Trade Organization members to craft a work program by July 31 to conclude the Doha round have ground to a halt due to a standoff between the United States and China over the extent to which a final deal would require Beijing to cut its domestic agricultural subsidies, calling into question whether the July deadline can be met, sources said.
 
At issue are U.S. demands that China cut its domestic support from the current levels it agreed when it acceded to the WTO in 2001. China was not required to make additional cuts to those commitments in the 2008 Doha draft agriculture text, and is now refusing to back down from that text.
 
The accession deal effectively required China to limit its product-specific subsidies to 8.5 percent of the value of production of a given product, and its non-product specific domestic subsidies to 8.5 percent of the value of its total agricultural production.
 
Sources said this longstanding dispute between the U.S. and China has become a "gateway issue" to resolving the larger Doha round agriculture talks, which have other components such as market access and export competition.
 
But having this subsidies fight as a gateway issue in some ways makes it more difficult to resolve since the U.S. and China are not able to trade off concessions on domestic support for gains in other areas, sources said.
 
The agriculture negotiations themselves are at the center of efforts to craft the work program as WTO members have long agreed that the level of ambition in agriculture will determine what is doable in the other key areas of industrial tariffs and services.
 
The work program talks on agriculture and market access have made little progress in recent weeks due largely to the U.S.-China deadlock on domestic support, according to Geneva sources. No negotiating proposals have been tabled since Argentina and Paraguay in February tabled proposals on new approaches for negotiating tariff cuts, they said.
 
"The intensive process in which we have been engaged has still not seen delegations move from entrenched positions or able to find acceptable ways around them," New Zealand Ambassador John Adank, who chairs the Doha negotiating group on agriculture, said at an April 27 formal meeting of the Trade Negotiations Committee (TNC).
 
The fact that many WTO members, not only the U.S. and China, have dug in was on full display at the TNC meeting. The U.S., China, India, and the European Union reiterated their longstanding negotiating positions and called on other to make concessions, without offering any flexibility themselves.
 
The deadlock in the negotiations has also led to widespread skepticism that WTO members can come up with the work program by the end of July, with one informed source speculating that the deadline is likely to be missed given the lack of recent progress.
 
The lack of progress has led to a greater focus on a "de facto" deadline of producing substantive results by the WTO ministerial in December in Nairobi, Kenya sources said.
 
The informed source speculated that WTO members could seek to avoid the embarrassment of missing another deadline by agreeing by the end of July to very broad modalities that would merely establish a "path forward" but not anything concrete. This could include, for instance, agreeing to use average cuts in the market access negotiations, without establishing the level of the cuts, he said.
 
WTO members could then seek by December to establish concrete outcomes, such as the specific level of the tariff cuts or the percentage of tariff lines members would be allowed to shield from tariff cuts, this source said.
 
WTO Director-General Roberto Azevedo in his statement at the TNC remained optimistic that a substantive work program could be reached in July. "We still have three months before the July deadline. That is enough time to advance this work and deliver a substantive outcome," he said.
 
He further elaborated on what he envisioned in the work program at a May 5 General Council meeting, saying that it needs to be "substantive and meaningful," provide guidance on how to conclude negotiations, and act as a "springboard" for a successful Nairobi ministerial -- all criteria he has previously laid out for the work program.
 
Trade ministers from key WTO members will have opportunities to discuss the status of the work program talks at a May 23-24 Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) ministerial and at an informal WTO ministerial in early June in Paris. The Paris meeting will take place on the sidelines of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ministerial.
 
Both the U.S. and China warned at the TNC that time is running out to reach an agreement on the work program and produce a substantive outcome for the December WTO ministerial meeting in Nairobi.
 
"With less than three months left before the July deadline, I am much concerned," Chinese Ambassador Yu Jianhua said at the meeting. "The question is, will we be able to live up to the Mandates by our Ministers and deliver a clearly defined, modality like Post-Bali Work Program on time?"
 
U.S. Ambassador to the WTO Michael Punke said that, with three months before the end of July and eight months until December, there is still time -- "just barely" -- to adapt the Doha negotiating approach to the current reality of world trade. The U.S. has long said the current approach needs to be updated to reflect the fact that major emerging economies like China are now providers of agricultural subsidies.
 
"We should not delude ourselves, however, in believing that the world's patience for the Doha Round is without limits," he said. "If we do not have results at Nairobi, many outside Geneva are likely to disregard this institution as a forum for problem-solving. ... The future credibility of this institution is at stake."
 
India, however, implicitly fought back against U.S. efforts to raise the stakes for the December ministerial. "Rather than delving in doomsday scenarios, it would be helpful if we could engage constructively and positively in addressing the issues most crucial to a successful conclusion of the Round," India said.
 
 
Fearing Collapse, Tech Industry Pushes For ITA Conclusion This Summer
Inside U.S. Trade - 05/08/2015
Representatives of U.S., Japanese and European tech firms were in Geneva this week urging participants in talks to expand the Information Technology Agreement (ITA) to finally conclude negotiations on the product scope before the summer break, but little appears to have moved in the negotiations since they reached a stalemate late last year.
 
Business representatives fear that the prolonged delay in the talks, combined with an expected shift in focus in Geneva toward the World Trade Organization ministerial meeting in Nairobi this coming December, could mean that the ITA expansion effort could ultimately collapse if a deal on the product scope is not reached before mid-July.
 
Conversely, if participants can reach agreement on the product scope, industry lobbyists think it should be possible to negotiate the tariff phase-out periods and have a full, final agreement by the end of the year.
 
Countries have agreed that the phase-out periods will follow the framework of the original 1996 ITA agreement, which eliminated tariffs either immediately on entry-into-force, or after three or five years. But no specific negotiations on tariff phase-outs have been conducted yet on the roughly 250 products under consideration among roughly two-dozen WTO members, counting the European Union as one, participating in the negotiations.
 
The talks, however, continue to be deadlocked over China's reluctance to cut tariffs on products that are commercial priorities for South Korea and Taiwan. No new movement is expected to be announced at a regular meeting of the ITA Committee to be held May 8, sources said.
 
Last month, in what appeared to be an effort to pressure Seoul to accept a deal, the industry-backed Information Technology & Innovation Foundation think tank released a study arguing that even without the products that have become sticking points, an ITA expansion deal would still be economically meaningful for South Korea.
 
Among the organizations lobbying delegations this week were the Japan Electronics and Information Technology Industries Association, DigitalEurope, the Consumer Electronics Association, Information Technology Industry Council and the Semiconductor Industry Association. Some representatives, as well as officials from companies like Apple and Hewlett Packard, spoke at a workshop on non-tariff barriers facing tech goods held on May 7.
 
Sources held open the possibility that negotiations to end the stalemate could occur at the May 23-24 meeting of Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation trade ministers in the Philippines, or the June 3-4 meeting of the Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development in Paris.
 
 
Easing trade, MSMEs to get spotlights on APEC's trade ministers' meeting 
By Kris M. Crismundo
PNA (Philippines News Agency)
 
MANILA, May 7 -- The Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) first Ministers Responsible for Trade (MRT) Meeting which will be hosted by the Philippines in Boracay, Aklan from May 23 to 24 will focus on easing trade in the region in order for micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) to directly participate in the global trade.

Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) Undersecretary Adrian S. Cristobal Jr., in a pre-MRT Meeting briefing on Thursday, mentioned three focuses that will be discussed by APEC's trade ministers during the meeting which include support in the multilateral system, regional economic integration, and MSMEs.

Cristobal, who will be the country's trade minister as DTI Secretary Gregory L. Domingo will chair the whole MRT Meeting, said the discussion on promoting multilateral trade system will be in line with the activities of the World Trade Organization (WTO) which is celebrating its 20th year and will be holding its 10th Ministerial Conference in Nairobi, Kenya in December 2015.

He mentioned that APEC has invited WTO Director General Roberto Azev'do to speak in the MRT Meeting to give updates on the Bali package and the preparation for the Ministerial Conference.

On regional economic integration, the 21 APEC economies will continue talks on collective strategic study on the Free Trade Area of the Asia-Pacific (FTAAP) which is initiated by China when it hosted the APEC 2014 meetings.

During the MRT Meeting, trade ministers target to come up with terms of reference for the collective strategic study on FTAAP that will be endorsed during the APEC Economic Leaders' Meeting (AELM) in November 2015.

The study is expected to be completed by next year's AELM.

Moreover, the meeting will also have an assessment on implementation of leaders' commitment that was forged in the 2012 APEC meeting in Russia, Cristobal said.

He added that APEC economies committed to reduce by 5.0 percent or below the tariffs of 54 environmental goods. Mostly, these are parts of machines or equipment that preserved the environment, including parts of solar panels or cells, parts of gas turbines, machinery for liquefying air or other gases, among others.

He mentioned that the Philippines has already 51 items out of the 54 environmental goods that are now down to 5.0-percent duty.

Moreover, consistent to the APEC's theme of 'Building Inclusive Economies, Building a Better World' and the Aquino administration's push for inclusive growth, the MRT Meeting will discuss how trading system will be more MSME-friendly in order for the sector to participate to the global trade.

The Philippines will also push for the APEC MSME Action Agenda, according to the DTI official.

'The APEC Action Agenda on Growing Global SMEs calls for economic cooperation in APEC for inclusive growth through fostering participation of SMEs and MEs in regional and global markets. Emphasis will be on initiatives that are geared on the development and integration of micro, small or artisanal enterprises into the trading system,' he said.

In the Asia-Pacific, 96 percent of businesses in the region are SMEs while employing more than 60 percent of its total workforce.

'Trade should be convenient, efficient, and attractive not only for medium and large business, but also for micro and small enterprises. It should result into more productive employment opportunities, sustainable and inclusive economic growth, and for its benefits to be spread more widely. That's why we want to ensure that the outcome for APEC 2015 involves our trade facilitation priorities and, at the same time, be beneficial to all participants. Ultimately, we want to bridge the gap between developing and developed APEC economies by further opening trade and investment in the Asia-Pacific Region,' Cristobal stressed.
 
 
US Farm Subsidy Levels for Corn, Soya Draw Scrutiny from Brazil
Bridges
7 May 2015
 
The Brazilian government is reportedly considering whether to formally question – or even challenge – the level of US farm subsidies for corn and soya, with sources telling Bridges that Brasilia is collecting evidence on whether such support has increased since the enactment of Washington’s 2014 Farm Bill.

Last year, Brazil posted its first trade deficit in over a decade, which has been attributed partly to falling soy prices. Domestic producers and government officials have reportedly expressed concern in recent months that increasing US subsidy levels in response to lower prices have negatively affected the soy sector, according to Brazilian newspaper O Estado de S. Paulo.

“Economic analysis already prepared shows that Brazil loses more than a billion US dollars in each product per year,” trade and agriculture policy consultant Pedro Camargo Neto told Bridges. Camargo Neto is a former Brazilian agriculture negotiator and has been the head of various Brazilian agribusiness associations, including the Brazilian Pork Producers and Exporters Industry Association (ABIPECS, by its Portuguese acronym).

Brazil is the largest global exporter of soybeans, with sales at US$31 billion in 2014, or 10 percent of its total exports. The US, meanwhile, is the largest producer of soybeans, with Brazil a close second.

US farm subsidies

Compared with the previous legislation, the 2014 Farm Bill has eliminated or phased out direct payments to farmers, replacing them with new subsidy schemes that tie payments to market prices and yields, while expanding crop and revenue insurance subsidy programmes.

With the new legislation, US farmers are now allowed to choose from a suite of subsidised farm support programmes that help protect them from market volatility, which reduces some of the financial risk related to farming.

Farm support is now tied to recent and current production and market conditions. Some critics say that most of these new policy instruments are heavily-trade distorting and should be classified in the WTO’s “amber box” of farm subsidies.

In the coming months, US farmers will need to choose between revenue or price-based coverage, which could give a clearer indication on the current and future subsidy levels and their effects on global markets.

“The new farm bill changed names and structure, but the distorting subsidies remain particularly now that prices are falling,” Camargo Neto told Bridges.

In their joint analysis on the 2014 Farm Bill, Joseph W. Glauber, former chief economist at the US Department of Agriculture and a Visiting Senior Policy Fellow at the International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), and Patrick Westhoff, director of the Food and Agriculture Policy Research Institute at the University of Missouri, argued that “the bill could have important WTO implications.”

They suggest that existing WTO limits on the current Aggregate Measure of Support (AMS), which includes all product-specific and non-product-specific agricultural support, would not be exceeded on average, though this could change depending on certain market conditions.

Other studies, such as an ICTSD paper written by Montana State University agricultural economist Vincent Smith, suggest that while the new Farm Bill may involve larger subsidies for farmers, it is unlikely to cause problems for the US in meeting its current AMS commitments. [Editor’s note: ICTSD is the publisher of Bridges.]

Towards another Brazil-US trade dispute?

A formal WTO dispute has not yet been launched by Brazil, though recent media reports indicate that Brasilia is closely monitoring US subsidy levels and their effects on global farm markets and may question Washington during the next meeting of the WTO’s Committee on Agriculture, scheduled for next month.

June will also see Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff make her long-anticipated state visit to Washington, though whether the subsidy issue will be raised was not clear at the time of this writing.

There are several factors that could be brought into a trade dispute, Glauber told Bridges in an emailed response. “The Brazil cotton case obviously presents a blueprint on how to argue a violation of the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures,” he continued, referring to the WTO’s rules on treating subsidies, while qualifying that a dispute panel would likely need to review the specifics of the case and commodity involved.

A recent study by the Brazilian Confederation of Agriculture and Livestock estimates that under current market conditions, US soy subsidies could reach US$19.2 billion, which they project could bring down global soy prices by two to four percent, thus lowering Brazil’s annual soy export revenue.

A US official told Bridges that Washington’s subsidy policies are transparent and have shown no indication of violating existing global trade rules.
 
 
Chinese Agricultural Support Trends Increasing in Latest WTO Notification
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, May 8. 2015
 
May 7 – China spent $4 billion on product-specific farm subsidies in 2010—a 30 percent increase from the year before, according to a recent notification to the World Trade Organization, which could lend credence to U.S. calls for new restrictions on that country's agricultural support as part of the WTO's latest Doha negotiations.
 
Total non-product-specific support in China in 2010 was $15.7 billion, a 10 percent increase from 2009, according to the notification. The support notifications mark a continued upward trend in China's subsidies for farmers. Total product-specific support in 2008 was $2.4 billion and $1.4 billion in 2007. Total non-product-specific support was $11.4 billion in 2008 and $3.9 billion in 2007.
 
In comparison, U.S. and European Union product-specific domestic support in 2010 was $4.4 billion and $9.3 billion, respectively. U.S. and EU non-product-specific market support in 2010 was $5.5 billion and $913 million, respectively.
 
China did not submit any aggregate measure of support (AMS) for 2009 or 2010 because its AMS, both product-specific and non-product-specific, is considered de minimis, or below the 8.5 percent of the total value of production ceiling it agreed to in its 2001 WTO accession package. China has recorded zero AMS since 2001.
 
Doha Negotiations
 
Domestic farm subsidies remain a hot-button issue in Geneva, as trade officials continue to disagree as to the best ways to reduce trade-distorting policies in line with the goals of the Doha Development Agenda (79 WTO, 4/24/15).
 
The U.S. said that any effort to conclude the 2001 Doha round must reflect modern realities where China and India are now the top two users of trade-distorting agricultural subsidies (15 WTO, 1/23/15).
 
Last month, Deputy U.S. Trade Representative Michael Punke urged Chinese Ambassador Yu Jianhua to reduce his government's overall trade-distorting domestic support policies in order to mitigate the impact on foreign markets (45 WTO, 3/9/15).
 
Yu rejected the U.S. calls for China to adjust its domestic support policies and said that China would not consider new disciplines that exceed the terms of the December 2008 draft modalities (Rev. 4), which are formulas for reducing trade-distorting measures.
 
China said that the total agricultural production values indicated in its latest notification “are only for reference” and should not be referred to in the latest Doha negotiations. “The categorization of agricultural products of China is different from that of the WTO,” China's notification said.
 
Cotton Subsidies
 
China's product-specific domestic subsidies for cotton fell 40 percent to $480 million in 2010, versus $810 million in 2009.
 
The trend does not support U.S. allegations that China's increasingly large subsidies for cotton are distorting trade and harming developing nations in Africa.
 
U.S. officials have alleged that China holds 60 percent of the global cotton stocks and that its cotton subsidies are 10 times higher than those of any other country. The U.S. repeatedly has cited a report issued by the International Cotton Advisory Committee that said Chinese cotton subsidies totaled $6 billion in 2012–2013.
 
U.S. trade officials did not respond to Bloomberg BNA's request for comment.
 
Public Stockholding
 
China spent $12.4 billion on public stockholding for food security purposes in 2010, a 10.8 percent increase from 2009.
 
The statistics are relevant as trade negotiators in Geneva continue to negotiate a permanent solution to modernize the WTO's rules regarding domestic food security programs, which ensure that farmers produce adequate supplies to feed poor citizens.
 
Last year, a small group of developing countries, led by India, opposed the WTO's approval of a customs accord called the Trade Facilitation Agreement. Those countries feared that their food security programs would be separately targeted because members have not updated the 1986–88 WTO pricing benchmark used to calculate trade-distorting measures related to farm subsidies.
 
Developed members like the U.S. and the EU are wary of updating the pricing benchmark because it could sanction higher levels of trade-distorting domestic support and undermine trade liberalization efforts.
 
Despite an active negotiation effort, members appear no closer to finding an amicable solution to the food security debate by the July deadline agreed to by members.
 
 
 
Russia files two WTO lawsuits against EU, Ukraine - Medvedkov  
 
MOSCOW. May 7 (Interfax) - On Thursday Russia filed a lawsuit with the World Trade Organization (WTO) against the European Union over the anti-dumping measures with respect to Russian welded pipes and ammonium nitrate, and one against Ukraine over the anti-dumping measures with respect to ammonium nitrate, the head of the Russian Economic Development Ministry's Department of Trade Negotiations, Maxim Medvedkov, told Interfax on Thursday.

"On Thursday we requested consultations," he said, adding that this was the first stage in filing the lawsuit, and should these consultations fail over a 60-day period, Russia will be able to initiate the creation of panels of arbitrators on these two lawsuits.

According to Russia, the EU's anti-dumping inquiries into ammonium nitrate and welded pipes, and Ukraine's into ammonium nitrate violated EU and Ukrainian WTO obligations, namely: the cost price of products failed to take into account Russia's domestic energy prices, and instead relied on third countries' prices, i.e. use the so-called "energy corrections," Medvedkov said. "These measures resulted in significant damage to Russian suppliers," he said.

Russia decided to file a single lawsuit against the EU over ammonium nitrate and welded pipes because essentially, the claims are the same and this lawsuit correlates with an earlier one filed by Russia against the EU over energy corrections, Medvedkov said.

According to Russian experts, the measures taken against Russian products have effectively discontinued Russian exports of welded pipes to Europe (the measures have been in effect since 2008), and led to an approximately 1.5 fall in Russian exports of ammonium nitrate to Europe in 2014 in comparison with 2012 (when it stood at nearly $220 million), Medvedkov said.
 
 
India asks EU to lift import ban on some vegetables 
 
New Delhi, May 7 (PTI) India has asked the European Union to lift the ban imposed on import of some vegetables like bitter gourd and okra.

Agriculture Minister Radha Mohan Singh today made this demand before EU Agriculture Commissioner Phil Hogan on the sidelines of G-20 Agriculture Ministers meeting at Istanbul.

"Singh thanked Hogan for lifting the ban on import of Indian mangoes and urged him to quickly resolve the issue of ban on import of other vegetables including bitter gourd, snake gourd, okra etc from India," an official statement said.

Singh also met his Canadian counterpart Gerry Ritz and discussed issues of mutual interest.

He sought the expertise of Canadian commercial enterprises in the low cost, energy efficient and ecologically sustainable cold chain technologies in India and invited Canadian investment in this sector.

"It was also agreed to quickly fix the date for the 4th meeting of the Joint Working Group with a view to take forward the cooperation between the two countries," the release said.

Singh is attending the two-day agri-meet of G-20 nations starting May 7.

This is the second meeting of G-20 agriculture ministers. The first meeting was held in June 2011 at Paris, France.

The G-20 meeting is expected to deliberate on global issues such as food security, food inflation, farm productivity, foodgrain loss, welfare of farmers among others. 
 
 
US accuses EU of undermining global food security 
Shawn Donnan in Washington 
7 May 2015
Financial Times (FT.Com)
 
The US has accused the EU of undermining efforts to improve global food security by proposing new rules that would allow any of its 28 member states to opt out of decisions by Brussels to open the door to genetically modified crops.

In an interview with the Financial Times, Tom Vilsack, the US agriculture secretary, said the move also raised "serious issues" about the future of transatlantic trade talks.

"If we are serious about global food security then we have to be very serious about the science that will allow us to be as productive as possible in the most sustainable way possible," Mr Vilsack said on the eve of a meeting of G20 agriculture ministers to discuss efforts to improve global food security.

"The EU's decision potentially . . . creates a serious obstacle to meeting the challenge of global food security," he told the FT. "It is, in our view, inconsistent with the notion that we would have a science-based, rules-based [global] system."

The world has made progress in tackling malnourishment and the issue of food security in recent years, he said. Yet 850m people in the world are still malnourished and, with the global population growing and the effects of climate change looming, more needs to be done.

The answers would have to come in large part from increasing agricultural productivity through technological innovation, Mr Vilsack said, with experts projecting that production would have to increase 60-70 per cent by 2050 to feed the 9bn people expected to be living on the planet by then. To do that would require a level of innovation in food production over the next 35 years equivalent to that seen over the past 10,000 years, Mr Vilsack said.

The EU has long had a much more sceptical view of genetically modified organisms than the US and has heavily restricted their trade.

The European Commission last month proposed giving individual member states the ability to opt out of any decisions it made to expand the heavily restricted list of genetically modified grains allowed into the EU. The move, which was accompanied by a decision to authorise 19 more GM products for distribution in the EU, was widely seen as a political fudge meant to accommodate public opposition to GMOs in countries such as France and Germany.

But it immediately drew an angry reaction from the US.

Officials in Washington have since not only expressed anger about the impact on efforts to secure a Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) but also have raised the possibility of bringing the EU to the World Trade Organisation if the proposal becomes law.

In Washington on Monday, Cecilia Malmström, the EU's trade commissioner, defended the decision and said the EU was confident it complied with both WTO rules and the union's internal market regulations.

Mr Vilsack, a former governor of the agricultural state of Iowa, said he accepted that there were different view points on GM crops in both the EU and the US, where a growing number of states are considering GMO labelling laws.

But "that's not the point", he said. "The point is if you're going to establish a trade relationship and you are committed to open trade, you are committed to a science-based system . . . you can't inject the culture or the politics or consumer choice into the discussions."

He added: "The consumer can make the choices in the context of an open market . . . The problem is you are basically constraining the market in order to avoid having consumer choice. And that's inconsistent with the notion that you want a trade relationship with the EU that creates less friction in the system as opposed to more friction.

"This creates more friction. This creates a lot more friction. It creates serious issues as to whether we will even get a TTIP. I'm not sure why the Europeans aren't willing to let the market decide."

 
China's draft national security law calls for cyberspace 'sovereignty' 
 
BEIJING (Reuters) - China has included cybersecurity in a draft national security law, the latest in a string of moves by Beijing to bolster the legal framework protecting the country's information technology.

China has recently advanced a wave of policies to tighten cybersecurity after former National Security Agency contractor Edward Snowden disclosed that U.S. spy agencies planted code in American tech exports to snoop on overseas targets.

The standing committee of the National People's Congress (NPC), China's legislature, reviewed a cyberspace "sovereignty" clause in a proposed national security law, according to a draft posted online this week after its second reading in late April.

"The state establishes national internet and information security safeguard systems ... and protects national internet space sovereignty, security and development interests," the draft said.

The country must "achieve security and control in internet and information core technology, key infrastructure, and important data and information systems", it said, as well as strengthen internet management and punish internet attacks.

It also said China's banking infrastructure must be strengthened and its financial systems improved to withstand international risks and shocks. It did not give specific guidelines for implementation.

China's earlier attempts to regulate cybersecurity were most clearly articulated in bank-technology guidelines and a proposed counter-terrorism law, which called for the similar use of "secure and controllable" technology that is developed in China or source code that is released to Chinese inspectors.

China's banking regulator temporarily suspended the financial industry rules after feedback from banks and an outcry from foreign governments and business, which argued they were unfair and motivated by protectionism.

But the foreign business community has said China could revive the banking rules in some form.

In addition to the national security law, the controversial anti-terrorism draft law is also still being reviewed by the NPC standing committee, a group of about 200 members, which often adopts laws after three readings.

President Xi Jinping, who heads a newly established national security commission, has said China's security covers a wide array of areas, including politics, culture, the military, the economy, technology and the environment.

The sweeping national security law has broad implications for the ruling Communist Party's governance of society, including powers for dealing with "harmful moral standards".
END


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.