HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "US wants WTO to stamp out evasion of antidumping duties
·         HYPERLINK \l "Iceland, Turkey Join WTO Talks on Environmental Goods Agreement
·         HYPERLINK \l "Kenya to Reap From World Trade Organisation Forum
·         HYPERLINK \l "L'Algérie pourrait présenter son dossier d'accession à l'OMC en décembre prochain
·         HYPERLINK \l "Evalúan propuesta para adecuar DJAI a OMC
·         HYPERLINK \l "Ambassador: WTO Win For Australian Plain Packaging Could Lead to Alcohol Labeling
·         HYPERLINK \l "Obama administration questions U.S. airlines on subsidy claims -source
·         HYPERLINK \l "Gulf Airlines Reject Claim They Gained Unfair Help
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S. sets preliminary duties on Turkey pipe imports, spares S.Korea
·         HYPERLINK \l "Canadian Court Rejects Skechers Appeal of Adding R&D Costs to Dutiable Cost
·         HYPERLINK \l "Suisse/UE : réunion du Comité mixte sur les marchés publics
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S. Senate's Hatch says making progress on fast-track trade talks
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S. urges allies to think twice before joining China-led bank
·         HYPERLINK \l "México es el primer exportador de vehículos de carga
 
US wants WTO to stamp out evasion of antidumping duties 
By Tom Miles 
 
GENEVA, March 17 (Reuters) - The United States wants members of the World Trade Organization to support a crackdown on schemes which help companies evade "antidumping duties" - punitive import tariffs levied on unfair foreign competition.

"Over the years, the United States has witnessed a dramatic increase in activities expressly designed to evade the application of antidumping duties," the United States said in a communication to other WTO members.

"Websites marketing such services have been on the rise, and aggressive outreach is luring exporters and/or importers into a false sense of security by offering so-called 'legitimate' services to evade the application of antidumping duties to subject merchandise."

Dumping happens when producers in one country export into a competitor's market at prices that are lower than in their own market.

Dumping is often alleged in markets for low added-value goods and basic materials such as steel products, chemicals, textiles, fertiliser or farm produce, and accusations often arise when global oversupply threatens producers with losses.

The United States has been the second biggest user of antidumping measures since the founding of the WTO in 1995. Only India has taken antidumping steps more often - 715 times compared to the U.S. total of 521, up to the end of June 2014.

The most frequent target of antidumping measures is China. But China is not only a target: like all big trading powers it is a frequent user of antidumping measures, with 215 instances over the same period.

The U.S. communication did not mention which countries were involved, but said the evasion schemes involved shipping goods to an intermediary third country, where they would be reloaded into new containers and provided with false documents to disguise them as goods originating in that country.

They could then be shipped to the final destination without incurring any penalty, it said.

"This problem has been going on for many years. However, it has become more pervasive and the parties have become more brazen in their activities."

It did not put a value on the evasion but said it threatened to undermine the world trade rules and nullify the effect of antidumping duties.

"Silence or inactivity by the host country may also too easily be construed as tacit approval of, or complicity with, such illicit activities." (Editing by Dominic Evans) 
 
 
Iceland, Turkey Join WTO Talks on Environmental Goods Agreement
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, March 18, 2015
 
March 17 – Turkey and Iceland joined in discussions among 15 other World Trade Organization members who launched their fifth round of Environmental Goods Agreement (EGA) negotiations aimed at reducing or eliminating trade tariffs on 54 environmental goods and technologies.
 
The theme of the current round of negotiations focuses on environmental monitoring, analysis and assessment, resource efficiency and environmentally preferable products, according to an EU statement.
 
The EGA is a plurilateral agreement that would eliminate import tariffs on a most-favored-nation basis, meaning that any duty-free terms would be applied to all WTO members. Other parties to the negotiations include Australia, Canada, China, Costa Rica, the EU, Hong Kong, Israel, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Singapore, South Korea, Switzerland, Taiwan and the U.S.
 
Three-Part Format
 
Discussions during the week of March 16 are to be divided into three sections, the EU said. First, the negotiators will meet with experts from international organizations, national environmental agencies, nongovernmental organizations, business associations, industry and academia to identify relevant products that could be considered in the negotiations.
 
Second, the negotiators will nominate products related to the theme of the round, on which tariff duties should be eliminated, the EU said. Products are nominated on the basis of their potential environmental benefits.
 
Third, the negotiators will review their previous work and discuss further steps in the negotiating process, such as the involvement of new members, the EU said. Members also will discuss how to draft a “living agreement” to ensure that the EGA can evolve with future developments in environmental technologies.
 
 
Kenya to Reap From World Trade Organisation Forum 
by Martin Mwita 
17 March 2015
All Africa
 
Mar 17, 2015 (The Star/All Africa Global Media via COMTEX) -- KENYA is set to benefit from the tenth World Trade Organisation ministerial conference with an estimated $8 million (about Sh1.6 billion), expected to be spent in the country.

The conference which coming to Africa for the first time is set for Nairobi between December 15 and 18.

According to the ministry of foreign affairs, the conference is expected to attract more than 5,000 trade stakeholders from 161 member states.

Among top beneficiaries will be hotels, restaurants and transporters which include taxis.

The head of economic affairs and international trade in the ministry of foreign affairs, Nelson Ndirangu yesterday said the conference would deliberate on pending issues carried over from the 2013 forum in Bali, Indonesia among other agreements, which have not been properly implemented.

These include decisions aimed at streamlining trade, allowing developing countries more options for providing food security, boosting least-developed countries' trade and helping development more generally.

Ndirangu however said Kenya will push for policies focusing on agriculture, industrial products and development.

Ndirangu was addressing journalists in Mombasa during the first technical preparation meeting by the national trade negotiating committee.

He said Kenya hosting the WTO conference is proof that the country is safe.

"Hosting this event will prove that Kenya is safe and peaceful than other countries which think they are peaceful than us. It will also prove that Africa can hold a meeting of such magnitude as we remain part of the global trading nations," said Ndirangu.

Kenya won the bid to host the conference after the Turkish government stepped down in its favour. 
 
 
L'Algérie pourrait présenter son dossier d'accession à l'OMC en décembre prochain
17 March 2015
All Africa
 
Alger, Mar 17, 2015 (Algerie Presse Service/AllAfrica Global Media via COMTEX) -- Le dossier d'accession de l'Algérie à l'Organisation mondiale du commerce (OMC) pourrait être présenté lors de la 10ème conférence ministérielle de cette organisation prévue en décembre prochain au Kenya, a indiqué, mardi à Alger, le ministre du Commerce, Amara Benyounes.

"Si le dossier (d'accession) sera prêt, nous le présenterons lors de la prochaine conférence ministérielle de l'OMC, sinon nous le ferons l'année prochaine", a déclaré M. Benyounes à la presse en marge d'une réunion du Comité national chargé des négociations pour l'accession de l'Algérie à cette organisation.

Selon lui, l'accession de l'Algérie à l'OMC, qui ne fait face, pour l'instant, à aucun obstacle majeur est au "dernier virage".

"Nous avons franchi plusieurs étapes depuis le début des négociations avec l'OMC en matière d'accession. Aujourd'hui nous sommes vraiment au dernier virage", a souligné M. Benyounes.

Depuis la tenue du dernier round de négociations multilatérales en mars 2014 à Genève, l'Algérie a reçu 131 questions additionnelles qui sont traitées par les différents départements ministériels.

"Je pense qu'il s'agit des dernières questions" adressées au pays, a-t-il avancé.

Quant à la réunion du Comité national chargé des négociations pour l'accession de l'Algérie à l'OMC, tenue mardi à huis clos entre les représentants de plusieurs ministères, M. Benyounes a fait savoir que cette rencontre a été consacrée à l'examen du projet de réponses aux questions posées essentiellement par les Etats-Unis et l'Union Européenne (UE).

Ces questions portent essentiellement sur la législation algérienne et sa mise en conformité avec les règles de l'OMC.

Après adoption des réponses, elles seront transmises au comité gouvernemental chargé du suivi et de la supervision de l'accession de l'Algérie à l'OMC, qui est présidé par le Premier ministre, Abdelmalek Sellal, qui tranchera définitivement sur ces réponses.

"Une fois que le gouvernement tranchera, nous allons probablement programmer une réunion multilatérale à Genève en juin", a ajouté M. Benyounes.

A ce jour, l'Algérie a mené 12 rounds de négociations multilatérales qui ont permis de traiter plus de 1.900 questions liées au système économique national.

Le pays a aussi tenu plus de 120 réunions bilatérales avec une vingtaine de pays, qui ont été couronnées par la conclusion de six accords bilatéraux avec le Cuba, le Brésil, l'Uruguay, la Suisse, le Venezuela et l'Argentine.

L'Algérie mène encore des discussions avec 19 autres pays membres dont douze avec lesquels les discussions sont à un stade avancé.

Tout en rappelant que l'accession de l'Algérie à l'OMC ne constitue pas une "obsession", M. Benyounes a réaffirmé que le gouvernement travaille conformément aux orientations du Président de la République, Abdelaziz Bouteflika, qui reposent sur "la préservation des intérêts de l'économie algérienne".

La prochaine conférence ministérielle, la première de l'OMC à se tenir en Afrique Sub-saharienne, aura lieu du 15 au 18 décembre 2015 à Nairobi (Kenya). 
 
 
Evalúan propuesta para adecuar DJAI a OMC 
18 March 2015
El Cronista Comercial
 
El secretario de Comercio, Augusto Costa, aseguró ayer que la Argentina "va a cumplir" con el fallo de la Organización Mundial de Comercio (OMC) respecto del sistema de las DJAI y que lo hará "de manera ordenada" para que no se perjudique el comercio exterior del país. Agregó que para cumplir con ese fallo el Gobierno "está elaborando una propuesta respecto de los plazos y las modificaciones que va a realizar al sistema de administración del comercio exterior que está vigente". El Gobierno considera que el fallo no obliga a eliminar las DJAI sino a adecuar el sistema, por lo que la propuesta irá en ese sentido.

La semana pasada se realizó una primera audiencia en Ginebra entre los negociadores argentinos y los delegados ante la OMC de los países demandantes (Estados Unidos, Europa y Japón) y entre jueves y viernes se realizará otro encuentro.
 
 
Ambassador: WTO Win For Australian Plain Packaging Could Lead to Alcohol Labeling
World Trade Online
Posted: March 17, 2015 
Indonesia’s Ambassador to the World Trade Organization Iman Pambagyo last week signaled that a win for an Australian law requiring plain packaging of cigarettes as an anti-smoking measure could lead his country to introduce a similar measure for alcoholic beverages.
 
If the Australian law survived Indonesia’s current challenge in the WTO, it would set a dangerous precedent for countries being able to implement measures that are more trade-restrictive than necessary to fulfill a legitimate policy objective without providing supporting scientific evidence that they could achieve the intended goal, he said in an interview with Inside U.S. Trade.
 
Pambagyo said there have been some officials talking about plain packaging for wine and alcoholic beverages on the ground that Indonesia has a large Muslim population. He said he would not like to see such an expansion of plain packaging in the future.
 
No law on plain packaging for alcoholic products is currently being developed because of Indonesia's challenge in the DSB, according to Pambagyo.
 
But he said a WTO win for Australia on this issue would leave the door open for the Indonesian government to expand plain packaging to alcoholic products without needing to justify that the law would advance the legitimate objective of protecting against moral hazards.
 
Indonesia would be able to base its law “on a moral high ground” because Indonesia is a largely Muslim country and many Muslims do not consume alcohol based on religious principles, Pambagyo said.
 
Pambagyo’s veiled, carefully worded warning about the possibility of retaliation is more explicit than a four-page briefing paper on the WTO plain packaging fight that Indonesia prepared to journalists.
 
It says that a win for plain packaging could mean it would spread to other products, such as palm oil or alcoholic beverages “for a religious reason of moral hazards."
 
Plain packaging requires companies to use standard colors and typefaces instead of brand logos on package, usually with large health warnings. The law is the last in a series of systematic steps that Australia has undertaken over the years to curtail smoking among its population, in line with the international treaty on tobacco approved by members of the World Health Organization (WHO).
 
Supporters of the law have long made the case that the expansion of plain packaging to products other than tobacco such as sugary drinks is highly unlikely since cigarettes are the only product that will kill people if it is used as intended. They also note that tobacco is the only product that is subject to a WHO treaty called the Framework Convention on Tobacco Control, which requires signatories to implement a series of policy recommendations that range from tobacco advertisement restrictions and graphic health warnings on packaging to protections from tobacco smoke exposure and the testing and regulating of the contents and emissions of tobacco products.
 
Pambagyo also said Indonesia fears that other countries such as the United Kingdom, Ireland, New Zealand and Chile will follow Australia's example by enacting plain packaging measures on tobacco products. For instance, Irish President Michael Higgins signed into law plain packaging measures on March 10, according to the president's website.
 
In its WTO challenge of Australia’s measure, Indonesia included a violation of Article 2.2 of the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT), which requires WTO signatories to refrain from imposing technical regulations that are more trade restrictive than necessary to achieve a legitimate policy objective in technical regulations, taking into account of the risks non-fulfillment.
 
The TBT article contains an illustrative list of possible legitimate policy objectives, including the protection of human health or safety, but not the prevention of moral hazards. The risks of non-fulfillment can be assessed by relevant “scientific and technical information” among others, according to Article 2.2.
 
Indonesia and the other complainants have charged that the Australian law was adopted without prior presentation of scientific analysis showing that its measures could meet the intended objective. Australia has claimed its law is backed by several studies showing that such a requirement will help reduce smoking if it is part of a comprehensive set of tobacco control measures. The law was recommended by Australia's National Preventative Health Task Force, which said its findings were backed by 12 peer-reviewed research papers and nine additional studies that are publicly available.
 
Additionally, Indonesia’s briefing paper claims that an analysis conducted since the implementation of Australia's law in 2013 has shown that law has had no effect on Australian smoking rates.
 
According to the briefing paper, Indonesia does not oppose any effort to address the harmful effects of tobacco products and itself taken measures to discourage smoking. This includes a regulation that requires graphic health warnings on 40 percent of a cigarette pack compared to the 30 percent minimum required by the WHO framework. The briefing paper notes that some signatories of the framework have not implemented that minimum requirement.
 
The brief also claims that some of Indonesia's smoking regulations are stricter or as strict than those of major economies including the European Union. Indonesia considers that its graphic warning requirement is less trade restrictive than necessary because it does not deny the use of a trademark, as does the Australian law, Pambagyo said.
 
The objective of protecting public morals is a possible exception to otherwise prevailing trade obligations under Article XX of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. Article XX allows members to impose measures necessary to protect public morals under the condition that they are not a disguised trade restriction and do not constitute an unjustifiable discrimination between countries where the same conditions prevail.
 
In the WTO case, Indonesia also charges a violation of Article 2.1 of the TBT, which states that members shall give imports treatment that is “no less favourable” than that of like products of national origin.
 
It also charges that it is a violation of the Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS), including the rights of trademark owners and rules on geographic indications (GIs). In the WTO fight, Indonesia has claimed that the Australian measures do not allow cigarettes to display trademarks, GIs, or “any other marking other than an alphanumeric code for product identification purposes.”
 
It has charged that this constitutes violations of Articles 22.2(b) and 24.3 of TRIPS, which apply to GIs. Article 22.2(b) protects against “unfair competition” as defined by the 1967 Paris Convention, which defines unfair competition as acts that “create confusion by any means whatever with the establishment, the goods, or the industrial or commercial activities, of a competitor.”
 
Indonesia has also charged that the Australian law violates TRIPS Article 20, which state that the use of a trademark shall not be unjustifiably encumbered by special requirements.
 
Indonesia requested a panel on March 3, 2014 and one was subsequently established on March 26, 2014. Indonesia is joined by Honduras, Cuba, Ukraine and the Dominican Republic as co-complainants. In October 2014, the DSB panel announced it would not issue a ruling before the first half of 2016.
 
 
Obama administration questions U.S. airlines on subsidy claims -source 
By Jeffrey Dastin 
 
WASHINGTON, March 17 (Reuters) - The Obama administration has asked U.S. airlines for more information on their claims that Gulf carriers have received market-distorting subsidies, marking its first written response to U.S. airlines' lobbying effort, Reuters has learned.

The administration asked U.S. airline representatives about 20 questions in writing last week about their method in determining the subsidy allegations and about the market harm they say Gulf carriers have caused them, according to a person familiar with the matter.

U.S. airlines hope to provide the government answers within 10 days, the person said.

While the administration has not taken a stance, the request reflects the growing focus on the debate in Washington. The source said the questions were factual and did not suggest the administration was either swayed or skeptical.

Leaders in the U.S. House Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure have recently called on the administration to look into the allegations, while U.S. airlines repeated their request Tuesday for the United States to open talks with Qatar and the United Arab Emirates on the "Open Skies" agreements that authorize flying between the nations.

The Gulf carriers, meanwhile, have stepped up their defense.

"We make no apologies for offering new competitive choice for air travelers," Etihad Airways Chief Executive Officer James Hogan said in a speech on Tuesday, adding that the airline supports more than 200,000 U.S. jobs and is transparent about what he emphasized were loans, not subsidies, provided to it by the government of Abu Dhabi, its shareholder.

Emirates airline President Tim Clark said at a separate media event Tuesday that the U.S. airlines' allegations were incorrect and promised to provide a "line-by-line response" to their lobbying document.

Both said they are in touch with the Obama administration, and Clark said his meetings were "very constructive."

Kerry Humphrey, a spokesperson for the Economic and Business Affairs Bureau at the U.S. Department of State, reiterated that the administration takes the U.S. airlines' competition concerns seriously but remains "committed to the Open Skies policy," which has benefited travelers, the U.S. aviation industry and the U.S. economy.

"No decisions have been made," she said in an email. (Reporting By Jeffrey Dastin in Washington; Editing by Ken Wills) 
 
 
Gulf Airlines Reject Claim They Gained Unfair Help 
By Jon Ostrower and Susan Carey 
18 March 2015
The Wall Street Journal Europe
 
WASHINGTON -- The head of Etihad Airways rejected claims by U.S. rivals that it has received unfair state support, saying the company is profitable and that the investments it has received from its government owner don't amount to subsidies.

The remarks by Etihad Chief Executive James Hogan, at an aviation conference Tuesday organized by the U.S. Chamber of Commerce Foundation, were a response to allegations by the three largest U.S. airlines that Etihad and two other Persian Gulf carriers -- Emirates Airline of Dubai and Qatar Airways of Doha -- have received more than $40 billion in trade-distorting government subsidies since 2004.

Mr. Hogan said Etihad has had to build its aviation infrastructure from scratch, whereas U.S. and European carriers enjoy a mature system. Given that, he said, the equity investments and loans by its owner, the government of Abu Dhabi in the United Arab Emirates, were a reasonable step to get the carrier up and running after its founding since 2003.

Tim Clark, president of fast-growing Emirates Airline also took vigorous exception Tuesday to the U.S. carriers' claims.

Speaking at the National Press Club in Washington, Mr. Clark said his company was established 30 years ago under "clear rules of no subsidies" and hasn't deviated from that approach except for receiving "seed capital" when it was just getting under way. The government of Dubai gives "no support for the operation," he said, and it expects Emirates to make its own way.

In late January, American Airlines Group Inc., United Continental Holdings Inc. and Delta Air Lines Inc. began circulating to Washington policy makers a 55-page report that alleges Emirates and its Gulf rivals, Etihad Airways of Abu Dhabi and Doha-based Qatar Airways, have received more than $40 billion in subsidies and unfair advantages since 2004.

The three big U.S. airlines are pressing their government to try to persuade the United Arab Emirates and Qatar to amend their liberal air treaties with the U.S. to "level the playing field." Failing that, the three big U.S. airlines want Gulf carrier access to be frozen or for the treaties to be revoked.

Mr. Clark said he made the rounds in Washington among the same policy makers and found the discussions "very constructive." He vowed that his airline will formulate "a line-by-line" response to the lengthy U.S. report and will "rebut" all the allegations. He also mentioned "being given the benefit of an apology" by the people who made them, and questioned why the report wasn't made public -- and visible to him and his Gulf rivals -- until two weeks ago.

Emirates, which now serves nine U.S. cities with 84 flights a week, intends to serve 20 U.S. airports, Mr. Clark said. Last year, Emirates delivered 2.4 million passengers to the U.S., 1.7 million of whom were coming from multiple points U.S. airlines don't serve..

 
U.S. sets preliminary duties on Turkey pipe imports, spares S.Korea 
 
WASHINGTON, March 17 (Reuters) - The United States on Tuesday set preliminary duties on welded line pipe from Turkey after finding they are produced using unfair government subsidies, but spared South Korean imports.

The U.S. Department of Commerce said anti-subsidy duties on the pipe, used for oil or gas pipelines, would range from 3.76 percent to 8.85 percent, with the highest rate for products from Turkey's Borusan Mannesmann Boru Sanayi ve Ticaret AS . South Korean subsidies were below the threshold, Commerce said.

Companies, including Northwest Pipe Company, JMC Steel Group division Energex and Maverick Tube Corporation, complained that rising imports forced local producers to cut prices.

But a parallel investigation will continue into whether imports were sold at below-cost prices, which could still lead to duties on products produced by South Korea's Dongbu Steel , Husteel Co, Korea Cast Iron Pipe Industry Co Ltd and SamKang M&T Co. (Reporting by Krista Hughes, editing by G Crosse) 
 
 
Canadian Court Rejects Skechers Appeal of Adding R&D Costs to Dutiable Cost
By Peter Menyasz
WTO Reporter, March 18, 2015
 
March 17— A Canadian court rejected an appeal by Skechers USA Canada Inc. to a decision by the Canada Border Services Agency (CBSA) to include all research and development (R&D) costs paid by Skechers to its U.S. parent when the agency set the dutiable value of footwear purchases (Skechers USA Canada Inc. v. Canada Border Services Agency,Federal Court of Appeal, No. A-121-14, 3/2/15 ).
 
Skechers USA did not respond to a March 17 request for comment or to the question of whether it would seek leave to appeal to the Supreme Court of Canada.
 
The Canadian International Trade Tribunal (CITT) correctly found a sufficient link between the R&D payments and footwear imported by Skechers to warrant including the payments in the goods' dutiable value, the Federal Court of Appeal said March 2 in its unanimous ruling, made public March 16.
 
Acceptable Outcomes
 
The tribunal's finding falls within the range of possible, acceptable outcomes and is defensible based on the facts and law, Justice David G. Near said in his ruling.
 
Skechers Canada purchases footwear designed by its U.S. parent and manufactured offshore by third parties, and the transfer price paid to Skechers USA Inc. includes the factory price paid to the manufacturers and the cost of shipping the goods to the U.S. and warehousing them, plus an arm's-length profit, the ruling said.
 
The Canadian subsidiary also pays the U.S. parent under a cost-sharing agreement for development and maintenance of the Skechers brand, including research, development, design, advertising and marketing, it said. The amounts are a percentage of Skechers USA's total annual costs for those activities, based on a ratio of Skechers Canada's operating profit to the total anticipated operating profits of all participants in the agreement, it said.
 
A 2006 CBSA audit found that a portion of the R&D payments made under the cost-sharing agreement should be included in the “price paid or payable” by Skechers Canada for the imports, the court ruling said. Skechers Canada requested a redetermination in December 2012, leading the border agency to issue seven decisions under Section 60(4) of the Customs Act that all R&D payments must be included for goods imported between 2005 and 2011.
 
Skechers Canada appealed to the CITT in March 2013, which in December 2013 upheld the border agency's conclusions.
 
Skechers Canada's appeal argued that the CITT's ruling was unreasonable, alleging specifically that the tribunal erred by imposing an improper burden of proof, misinterpreting the Act and the cost-sharing agreement and failing to properly apply relevant jurisprudence, the ruling said.
 
But the tribunal made no error in requiring Skechers Canada to prove the R&D payments were not “in respect of” the goods, it said. The appellate court also rejected Skechers Canada's argument that the R&D costs associated with unsuccessful styles and styles that are never imported into Canada should not be included in the cost of the goods.
 
The court rejected Skechers Canada's argument that the CITT contradicted Decision 5.1 of the World Trade Organization Committee on Customs Valuation, which found in May 1995 that costs incurred solely for research do not represent “development or design” work. The firm conceded that its R&D payments were not actually assists, so the tribunal was under no obligation to consider the WTO ruling, it said.
 
 
Suisse/UE : réunion du Comité mixte sur les marchés publics 
Shi Jianguo 
 
GENEVE, 17 mars (Xinhua) -- La 11ème réunion du Comité mixte Suisse-Union européenne (UE) s'est tenue mardi à Genève, qui est consacrée à l'accord bilatéral sur les marchés publics.

Lors de cette réunion, les deux parties se sont déclarées satisfaites de l'application dans de bonnes conditions de cet accord qui "constitue un pilier important pour l'accès aux marchés publics", selon un communiqué publié à l'issue de la réunion.

Elles ont fait le point sur "l'état des processus de révision des législations sur les marchés publics, particulièrement dans le contexte de la mise en oeuvre de l'Accord révisé de l'Organisation mondiale du commerce (OMC) sur les marchés publics entré en vigueur le 6 avril 2014 pour la plupart des Membres, dont l'UE", selon la même source.

Les deux parties ont également échangé à cette occasion des points de vue sur le rôle des marchés publics dans le cadre des relations de libre-échange avec des pays tiers.

L'accord bilatéral sur les marchés publics est l'un des sept accords sectoriels conclus en juin 1999 entre l'UE et la Suisse. Il étend le champ de couverture de l'Accord de l'OMC, notamment aux achats publics effectués dans l'UE et en Suisse par les communes.
 
 
U.S. Senate's Hatch says making progress on fast-track trade talks 
 
WASHINGTON, March 16 (Reuters) - U.S. Senate Finance Committee Chairman Orrin Hatch, a Republican, said on Monday he is making progress with his Democratic colleagues on a bill to streamline the passage of free-trade deals through Congress.

"We're making headway," Hatch told reporters. "I have high hopes that we will get there. I chatted with the president (Barack Obama) today. He said it's very important to him and he wants me to get it through."

Hatch has been negotiating with the panel's top Democrat, Ron Wyden, and the Republican chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, Paul Ryan.

Fast-track legislation is seen as key to sealing a 12-nation Pacific trade pact.

Hatch said Wyden, who is pushing for a mechanism to strip unsatisfactory deals of their special status, wanted some concessions Republicans balked at.

"We have given quite a bit on changes to senator Wyden and we have reached a point where there isn't much more we can give," he said.

Wyden said he did not want to negotiate in public.

The delay in agreeing on legislation is blamed by some for pushing back the timetable on the 12-nation Trans-Pacific Partnership.

Chief negotiators wrapped up talks in Hawaii on Sunday without setting a date for ministers to meet and take the tough political decisions needed to close the deal.

"There are still issues that have big gaps among member nations, so working-level or chief negotiator-level talks will be needed before moving on to ministerial-level talks," a Japanese official told reporters in Tokyo.

Japan's Prime Minister Shinzo Abe is reported to visit Washington during Japan's "Golden Week", a string of holidays from late April to early May.

Japanese Economy Minister Akira Amari said he wants to reach a broad agreement to two-way trade talks between Japan and the United States, which is seen to play a crucial part for the overall TPP deal, before Abe's possible visit to the U.S.

Amari also said he hopes to hold talks with his counterpart U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman in spring before the expected Abe's visit to the United States. (Reporting by Krista Hughes; Additional reporting by Kaori Kaneko and Takashi Umekawa; Editing by Sandra Maler, Bill Trott, Mohammad Zargham and Michael Perry) 
 
 
U.S. urges allies to think twice before joining China-led bank 
 
* Four big EU states agree to join new investment bank 
* Bank could spread Chinese "soft power" in Asia 
* U.S. says new bank must meet high governance standards 
* India also joins, Japan seen staying away
 
By Matthias Sobolewski and Jason Lange 
 
BERLIN/WASHINGTON, March 17 (Reuters) - The United States has urged countries to think twice before signing up to a new China-led Asian development bank that Washington sees as a rival to the World Bank, after Germany, France and Italy followed Britain in saying they would join. 
 
The concerted move by U.S. allies to participate in Beijing's flagship economic outreach project is a diplomatic blow to the United States and its efforts to counter the fast-growing economic and diplomatic influence of China. 
 
Europe's participation reflects the eagerness to partner with China's economy, the world's second largest, and comes amid prickly trade negotiations between Brussels and Washington. 
 
European Union and Asian governments are frustrated that the U.S. Congress has held up a reform of voting rights in the International Monetary Fund that would give China and other emerging powers more say in global economic governance. 
 
Washington insists it has not actively discouraged countries from joining the new bank, but it has questioned whether the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) will have sufficient standards of governance and environmental and social safeguards. 
 
"I hope before the final commitments are made anyone who lends their name to this organization will make sure that the governance is appropriate," Treasury Secretary Jack Lew told U.S. lawmakers. 
 
German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schaeuble announced at a joint news conference with visiting Chinese Vice Premier Ma Kai that Germany, Europe's biggest economy and a major trade partner of Beijing, would be a founding member of the AIIB. 
 
In a joint statement, the foreign and finance ministers of Germany, France and Italy said they would work to ensure the new institution "follows the best standards and practices in terms of governance, safeguards, debt and procurement policies." 
 
In a short statement, China's Ministry of Finance said it welcomed the decision and hoped to receive written confirmation soon. 
 
"If all goes smoothly, France, Italy and Germany could formally become founding members of the AIIB two weeks after," it said. 
 
Luxembourg's Finance Ministry also confirmed the country, a big financial centre, has applied to be a founding member of the $50 billion AIIB. 
 
The AIIB was launched in Beijing last year to spur investment in Asia in transport, energy, telecommunications and other infrastructure. It was seen as a rival to the Western-dominated World Bank and the Asian Development Bank. China has said it will use the best practices of those institutions. 
 
NOT AN ACCIDENT 
 
The World Bank is traditionally run by a U.S. nominee and Washington also has the most influence at the IMF. The United States and Japan are the dominant members of the Asian Development Bank (ADB). 
 
The planned reforms at the IMF would double the fund's resources and hand more voting power to countries such as the BRICS - Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa. The adjustment of shares and voting rights was brokered by Britain at a Group of 20 summit in 2010, and European countries ratified it long ago. 
 
Lew told lawmakers that the U.S. delay in ratifying the agreement was undermining its credibility and influence as countries question the United States' commitment to international institutions. 
 
"It's not an accident that emerging economies are looking at other places because they are frustrated that, frankly, the United States has stalled a very mild and reasonable set of reforms in the IMF," Lew said. 
 
Some Republicans have complained the changes would cost too much at a time Washington is running big budget deficits. The reforms have also ran afoul of a growing isolationist trend among the party's influential Tea Party wing. 
 
China said earlier this year a total of 26 countries had been included as AIIB founder members, mostly from Asia and the Middle East. It plans to finalise the articles of agreement by the end of the year. 
 
China's state-owned Xinhua news agency said South Korea and Switzerland were also considering joining. 
 
Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Hong Lei would not comment on which countries had applied, and repeated that the bank would be "open, inclusive, transparent and responsible." 
 
Washington says it sees a role for the AIIB given Asia's immense infrastructure needs and regards it as a potential partner for established institutions like the ADB. 
 
But its strategy of questioning the AIIB's standards has drawn criticism from some observers, who say the administration should have been more accepting of the new bank or offered alternatives within existing institutions. 
 
 
México es el primer exportador de vehículos de carga 
El Economista 
18 March 2015
El Economista
 
Roberto Morales 
El Economista México exportó vehículos de autotransporte de mercancía por 21,503 millones de dólares en el 2014, un aumento interanual de 22.5%, colocándose como el líder en esta categoría a nivel mundial. Los productos vendidos comprenden camionetas y camiones, en su gran mayoría con capacidad de carga de entre 2 y 20 toneladas, lo cual no incluye tractores para semirremolques (tráileres). El monto no sólo representa un récord, sino que además ninguna otra categoría en el sector automotriz se disparó tanto en su crecimiento. Aumentó al triple (195%) frente al resultado del 2008 antes de la crisis financiera internacional, cuando las exportaciones fueron por 7,298 millones de dólares. Distante, en la segunda posición global, quedó Estados Unidos, cuyas exportaciones sumaron 14,051 millones de dólares, de acuerdo con datos de la Organización Mundial de Comercio (OMC).

Es un sector que recibe muy poca atención; sin embargo, es altamente rentable y ha tenido un repunte gracias a la economía estadounidense y al crecimiento económico de América Latina , afirmó Guido Vildozo, gerente de IHS Automotive Latinoamérica. En el 2014, México dirigió 89.2% de este tipo de exportaciones a Estados Unidos, el mayor importador mundial. De hecho, las fábricas instaladas en México abastecieron ocho de cada 10 vehículos de esta categoría importados por los estadounidenses. Entre las empresas exportadoras estuvieron Chrysler, con las camionetas RAM 4,500 y 5,500 producidas en Saltillo, Coahuila; General Motors, con la camioneta Chevrolet Silverado, ensamblada en Silao, Guanajuato, e International, con varios tipos de camiones fabricados en Escobedo, Nuevo León. México tiene ventajas competitivas vía costos para la fabricación de estos vehículos, que son más intensivos en mano de obra de lo que son los automóviles para el transporte de personas , refirió Armando Soto, presidente de la consultoría Kaso y Asociados. Un factor que beneficia a México es su vecindad con Estados Unidos, dado que se trata de productos de gran tamaño cuyo costo de transporte, por tanto, se eleva. Esto influyó para que su segundo mercado fuera Canadá, donde las exportaciones mexicanas alcanzaron 986 millones de dólares. rmorales@eleconomista.com.mx
END


  ________________________________  
Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.