WTO chief says India should lead talks on food stock solution
WTO should continue to stem protectionism: Nirmala Sitharaman
WTO rules against Argentina in import restrictions case
Pierde Argentina apelación contra Estados Unidos, Europa y Japón
OMC/politique d'importation: l'Argentine déboutée à nouveau en appel
Lawmakers hail victory on Argentina imports
China, Korea Hold Bilaterals On ITA Product Scope, But Talks Still Stalled
Vilsack Says Congress Will Need Act On COOL If U.S. Loses WTO Appeal
Japan TPP negotiator: felt US intends to wrap up talks in few months
US loosens restrictions on Cuba, making trade, travel easier
Swiss stun markets and scrap franc ceiling
IMF Chief Says Global Economy Faces 'Very Strong' Headwinds
 
WTO chief says India should lead talks on food stock solution
Nayanima Basu
Business Standard
16 January 2015
 
India should assume a leading role in spearheading the talks for having a permanent solution in public stockholding for food security purposes, according to the director general of World Trade Organization (WTO) Roberto Azevedo.
“The first decision and clearly the most important for India was a clarification of the Bali decision on the public stockholding for food security purposes mainly and unequivocally stating that the Peace Clause agreed in Bali would remain in place until a permanent solution is found for that issue. I look forward to India playing a leading role in this regard in the coming months,” Azevedo said on Friday while addressing the CII Partnership Summit.
Lauding the efforts of Prime Minister Narendra Modi and minister of state (independent charge) for commerce and industry Nirmala Sitharaman in achieving the breakthrough last year in November that led to the adoption of Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA), Azevedo said it was significant decision that enabled all 160-members agree to come together and bring issues back on track.
Azevedo said the impasse that was reached in the talks that were agreed in Bali, had a “paralyzing effect on negotiations across the board.”
The standoff happened last year in July when India refused to sign the TFA that would have converted it into a legal document. TFA aims at easing global customs norms.
India took a stance that it will not agree to the TFA until the ‘Peace Clause’ on food stocks is made permanent until a final solution is arrived at on the issue. Earlier, it was agreed in Bali in December 2013 that the ‘Peace Clause’ or interim measure will be applicable only for four years. However, the impasse was broken when US assured its support on India’s stance at the WTO. Subsequently all members also agreed.
Azevedo said WTO members are now working towards ratifying the TFA according to their own domestic procedures.
“It has the potential to make a big difference, particularly for countries like India,” he added.
Underscoring the need for members to put their focus back on the Doha Development Agenda, which started in 2001, Azevêdo said that all countries should start negotiations by July. He also highlighted the tough times expected ahead with the onset of negotiations that will culminate at the 10th ministerial conference in Nairobi in December.
On the other hand, minister Sitharaman once again stated that mercantilist policies of certain countries cannot be encourage if the Doha development round has to be completed.
“There is an attempt to link free trade to development. Trade and development are intertwined but I would be hastened to think that only trade is development … Development must remain at the core of the Doha round,” Sitharaman added.
She also highlighted that the objective of the Doha round is alleviating poverty, which cannot be done if the agreements are achieved based on countries’ growth rates.
 
 
WTO should continue to stem protectionism: Nirmala Sitharaman
Hindu Business Line
 
New Delhi, Jan 16:   
The World Trade Organisation should continue with its good work of stemming protectionism and India will work with this multilateral body to move in that direction, Commerce and Industry Minister Nirmala Sitharaman has said.

"WTO had made every effort to stem protectionism. It should continue to stand up to protectionism", Sitharaman said at a special Plenary at the CII Partnership Summit 2015 at Jaipur on Friday.

This special plenary was held to mark the two decades of existence of the WTO. 
 
Starting on January 1, 1995 with 127 members, the WTO has significantly expanded in the two decades of its existence with as many as 160 members and accounting for 98 percent of the global trade.

In her address, Sitharaman urged the WTO to be more responsive to the needs of the developing countries and least developed countries, who account for minuscule share of less than 1 per cent of the global trade. 
 
INDIA's CONCERN 
 
Sitharaman also expressed concern about attempts being made by certain countries to equate only free trade to development.

"Trade is an important instrument (for development). But only free trade cannot be equated to development. Development encompasses of other things also and not just trade", Sitharaman said.

Development was at the core of the Doha Development Agenda and it must remain at the centrestage, she said, noting that WTO's future work programme must factor in the point that prosperity of few cannot be achieved at the misery of many. 
 
Later, WTO Director General Roberto Azevedo told BusinessLine that he agreed with the Indian position that trade cannot be the only element affecting development of countries.

"She (Nirmala Sitharaman) is absolutely right. Trade is not the only element affecting development, there are many elements that affects the development of countries. It would also be wrong to say that trade does not play a part.

While trade is not the only element that must be looked into, it is clearly one important element of the development debate", Azevedo said.

He also made it clear that it was not for the WTO (the organisation) but its members who have to find the right balance.
 
 
WTO rules against Argentina in import restrictions case 
By Krista Hughes

WASHINGTON, Jan 15 (Reuters) - The World Trade Organization on Thursday rejected Argentina's bid to overturn a ruling in favor of the United States, the European Union and Japan against the South American country's licensing rules used to restrict imports.

The WTO's appellate body recommended Argentina fix its trade rules after it upheld an earlier WTO panel report that Argentina's import licensing requirement and other import restrictions breach international trade rules.

Reacting to the decision, Argentina said it would have no immediate impact on trade.

"It will not have an immediate practical impact on the system and administration of commerce or on trade dynamics," Commerce Secretary Augusto Costa told Reuters.

Faced with a struggling economy, Argentina's government has limited imports in a bid to shield local industries and bolster its trade surplus. In 2012, the country imposed a system requiring prior approval of nearly every purchase from abroad, sparking the WTO case.

The U.S. National Association of Manufacturers said Argentina should quickly scrap its "burdensome" import requirements and the administration said it would continue to make sure trading partners played fair.

"Argentina's protectionist measures impact a broad segment of U.S. exports, potentially affecting billions of dollars in U.S. exports each year that support high-quality, middle-class American jobs," U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman said in a statement.

The European Commission said Argentina should stop requiring foreign companies to limit their imports, offset the value of imports with equivalent exports, invest in the country and keep their profits there, or use a certain amount of Argentine content in their products.

A U.S. trade official said as a result of the ruling, Argentina would have a "number of months" to fix its laws and make sure any import licenses were automatic and transparent.

But so far no deadline has been set and presidential elections in October mean the issue could wait for the next government. Argentina, Latin America's No. 3 economy, is also locked in a dispute with U.S. investors over unpaid debt.

Ultimately, if the dispute cannot be resolved, trading partners could retaliate by restricting Argentine imports or seek financial compensation.

The United States exported nearly $11 billion in goods to Argentina in the 11 months through last November, according to trade data. Key exports were computers, industrial and agricultural chemicals, agricultural and transportation equipment, machine tools, parts for oil field rigs, and refined fuel oil.

European exports to the country, mainly machinery, transport equipment and chemicals, totaled 10 billion euros ($11.59 billion) in 2013, trade data showed.

($1 = 0.8625 euros) (Additional reporting by Eliana Raszewski in Buenos Aires, Tom Miles in Geneva and Phil Blenkinsop in Brussels; Editing by David Gregorio, Gunna Dickson and Tom Brown) 
 
 
Pierde Argentina apelación contra Estados Unidos, Europa y Japón 
15 January 2015
Agencia Mexicana de Noticias, NOTIMEX
 
Ginebra, 15 Ene (Notimex).- Argentina volvió a perder una nueva apelación, en el conflicto comercial que mantiene con la Unión Europea, Estados Unidos y Japón en el seno de la Organización Mundial de Comercio (OMC).

La OMC instó al país sudamericano a "cumplir" las reglas del comercio internacional, anunció el organismo de comercio multilateral.

El gobierno de Buenos Aires había apelado en septiembre pasado el fallo emitido en primera instancia por el órgano de solución de conflictos de la OMC.

Dicho fallo dictaminó que Argentina viola las reglas del derecho internacional al imponer obstáculos a las importaciones de bienes europeos, estadunidenses y japoneses.

Es así como la OMC ratificó una decisión previa en la que consideró ilegales algunas restricciones argentinas a las importaciones de los países mencionados.

Los gobiernos inconformes acudieron a la OMC para protestar que Argentina exigiera una Declaración Jurada Anticipada de Importación sobre cualquier mercancía que ingresa a su territorio y otras licencias adicionales relacionadas con la importación de bienes.

"Estados Unidos aprecia las conclusiones de la OMC en esta disputa", señaló el representante comercial estadunidense, Michael Froman, en un comunicado.

"Las medidas proteccionistas de Argentina impactan sobre un amplio segmento de exportaciones estadunidenses, afectando un potencial de miles de millones de dólares al año en exportaciones, que son la base de empleos de alta calidad para estadunidenses de clase media", añadió.

La Organización Mundial del Comercio se ocupa de las normas mundiales por las que se rige el comercio entre las naciones. Su principal función es velar porque el comercio se realice de la manera más fluida, previsible y libre posible.
 
 
OMC/politique d'importation: l'Argentine déboutée à nouveau en appel 
15 January 2015
Agence France Presse ECOFI
 
L'Argentine a perdu à nouveau en appel devant l'Organisation mondiale du commerce (OMC), dans le conflit commercial qui l'oppose à l'UE, aux Etats-Unis et au Japon, selon une décision publiée jeudi par l'OMC.

L'Argentine avait fait appel de la décision de première instance du 22 août dernier, selon laquelle ce pays avait violé les règles du droit international en imposant des obstacles à l'importation de biens européens, américains et japonais.

L'appel a été déposé en septembre dernier et la décision a été rendue jeudi.

Dans sa décision d'appel, l'OMC confirme entièrement le jugement de 1ère instance et demande instamment à l'Argentine de "se mettre en conformité" avec les règles du commerce international.

Les trois plaignants accusaient l'Argentine d'avoir mis en place des restrictions qui pénalisent leurs exportations vers ce pays, obligeant les entreprises qui veulent exporter vers l'Argentine à importer en contrepartie des biens argentins.

L'un des exemples les plus connus est celui du constructeur automobile allemand Porsche qui a dû s'engager à acheter du vin et de l'huile d'olive argentins, pour faire entrer dans le pays une centaine de voitures.

 
Lawmakers hail victory on Argentina imports
By Victoria Guida 
POLITICO
1/15/15 5:45 PM EST
Members of Congress praised the United States’ sound defeat of Argentina at the World Trade Organization on Thursday over the Latin American country’s import restrictions, with House Ways and Means ranking member Sander Levin calling them “discriminatory and obnoxious.”
“Argentina’s import licensing restrictions are particularly pernicious because they apply to imports of all goods into Argentina, clearly discriminate against non-Argentine producers, and unjustifiably force companies seeking access to Argentina’s market to make local investments and purchases in a manner that amounts to extortion,” Levin said in a statement.
Senate Finance Committee ranking member Ron Wyden stressed that “strong enforcement of trade rules delivers clear wins for American workers, manufacturers and businesses that export.”
“The WTO confirmed that Argentina’s illegal trade restrictions on American exports of everything from advanced electronics to bicycles have no place in a 21st century global trading system,” he said in a statement, calling Argentina’s restrictions “a protectionist shakedown of American exporters.”
The Office of the U.S. Trade Representative particularly stressed their recent record of enforcement victories, including challenges of China’s duties on autos, export restrictions on rare earth minerals and India’s ban on U.S. poultry.
One administration official hammered this point home, telling POLITICO: “This administration’s commitment to enforcement is evident in victories like this one and will absolutely be part of the overall case we make on moving the trade agenda forward.”
The National Association of Manufacturers similarly praised the ruling, saying it would promote “a more open trading environment that will expand opportunities for both our economies.”
“Manufacturers strongly welcome today’s decision by the WTO Appellate Body finding that Argentina’s burdensome and trade-limiting import licensing requirements are contrary to the obligations that Argentina took in joining the WTO,” Linda Dempsey, NAM’s vice president of international economic affairs, said in a statement. “We urge Argentina to move quickly to eliminate these provisions.”
The WTO’s Appellate Body shot down all of Argentina’s appeals in a dispute with the United States, European Union and Japan over a broad array of import restrictions. The ruling upheld a WTO panel’s previous decision that the country’s Advance Sworn Import Declaration violated international trade rules barring import restrictions other than “duties, taxes or other charges.”
The WTO faulted Argentina for conditioning a company’s imports on an equal or greater value of exports, limiting the volume of imports or reducing their price, requiring investment in Argentina and mandating local content in domestic goods.
“This is a great win for the United States,” U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman said in a press release. “Argentina’s protectionist measures impact a broad segment of U.S. exports, potentially affecting billions of dollars in U.S. exports each year that support high-quality, middle-class American jobs.”
Argentina’s import policy also allowed the country to require extra information or steps from importers before their products were allowed into the country. Opponents of the policy argued that this amounted to an import license that could be faulted under the WTO’s import licensing agreement, but the original WTO panel disagreed, calling it a restriction.
After the U.S., EU and Japan began dispute settlement action on this case in 2012, Buenos Aires responded by launching its own WTO cases, including one against EU restrictions on imports of biodiesel and two against U.S. curbs on imports of lemon and beef.
According to a U.S. trade official, the lemon case is still under discussion by the two sides. A WTO panel is expected to issue a ruling in the beef case early this year.
 
 
China, Korea Hold Bilaterals On ITA Product Scope, But Talks Still Stalled 
Inside U.S. Trade - 01/16/2015 
 
China and Korea have continued their bilateral exchange on the product scope of an expanded Information Technology Agreement (ITA), but so far have failed to settle their differences. Korea wants China to add products such as rechargeable batteries or certain kinds of monitors to the product list to make up for the fact that China has been unwilling to consider tariff elimination on flat-panel displays.
 
One informed source said Chinese and Korean ministers have exchanged letters on ITA, but Beijing has not wavered from its insistence that it cannot make concessions that go beyond the understanding it reached with the United States in November. That understanding excluded flat panel displays (Inside U.S. Trade, Dec. 19, 2014).
 
The bilateral exchange between China and Korea is the only activity on ITA that has been taking place, and until Korea and China resolve their differences, no additional negotiating rounds will be scheduled, a Geneva source said.
 
At the same time, sources said they do not expect a major development to occur at the Jan. 21-24 World Economic Forum meeting in Davos, Switzerland. One Geneva source noted that many of the key political actors needed to conclude the product scope negotiations will attend that meeting, but that ITA is not scheduled to be discussed at that meeting. However, principals could discuss it on the sidelines.
 
One source said they are waiting for the informal consultations by World Trade Organization Director-General Roberto Azevedo to be held as well. Those have not occurred as the WTO has begun to return from its holiday break.
 
 
Vilsack Says Congress Will Need Act On COOL If U.S. Loses WTO Appeal 
Inside U.S. Trade - 01/16/2015 
 
Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack last week suggested that Congress would have to either repeal or reform the U.S. country-of-origin labeling (COOL) system for meat if the United States loses its appeal at the World Trade Organization of an October 2014 panel ruling that found the U.S. failed to bring its COOL regime into compliance with trade rules.
 
Speaking on Jan. 9, Vilsack also pointed to two ways that Congress could fix the law if the U.S. appeals fail. They are to repeal the mandatory COOL requirement, thereby making such labeling voluntary, or to come up with a more lax labeling regime that does not require cattle producers to segregate animals based on their country of origin.
 
"If we lose the appeal, the only way you can create a synergy between what Congress is currently asking us to do and the WTO is for Congress either to rescind and repeal the law, and you get into a voluntary situation, or come up with a different direction to us to come up with a more generic labeling that doesn't require segregation," Vilsack said during a press conference at the American Farm Bureau Federation's annual convention in San Diego.
 
In its October ruling, the compliance panel found that the COOL measure -- despite revisions made through a U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) rule in 2013 to comply with an earlier WTO Appellate Body ruling -- continued to violate Article 2.1 of the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade, which requires that members' technical regulations not discriminate against imported products.
 
The U.S. appealed the compliance panel ruling on Nov. 28, and the Appellate Body is required to deliver its ruling within 60-90 days of that date.
 
Vilsack's statement at the Farm Bureau convention goes farther than remarks he made in November saying he does not believe COOL can be sufficiently altered through regulation to satisfy the WTO (Inside U.S. Trade, Nov. 21, 2014). At the Farm Bureau press conference, Vilsack emphasized that his aides have told him USDA cannot "square the circle" through more COOL regulations.
 
The Farm Bureau in its 2015 policy positions adopted on Jan. 13 said it supports COOL provisions "consistent with World Trade Organization rules." That position does not go beyond what the Farm Bureau has said previously.
 
 
Japan TPP negotiator: felt US intends to wrap up talks in few months 
 
TOKYO, Jan 15 (Reuters) - Japan's deputy chief trade negotiator Hiroshi Oe said on Wednesday he got the impression during talks that the United States intends to wrap up overall TPP discussions within a few months. 
 
Oe, speaking to reporters after talks with his counterpart Wendy Cutler, acting deputy U.S. trade representative, said he felt the United States is seriously trying to find common ground in their discussions. 
 
Japan and the United States are pushing for a two-way trade deal, a crucial part of a broad U.S.-led Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP). 
 
But Oe also said more work needed to be done and it was not yet a situation in which a "political decision" could be arranged. 
 
 
US loosens restrictions on Cuba, making trade, travel easier 
 
WASHINGTON, Jan. 15 (Xinhua) -- The Obama administration said on Thursday that it will loosen trade, finance, and travel embargo against Cuba.

The U.S. Departments of Treasury and Commerce on Thursday announced regulatory amendments to sanctions on Cuba following the U.S. president's announcement of a set of diplomatic and economic changes to chart a new course in U.S. relations with Cuba in December 2014.

The new changes will facilitate travel to Cuba, allow U.S. financial institutions to open correspondent accounts at Cuban financial institutions to facilitate the transactions processing, change export policy and authorize the flow of certain goods and services to Cuba with a license, and allow a number of activities, such as telecommunications, financial services, and shipping.

The new rules will take effect from Jan. 16. 
 
In December 2014, U.S. President Barack Obama announced a historically new policy towards Cuba, in a move to normalize relations and end more than five decades of estrangement between the two countries.

Obama said he had instructed Secretary of State John Kerry to initiate talks with Cuba on restoring diplomatic relations with the island country, which were severed in January 1961, and to review Cuba's designation as a State Sponsor of Terrorism. He added that the U.S. would reestablish an embassy in Havana and high-ranking officials will visit Cuba.

At that time, Obama said that the U.S. was taking steps to increase travel, commerce and the flow of information to and from Cuba.

But many Republicans opposed the White House's decision and are not likely to vote to end the embargo.
 
 
Swiss stun markets and scrap franc ceiling
James Shotter in Zurich, Alice Ross in Washington and Michael Hunter in London
Financial Times
Last updated:January 15, 2015 7:54 pm
 
Switzerland’s central bank stunned markets in one of the most dramatic currency interventions in decades as it unexpectedly abandoned a ceiling put in place more than three years ago, sending the franc soaring against the euro.

The Swiss currency surged as much as 39 per cent against both the euro and the dollar, one of the sharpest appreciations in recent history, after the Swiss National Bank said it would no longer maintain its SFr1.20 threshold.
 
The decision was not taken as part of a co-ordinated policy with other central banks, said a person with knowledge of the situation. Christine Lagarde, head of the International Monetary Fund, said she found it “a bit surprising” that the SNB had not warned her of the move.

The European Central Bank is next week expected to embark on a sovereign bond buying programme aimed at reviving growth and saving the eurozone from the ravages of deflation.

A launch of full-blown quantitative easing would precipitate massive demand for the Swiss franc, widely seen as one of global markets’ stronger havens — and would have made it increasingly difficult for the SNB to defend its currency ceiling.

The move triggered mayhem on foreign exchange trading desks and sent investors who had been betting on the ceiling remaining scrambling to close positions. “Anyone caught on the wrong side of this will be lying on the floor,” said one hedge fund manager.
 
‘The post-2008 period of excessive reliance on central bank policies needs to give way to a more comprehensive policy response ‘

“There was a degree of shock and an equal amount of horror,” said a banker on a London trading floor after the news broke at 10.30am European time. In late trade, the euro was down 13.8 per cent at SFr1.0355.

The ceiling was introduced in 2011 after the eurozone debt crisis saw investors pile into Swiss assets as a perceived haven, strengthening the franc and alarming central bank officials who wanted to protect exporters. Yet the SNB has increasingly faced questions over its bloated balance sheet as its attempts to keep the franc weak resulted in a record pile up of SFr495bn in foreign currencies — about 80 per cent of Swiss gross domestic product.

The decision highlights the difficulties that central banks of smaller developed economies, such as Switzerland and the UK, face as they navigate the turbulent waters between the US Federal Reserve, which is closer to tightening monetary policy, and the ECB, which is poised to loosen it.
 
It also marks a volte-face for the SNB, which insisted on Monday that it remained committed to the ceiling. Thomas Jordan, chairman of the SNB’s governing board, defended the decision, saying that once it was clear that the policy was no longer sustainable, it was important to act quickly.

The bank’s move was greeted with dismay by Switzerland’s exporters, as a stronger franc will make their products more expensive abroad . The country’s main equities index, the SMI, fell 10 per cent on the bank’s announcement.

“Today’s SNB action is a tsunami; for the export industry and for tourism, and finally for the entire country,” said Nick Hayek, chief executive of Swatch Group, the watchmaker. Its shares
tumbled 16.4 per cent to SFr382.30.

Bank shares also declined. UBS fell 11.7 per cent to SFr14.73, Credit Suisse was 11 per cent weaker at SFr20.66, and Julius Baer fell 11.5 per cent to SFr40.40.

The move hit eastern European economies’ currencies, with the Polish zloty initially down 40 per cent to the franc.
 
 
IMF Chief Says Global Economy Faces 'Very Strong' Headwinds 
By Ian Talley 
15 January 2015
Dow Jones Institutional News
 
Strong headwinds from weak investment, substantial debt burdens and high unemployment are preventing a pickup in global economic growth despite a strengthening U.S. recovery and tumbling oil prices, International Monetary Fund Managing Director Christine Lagarde said.

A healthier U.S. and cheaper energy "won't suffice to actually accelerate the growth or the potential for growth in the rest of the world," the head of the emergency lender to nations said in a speech Thursday at the Council on Foreign Relations in Washington.

"If the global economy is weak, on its knees, it's not going to help," said Ms. Lagarde in remarks previewing the IMF's latest forecasts for the global economy due out on Monday.

The eurozone, at risk of a third recession in six years, continues to struggle with the fallout from the 2008 financial crisis. Japan is also mired in low inflation, high debt and anemic growth. And output in many major emerging markets--economies that have provided most of the gas for global growth over the last decade--is slowing faster than expected.

Nonetheless, the IMF is upgrading its forecast for economic output in the U.S., one of the few advanced economies bucking the weak global-growth trend. But the world's biggest economy and a shot in the arm from cheaper gasoline aren't cures for deep-seated weakness elsewhere, Ms. Lagarde said.

"Too many companies and households keep cutting back on investment and consumption today because they are concerned about growth tomorrow," she said.

Both Europe and Japan are at risk from a much longer period of excessively low inflation and anemic growth, the former French finance minister said.

Years of stagnation in two of the world's biggest economies also threaten to drag down global growth. That would make it even harder for those economies to cut their dangerously high debt levels and raise employment, two persistent legacies of the financial crisis.

The Bank of Japan has expanded its cash injections to help spur growth, while European Central Bank officials have signaled plans for a new bond-buying program that could be announced as soon as next week.

Meanwhile, markets are expecting the U.S. Federal Reserve this year to raise borrowing rates for first time since 2006.

The schism between interest rates moving in different directions around the globe is one of the major reasons the dollar has hit decadelong highs in recent weeks against a basket of currencies. Ms. Lagarde said the Fed's expected midyear rate increase will likely fuel further strong swings in international capital flows, exchange rates, bond prices and stock markets.

Many emerging markets are increasingly exposed to turmoil elsewhere, especially those with high dollar-denominated debt. As those countries' currency values fall and their growth prospects dim, investors are rethinking their high-risk investments. "Among those emerging markets, some are likely to face a triple risk" from a stronger U.S. dollar, higher global interest rates and volatile capital flows, the IMF head said.

Ms. Lagarde also said oil's price fall should, on balance, boost global growth, as consumers have more money left over after filling their car tanks to spend in other sectors of the economy. But she acknowledged the decline is also adding to deflation risks in Europe and Japan, bolstering the case for central bank action.

The high risk of recessions and years of slow global growth are why policy makers need to take more aggressive action, she said. Aside from pushing for a longer period of easy-money policies and more infrastructure investment, the IMF has been urging the Group of 20 largest economies to honor promises for economic overhauls to reignite growth prospects.

"Policy makers have to step up structural reforms. There's a lot of talk about it, and some are doing it, but there has to be real implementation, " she said. "All of that is not new, but it takes a sense of increased urgency."

In many countries, efforts to restructure labor and product markets, overhaul education, health, and social safety nets, or approve trade deals that would open up protected markets have faced stiff political hurdles. Some economists fear the longer growth remains weak, the more politically difficult those economic policy changes may become.
