Headlines:

India working for solution to WTO food stockholding issue
WTO General Council to consider Kazakhstan's accession July 27 
China parliament ratifies BRICS Bank agreement
Why is Asian infrastructure bank different?
TPP trade talks: US tariff set to vanish swiftly on majority of Japanese autoparts
TPP puts Vietnam's top garment producer on the defensive
Kuwait- Oil Prices Decline In June On Global Economic Concerns
Intellectual Property of the Biggest Trade Deal in History
Greek parliament approves next phase in bailout reforms
Paquet de cigarettes neutre: où, pourquoi, comment?

 

Details:

India working for solution to WTO food stockholding issue

23 July 2015

Sarkaritel

New Delhi, July 23 -- India is working with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO members for a permanent solution to the problem of public stockholding for food security purposes, or the "subsidy cap issue", parliament was informed on Wednesday.

The World Trade Organisation General Council's November 2014 decision in the matter "also includes a commitment to find a permanent solution by December 31, 2015, on a best endeavour basis and a firm commitment to engage in negotiations for this purpose through an intensified programme of work", Commerce Minister Nirmala Sitharaman told the Rajya Sabha in a written reply.

"The General Council adopted a decision in November 2014, making it clear that HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO members will not challenge the public stockholding programmes of developing country members for food security purposes, and the peace clause will remain in place in perpetuity until a permanent solution has been agreed and adopted," she added.

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO agreement on public stock holding, paved the way for signing the trade facilitation agreement (TFA) for easing global custom rules.

The TFA, approved by 160 HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO members last year, aims to streamline and harmonise customs procedures to bring an estimated saving of over $1 trillion annually.

An agreement between India and the US earlier opened the way for a consensus on the TFA which had eluded the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO members.

India has asked for a permanent solution to the issue of public stockholding for food security purposes and not restricted for a period of four years as decided earlier during the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO ministerial meeting in Bali, Indonesia, last year.

India has been under pressure from several countries, particularly the US, to drop its objections to the TFA.

India's objections are on the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO limits on agriculture subsidies at 10 percent of the total value of foodgrains production, and on stockpiling them. Complying with the Food Security Act passed in 2013 that guarantees subsidised foodgrains to around 70 percent of the population could result in breaching these limits leading to penalties for India.

Members also agreed on what is called the "peace clause", that till 2017 no country can move to the dispute settlement body of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO against another member if its government was found to be breaching the level of subsidy freeze that was permitted.

Published by HT Syndication with permission from Sarkaritel.

For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com 

WTO General Council to consider Kazakhstan's accession July 27 

22 July 2015

Interfax: Central Asia General Newswire

MOSCOW. July 22 (Interfax) - The General Council of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO) intends to discuss the issue of Kazakhstan's accession to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO at a session on July 27, a source with knowledge of the agenda for the session told Interfax.

Kazakhstan's protocol on HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO accession must be ratified by the end of October, the National Chamber of Entrepreneurs Atameken said at the beginning of July.

Kazakhstan will become the 162nd member of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO within 30 days of ratification.

Pr ak

China parliament ratifies BRICS Bank agreement

22 July 2015

Reuters News

BEIJING, July 1 (Reuters) - China's largely rubber-stamp parliament ratified an agreement with the world's largest emerging nations on Wednesday to create a new development bank, state news agency HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Xinhua reported.

The New Development Bank, also known as the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"BRICS Bank, is one of two international development banks that China is promoting as an alternative to western institutions such as the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Bank.

The Standing Committee of the National People's Congress, China's legislature, approved the agreement between Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa to create the bank, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Xinhua said.

The NDB will have initial capital of $50 billion, to be equally funded by the five members who will have equal voting rights, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Xinhua said. The capital will be expanded to $100 billion within the next couple of years.

The members will also establish a reserve currency pool worth more than $100 billion, to which China has pledged to contribute $41 billion.

Last month, state media said that China would inject $10 billion into the bank once the Chinese parliament had ratified the agreement. Russia and India ratified the agreement in April.

The bank, which will be headquartered in Shanghai, will first be led by an Indian, followed by a Brazilian and then a Russian.

Chinese Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Hua Chunying said that there would be a meeting in Moscow next week to confirm its new leadership and map out the bank's first five years.

China has also led the creation of a new Asian development bank, known as the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, which counts among its 57 member countries nations such as Britain and Germany.

Hua said that the two banks would complement each other.

"We think this will help increase the influence and right to speak of the BRICS countries on issues of international finance," she told a daily news briefing. (Reporting by Ben Blanchard; Editing by Kim Coghill) 

Thomson Reuters (Markets) LLC

Why is Asian infrastructure bank different?

23 July 2015

The Jakarta Post

Avilash Roul, Chennai, India

In June, 50 member countries of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB), among 57 founding members, formally signed the much awaited Article of Agreement (AoA). The AoA of the AIIB confirms the rationale behind its establishment by putting a full stop on various speculations. The purpose is to protect Asian economies from global shocks and untying control of post-war global economic structure.

The AoA distinctly shows the differences from rest of the international financial institutions (IFIs) dominated by the West like the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Bank, ADB, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"EBRD, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"IMF and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"IADB. The objective of the AIIB is to invest in infrastructure specific projects and programs to sustain development with social importance and promote stable economic growth among Asian countries.

First, the AIIB aims to get rid of financing bottlenecks facing many Asian countries and to make countries resilient against global economic shocks. The examples are fresh elsewhere for such logjams that have cornered Greece and Argentina lately. While performing a shock absorber's role, the AIIB actually dismantles the post-war US-led economic order, at least in Asia. No other multilateral financial institutions have made such a pronouncement in their Agreements or Charters.

Be it the 1944 Agreement of International Banks for Reconstruction and Development (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"IBRD) -- an arm of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Bank -- or the 1966 Charter of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Asian Development Bank (ADB) or the 1991 Agreement of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"EBRD), they all aim at integrating developing countries' economies into international trade and facilitating a market economy, which traditional donors like the US and EU countries have been managing and controlling.

In a further step, the ADB was established for post-war construction in the line of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Bank but self-claimed as Asian in its basic character -- "Asia-ness".

The governance of AIIB as enshrined in AoA is also unique. Perhaps, for the first-time in the history of intergovernmental institutions, especially financial institutions, traditional donor countries lost the top three slots as largest shareholders which transforms into voting powers in decision making. In ADB, both the US and Japan hold the largest shares among 67 member countries. Both are not members of the AIIB, yet. In HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"IBRD and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"EBRD too, the US is the single largest shareholder. In AIIB, the proponent China holds the largest share followed by India and Russian Federation.

Inclusion of Russia as a regional member and third largest shareholder in AIIB has dismantled the post-world war and subsequently the post-Cold War world economic edifice. Russia's position in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"EBRD, which extends financial assistance to most former Soviet republics among others, in terms of decision making is seventh, while in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"IBRD is eighth.

It is not only the shareholding which gives the AIIB a distinct character from rest of the institutions, but also the composition of its board of directors (BoDs). The Governors (generally finance ministers) of 37 regional members will select nine representatives while 20 non-regional members will choose three for the 12-member BoDs as envisaged in the AoA. In the ADB, eight members are elected by 48 regional members and four by the 19 non-regional members. The representation in the AIIB BoDs has embedded its Asian character.

With more than a quarter of total shareholding, China has already explained that as new members come in it will be reduced. The introduction of "Special Majority" and "Super Majority" during voting for institutional decision making by governors is a welcome step. A Super Majority vote shall require two-thirds of total number of governors, i.e., 38 members and representing not less than three-fourths of the total voting power of the members. A Special Majority shall require a majority of the member countries and representing not less than a majority of total voting power. The president of the AIIB, who is the legal representative of the bank and head of management, shall be elected by the governors through a Super Majority. In the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Bank and the ADB, it is the BoDs who select the president.

Unlike in the ADB or the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Bank or HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"EBRD, the BoDs of AIIB shall function on a non-resident basis, meaning they won't permanently sit at the headquarters in Beijing. The AoA provisions seem to downsize the rigidity of bureaucracy experienced by the ADB and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Bank. A similar echo of present NDA government's motto "less government, more governance" has inspired the AIIB.

There is a logical reason too as China's bitter experiences mostly in the ADB in 2009 related to India's Country Partnership Strategy document and Fuzhou Environmental Improvement Project where BoDs decided to send a review team to investigate the policy violations in China. In addition, strategy to dissuade the interaction and access of civil societies to BoDs and for security reasons (read cancelation of visas of British parliamentarians to meet Hong Kong protestors), the BoDs are placed in non-resident mode as of now.

With China's longstanding border disputes with neighbors and developments in the East China Sea, the AIIB has cautiously traded issues related to disagreements or disputes which are potentially high in Asia. The disagreement over a termination of a project funded by AIIB should be resorted to a three member tribunal that consists of representative of the country where the project is terminated, one from the bank and one as appointed by the president of the International Court of Justice, which is unique.

Respecting the sovereignty as sacrosanct, the bank is not going to fund any projects or programs or undertaking in the territory if "that" member objects to such financing. However, like the ADB, the AIIB has not clarified funding in disputed territory. In all probability, the bank will avoid becoming entangled in disputed territory.

With much more progressive wording than its old counterparts, the AIIB ensures that each of its operations are in compliance with the bank's operational policies, which shall be developed by the BoDs, including addressing environmental and social impacts (safeguard policies). Many governments, including the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"US government, are concerned about the AIIB's lack of social and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"environmental safeguards. However, the AIIB tumbles a step behind by allowing member countries' procurement policies which are in shambles to be used in bank operations in those countries.

Although the charters of most of the financial institutions are similar, the AIIB has mentioned social development in its AoA itself. It is heartburning for sympathizers of Bretton Wood's Siamese twins to see the pace and large support for the AIIB. The AIIB also fairly accommodates BRICS members allowing Brazil and South Africa as non-regional members. The AIIB will compliment and supplement the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"New Development Bank (NDB) for its global reach. It is neither required of critics of globalization to defend AIIB, nor of the US plus to approve the establishment of Asia's own multilateral financial institution, which truly represents "Asia-ness".

The writer is senior research fellow, Indian Institute of Technology-Madras, Chennai, India. The views expressed are his own.

PT Bina Media Tenggara

TPP trade talks: US tariff set to vanish swiftly on majority of Japanese autoparts

23 July 2015

Nikkei Report

TOKYO -- More than 50% of Japanese autoparts would be imported to the U.S. without tariffs immediately if the proposed Trans-Pacific Partnership trade pact takes effect.

U.S. and Japanese negotiators appear to have found some common ground in the items considered unlikely to trouble U.S. manufacturers. They also are considering eliminating tariffs on the majority of the remaining types of autoparts within 10 years.

Japan exports to the U.S. about 100 types of autoparts including tires and seat belts. The figure grows to about 300 with the inclusion of screws and other items also used for nonautomotive devices.

Such exports total about 2 trillion yen ($16 billion) a year, so the current tariff of 2.5% represents around 50 billion yen in levies.

But differences remain. The U.S. seeks a longer protection period for transmission, gear box and other items specified by manufacturers, while Japan wants more types of autoparts subject to the swift tariff relief.

Negotiators have agreed to give the longest phaseout period for a 2.5% tariff on fully assembled Japanese automobiles. The period likely will exceed 10 years, possibly reaching 20 to 30.

The two countries are about to finalize the design of a dispute-settlement system for trade issues attributable to Japan.

A ministerial meeting is set for the end of the month in Hawaii, where the two nations aim to settle all lingering concerns including the level of Japan's tariff-free quota for U.S.-grown rice.

(Nikkei)

Nikkei Digital Media Inc. 

TPP puts Vietnam's top garment producer on the defensive

22 July 2015

Nikkei Report

HO CHI MINH CITY -- HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Vinatex, Vietnam's largest state-owned textile company, is rushing to secure new revenue streams and improve its internal supply chain. Despite widespread excitement about the Trans-Pacific Partnership and the business it could bring, the pending trade deal's fine print could cause complications.

This month, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Vinatex and its subsidiaries provided thousands of revamped uniforms to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Vietnam Airlines, the national flag carrier, under an exclusive contract. The move came as Vietnam and the other 11 nations negotiating the TPP appeared to be drawing closer to a final agreement.

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Vinatex is to provide some 79,000 sets of uniforms and accessories to the airline, under an arrangement that runs until 2020.

The garment manufacturer sees the uniform market as a vital source of domestic income. With the nation's economy growing steadily, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Vinatex projects uniform demand could grow 30-40% a year. More than 400,000 local enterprises are expected to hire around 12 million workers this year.

But what about the massive export opportunities promised by the TPP?

The U.S. and Japan, both of which are parties to the TPP negotiations, take in some 60% of Vietnam's total exports of garments and footwear. Duties on many such products will be slashed to zero, from the 7-32% range, in the three years after the pact takes effect. Free access to 11 other markets ought to be a boon for Vietnamese companies.

There is a catch: A "yarn forward" rule of origin will require apparel producers to use yarn made within the TPP bloc if they want to export without paying duties.

This poses a problem for Vietnam's garment sector, which depends heavily on imported raw materials. A lot of these supplies come from China, which offers low prices and wide variety but is not a TPP member.

83% imported

Vietnam's shipments of garments and footwear brought in $36 billion last year, making the country the biggest apparel exporter in the TPP group.

According to the Vietnam Cotton & Spinning Association, known as Vcosa, the country produced about 65 million spindles worth of raw materials last year, equivalent to 4 billion meters. But due to the poor capabilities of the local industry's yarn, textile and dye segments, two-thirds of the spindle output was sent on to China, Turkey, South Korea and Brazil.

Of domestic demand totaling 8.2 billion meters, Vietnam imported 83%, mainly from China. Much of the rest was provided by local companies created through foreign direct investment.

For the past 10 years, the Vietnamese government has sought to strengthen the domestic textile industry, in part to capitalize on the TPP. Progress has been hampered by shortages of funds, technology and human resources.

Aside from HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Vinatex, no single company appears ready to add factories for churning out raw materials.

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Vinatex has been pushing for self-sufficiency. Since 2013, when it listed on the stock market, it has invested $367 million in 51 projects, according to local reports. These include 14 yarn and 15 textile facilities. The company expects that by next year, it will be able to meet up to 60% of its needs through its internal chain, which consists of 60 subsidiaries and associates.

Still, foreign companies have emerged as a threat, even for a company with the muscle of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Vinatex. These rivals have plenty of capital, technological expertise and marketing know-how. They are increasingly establishing and expanding factories in Vietnam, anticipating tariff-free access to the U.S. A number of under-construction plants are expected to start shipments in the next two years.

In the first six months of 2015, Vietnam's textile industry attracted a record 22.7% of overall foreign direct investment -- $1.394 billion out of $6.124 billion -- the Vietnam General Statistics Office said. The tally includes a $660 million project of Turkey-registered Hyosung Istanbul Tekstil, with capital from South Korea; a $300 million project involving British Virgin Islands-registered Worldon; a $160 million project of Hong Kong's Lu Thai; and a $274 million project of Taiwan-based Polytex Far Eastern.

In northern Vietnam, Chinese investors including Texhong Textile, TAL and a joint venture of Foshan Sanshui Jialida, Luenthai and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Vinatex last year kicked off projects worth up to $1 billion.

Vcosa says foreign-invested textile companies, which run closed supply chains, account for 25% of Vietnam's 3,000 producers but contribute 60% of total export value.

At this point, few Vietnamese companies have figured out how to overcome their constraints and compete with foreign players in raw material production. Another challenge: complying with strict rules on waste treatment and environmental protection under the TPP.

Many Vietnamese companies are starting to think the TPP might bring more risks than benefits. They fear they could lose contracts if they cannot meet the rules of origin. And since the pact could fire up other sectors, such as agriculture, competition for labor will intensify as well.

Diversification may be garment manufacturers' best bet for survival.

Looking elsewhere

Saigon Garmex, based in Ho Chi Minh City, says it has negotiated to buy a U.S fashion brand, though it has yet to disclose the details. The company wants to turn itself into an original design manufacturer -- a business that creates and turns out products, which are later branded and sold by others. It aims to export outside the TPP bloc and double its revenue in 2018, from $64 million last year.

As for meeting the TPP's origin requirements, Saigon Garmex has given up. It believes it will be too difficult to secure enough raw materials from TPP nations.

"We see all FTAs as good chances, but we never put all our eggs into one basket," Saigon Garmex Chairman Le Quang Hung told the Nikkei Asian Review. "We are investing more in original design manufacturing and the search for more clients and new orders from other markets."

Some companies plan to turn to South Korea and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Eurasian Economic Union, where rules of origin are considered looser. Meanwhile, many small Vietnamese companies that provide "cutting, making and packing" and "cut, make and trim" services are sticking to the outsourcing business model. They reckon Vietnam's inexpensive but skilled labor can withstand competition with China, Bangladesh, Cambodia and Indonesia.

Nguyen Hong Giang, Vcosa's general secretary, summed up the outlook. "Vietnamese local companies in the fashion industry are too small and too slow in improving their capabilities to take advantage of the TPP," he said. "Financially strong [foreign-invested companies] are likely to get most of the benefits when the pact comes into effect."

Nikkei Digital Media Inc. 

Kuwait- Oil Prices Decline In June On Global Economic Concerns

22 July 2015

Middle East North Africa Financial Network (MENAFN)

(MENAFN - Arab Times) After two consecutive months of positive growth, average monthly oil prices declined during June-15 on the back of a number of concerns surrounding the global economy. The Greek loan repayment default had its fair share of impact on global economies and on the oil market as it pushed up USD/EUR rates thereby pushing crude oil prices as well as the prices of USD-denominated oil imports. Moreover, after Greece's successful debt deal with six of its international lenders, the USD once again rallied against major currencies (EUR, Yen and Swiss Franc) as there was a renewed focus on the possibility of a US Fed rate hike in September this year. In addition, the widening yield differentials between Europe and the US also helped to strengthen the USD.

Meanwhile, the slump in the Chinese stock markets that fell by 30 percent from a 7-year high level also affected oil prices due to the fear that China, being one of largest driver of oil demand, could face an economic slowdown. Moreover, the chances of a hard landing in China are also being speculated. The much talked about Iran nuclear deal finally went through on 14-July-15 affecting the oil market as it leads to expectations of additional supply to an already oversupplied market. However, oil prices stabilized after the expected increase in oil supply from Iran appeared to be more gradual than originally believed and believed to be more of a 2016 phenomenon. Various polls pegged the increase in Iran's oil supply at 0.25-0.5 mb/d within the next 6-12 months.

Average monthly HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OPEC Reference Basket price fell to USD 60.2/b in June-15, a decline of 3.1 percent from the previous month. The month closed at a sub-USD 60/b oil price level of USD 58.79/b and continued to slide in July-15 reaching USD 55.99/b on 10-July- 15 after touching its lowest point since April- 15 as concerns regarding Iran continued to affect prices. Meanwhile, Kuwait Blend Spot Price FOB averaged at USD 59.3/b during June-15, a decline of USD 1.86/b or 2.6 percent after two consecutive months of strong gains. Total HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OPEC production during June-2015 witnessed a strong increase of 2.4 percent or 0.744 mb/d to reach at 32.1 mb/d as compared to 31.39 mb/d in May-15.

The biggest monthly jump in production was recorded in Iraq that produced at the rate of 4.4 mb/d during the month as compared to 3.8 mb/d during the previous month, a significant increase of 0.567 mb/d or 14.8 percent. However, the IEA pointed out in a report that this surge in production is not permanent and the Iraqi government has already told major oil companies that run the southern oil fields to slow production later during 2015. Moreover, oil price were also affected after an EIA report pointed to a surprise build in stockpiles in the US. After two consecutive months of positive trend, average monthly oil prices fell in June-15 on the back of a number of concerns in the international market that included the concerns regarding Greece, strong USD, the weakness in China as well as the looming nuclear deal with Iran.

The month started with a positive trend after oil prices extended gains led by signs that the slowdown in US drilling activity could help in lesser supply from the market and would ease some concerns regarding the global oil glut. However, the momentum was short lived as oil prices started declining sliding below the USD 60/b mark after an IEA report highlighted that the biggest members of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OPEC are pumping oil at a record pace. Another report from API highlighted that HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OPEC production increased to the highest level in almost three years. Average monthly HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OPEC Reference Basket price fell to USD 60.2/b in June-15, a decline of 3.1 percent from the previous month. The month closed at a sub-USD 60/b oil price level of USD 58.79/b and continued to slide in July-15 reaching USD 55.99/b on 10-July-15 after touching its lowest point since April-15 as concerns regarding Iran continued to affect prices.

On 14-July-15, Iran and world powers sealed a historic accord on its nuclear program which affected oil prices globally; however, according to industry experts, it will take decades for Iranian oil to enter the oil market as it requires setting up the necessary infrastructure. In terms of YTD-15 performance, the average HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OPEC Reference Basket price stood at USD 55.21/b, 42.7 percent lower as compared to FY-2014 average of USD 96.29/b. Kuwait Blend Spot Price FOB averaged at USD 59.3/b during June-15, a decline of USD 1.86/b or 2.6 percent after two consecutive months of strong gains. Kuwait oil closed June-15 at a below monthly average price of USD 58.76/b recording a monthly decline of 0.7 percent as against a 3.1 percent decline during the previous month. Kuwait oil price continued to decline in July-15 falling to USD 54.45/b its lowest point since April- 14.

Meanwhile, European Brent Spot Price FOB averaged at USD 61.48/b during June-15 recording a marginal decline of 0.8 percent or USD 0.49/b. Total world oil demand growth for 2015 was raised by 0.1 mb/d to 1.28 mb/d as compared to the previous month's growth estimate of 1.18 mb/d from the 2014 level to average around 92.61 mb/d. According to the latest monthly US oil demand data, oil demand in the US continued to rise in April- 15. Demand during the first four months of 2015 was higher by 0.4 mb/d led by growing requirement for gasoline (on the back of rising car sales and employment figures), distillate fuel and jet fuel due to the low oil price requirement. Moreover, preliminary data for May-15 and June-15 also pointed to a continued increasing demand for oil in the US. Oil demand also grew in Europe during May-15 especially in Germany, France and the UK on the back of improving economy.

In HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD Asia Pacific, oil consumption is expected to fall in 2015 by 0.12 mb/d due to a decline in demand from Japan. In Other Asia, oil demand in India increased by 0.1 mn/b or 3.0 percent during May-15 and the overall region is expected to see oil demand growth of 0.26 mb/d in 2015. Latin America and the Middle East are also expected to see rising oil demand to the tune of 0.13 mb/d and 0.2 mb/d, respectively. The latest oil monthly report from HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OPEC also included detailed expectations for 2016. According the report, world oil demand in 2016 is expected to grow at a faster pace than in 2015 rising by 1.34 mb/d from the 2015 levels to average around 93.94 mb/d on the back of improving economic conditions in major global economies that would lead to higher demand for transportation fuels.

This higher demand would be led by non- HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD countries with 1.16 mb/d in total demand, while growth in HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD nations is anticipated to increase by 0.18 mb/d. Within the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD economies, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD Americas is expected to see higher demand in 2016 partially offset by a slight decline in demand from HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD Europe and Asia Pacific (a total decline of 0.14 mb/d in these economies). Total non-OPEC supply in 2015 was revised up by 0.22 mb/d as compared to the previous monthly report and is expected to increase by 0.86 mb/d to average at 57.39 mb/d. The increase comes despite a decline in US oil rig count for most of 2015. Rig count in the US declined for 29 consecutive weeks after it picked up in July-15 for two consecutive weeks to 645 rigs.

Oil supply from HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD countries was upgraded from the previous month's estimates and is now estimated to grow by 0.76 mb/d to average at 24.92 mb/d in 2015. Within the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD, US would see the strongest supply growth of 0.93 mb/d as compared to an increase of 0.81 mb/d for the entire HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD Americas region indicating a decline in supply from Canada that was revised down by 80 tb/d. According the report, there was higherthanexpected supply growth in the US in Q1-15 as well as Q2-15 based on preliminary data. On the other hand, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD Europe and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD Asia Pacific are expected to see a decline in supply to the tune of 0.02 mb/d and 0.03 mb/d, respectively. For the non- HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OPEC countries, supply growth is expected to decline sequentially from Q1-15 to Q3-15 and then rise Q4-15 led by seasonal factors. In 2016, oil supply is expected to increase by 0.30 mb/d to average at 57.69 mb/d as compare to 56.52 mb/d in 2015.

The year is expected to see a decline in supply from the Middle East and Africa (0.06 mb/d each) and to a higher extent from FSU (-0.23 mb/d) on the back of 0.11 mb/d decline in supply from Russia. However, higher supply from the US and Latin America is expected to offset the decline in supply from the aforementioned regions. Total HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OPEC production during June-2015 witnessed a strong increase of 2.4 percent or 0.744 mb/d to reach at 32.1 mb/d as compared to 31.39 mb/d in May-15. The biggest monthly jump in production was recorded in Iraq that produced at the rate of 4.4 mb/d during the month as compared to 3.8 mb/d during the previous month, an significant increase of 0.567 mb/d or 14.8 percent. However, the IEA pointed out in a report that this surge in production is not permanent and the Iraqi government have already told major oil companies that run the southern oil fields to slow production later during 2015.

Meanwhile, production in Saudi Arabia also increased by strong 0.15 mb/d or 1.5 percent to 10.45 mb/d as the country continues to produce at its highest level in more than 30 years in order to protect its market share from the oil glut in the US. However, Saudi Arabia is also expected to generate significant oil demand in 2016 using a significant share of its oil production for domestic use. The third biggest increase in monthly oil production was recorded in Iran that produced at the rate of 2.85 mb/d during June- 15, an increase of 50 tb/d. However, this increase does not reflect the expected rise in oil production from Iran after it successfully signed the nuclear deal in July-15. On the other hand, production in Kuwait continued to decline for the second consecutive month by 80 tb/d during June-15 to reach 2.75 mb/d due to the drop in production in the divided zone which it shares it with Saudi Arabia. Production drop was also seen in Libya which recorded a second consecutive decline of 15 tb/d as compared to a steeper decline of 115 tb/d during the previous month.

Middle East North Africa Financial Network Inc

Intellectual Property of the Biggest Trade Deal in History

BY LAWRENCE E. ASHERY Special to the Legal 

22 July 2015

The Legal Intelligencer

TPP. TPA. TAA. It's been a figurative "alphabet soup" of names for international trade legislation that has recently been in the news.

The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) is a proposed trade agreement between the United States and 11 other countries that together make up 40 percent of global gross domestic product (GDP). If the TPP is implemented as proposed, it will be the biggest trade deal in history. The Trade Promotion Authority (TPA) gives the U.S. president the authority to negotiate trade agreements (such as the TPP) that Congress can only approve or disaprove (i.e., amendment or filibuster is not permitted). Recently signed into law by the White House, the TPA was viewed as a necessary prerequisite for each country to ratify the TPP. Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) provides financial assistance to U.S. workers who lose their jobs due to production outside of the United States. In May of this year, the Senate passed the TPA bill with the TAA. The bill then moved on to the House, which passed the bill without the TAA. The Senate subsequently passed the bill without the TAA, and President Obama signed the TPA into law. While some hurdles have been overcome, the end is not in sight. A final agreement between all countries participating in TPP negotiations must be reached. Congress will then vote on the TPP, probably in the fall. It remains to be seen whether the TPP will be signed into law.

The controversy surrounding the TPP has been substantial, with supporters heralding this agreement as the pathway to substantial growth of world output, and detractors arguing that implementation will result in the loss of tens of thousands of American jobs. Yet, one other abbreviation has recently captured attention in this debate—IP. The IP provisions of this legislation appear to be significant, and its effects might have serious economic implications.

Many of the confidential terms of the TPP have been publicly disclosed through leaked documents, which have been made available by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WikiLeaks, Politico and U.S. Rep. Darrell Issa, R-California (his website includes a link to a draft of the intellectual property provisions). It is very possible that, if ratified, the provisions of the final TPP will look different than what has been leaked to the public. Yet, what is currently known about the intellectual property chapter of the TPP is receiving attention.

One section of the TPP that has recently captured the most attention is a patent linkage requirement, which prevents regulators from approving generic drugs for market entry while there are patent issues that have not been resolved. Patent linkage was introduced into the United States in 1984 through the Hatch-Waxman Act; it exists in several other countries as well. Most TPP countries, however, do not require patent linkage. That would change if the TPP is accepted in its current form.

Supporters of this provision note the significant costs associated with the development of name-brand pharmaceuticals, and the importance of incentivizing drug companies to research and produce new drugs. Extending patent monopolies in various countries would help to achieve that goal. Opponents, however, argue that expansion of patent terms will create sufficient financial burden to medical care systems, and will deny needed drug treatments to the poor. If patent terms are effectively lengthened, then availability of lower-priced generic medications will be delayed.

Another area of concern is with regard to the TPP's proposed protection of biologics (genetically engineered proteins that target specific ailments). Biologics are drugs that include large and complex molecular structures and are typically much more expensive to develop than traditional pharmaceuticals. Before selling biologics in the United States, biologics must be approved as safe and efficacious by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"U.S. Food and Drug Administration (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"FDA).

To understand how the TPP could affect biologics, some definitions might be helpful. When a biologic is first created, it is called an "originator biologic." A biologic subsequently created based on the originator biologic is referred to as a "biosimilar." A biosimilar has a chemical structure that is similar (although not identical) to the originator biologic from which it is created. Because of the similarities, development of biosimilars generally cost significantly less than development of originator biologics.

In the United States, a biologic receives data exclusivity for a period of 12 years. This means that for 12 years the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"FDA cannot approve an application for a biosimilar that is based on data submitted in an originator biologic application. Of the countries negotiating the TPP, the United States has the longest time period for data exclusivity of biologics (for some of the countries involved, there is currently no data exclusivity period). Supporters for the TPP argue that requiring all of the TPP countries to agree to a 12-year data exclusivity term encourages pharmaceutical development while opponents argue that the longer time period renders medications unaffordable.

Another significant issue raised by the TPP proposals is the fact that for patents, a "best mode" requirement is not included. U.S. law requires that a patent specification include the best mode (i.e., the best means known to the inventor for carrying out an invention), but the America Invents Act provides that "a failure to disclose the best mode shall not be a basis on which any claim of a patent may be canceled or held invalid or otherwise unenforceable." Thus, the America Invents Act has severely limited the importance of the best-mode requirement. Will adoption of the TPP be the final death knell for the best-mode provision? Perhaps.

In copyrights, the TPP proposes a significant modification to current U.S. law. Currently, U.S. copyright law requires that a work be "fixed" in order to be protected. Article 4.1 of the proposed TPP, however, states that copyright holders may "authorize or prohibit all reproductions of their works, performances, and phonograms, in any manner or form, permanent or temporary (including temporary storage in electronic form)."

If adopted, this provision may have a significant effect on U.S. copyright jurisprudence.

There are also differences with current U.S. law regarding preliminary injunctions in copyright cases. The TPP would require that preliminary injunctions must be granted within 10 days. Also, to obtain a preliminary injunction, there is no requirement that the copyright holder show irreparable harm.

The current copyright term in the United States extends to 70 years past the life of the author. In other countries, the term is less. TPP would extend the copyright term in other countries to match the copyright term in the United States.

The American public will not have a clear understanding of the provisions of TPP until the final draft is released in its entirety. That dissemination will not occur until the fall, when disclosure of the TPP's terms will be made to Congress prior to their vote. Of concern are the potential changes to intellectual property law that would have far-reaching effects. The international intellectual property community will certainly be watching closely as this story continues to unfold.

Greek parliament approves next phase in bailout reforms

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Helena Smith, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Greame Wearden

23 July 2015

The Guardian

Large majority of MPs including Yanis Varoufakis, the renegade former finance minister, approves further measures required to qualify for €86bn in loans

Greece’s prime minister easily won a crucial vote on a third bailout programme for the debt-stricken nation early on Thursday, hours after the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Central Bank infused cash-starved Greek banks with further emergency liquidity.

A total of 230 MPs backed the economic reforms programme demanded by Greece’s creditors, while 63 voted against the plan at the late-night vote.

Alexis Tsipras again faced down rebels within his own party who oppose a third bailout. Thirty-six Syriza MPs either voted no or abstained, three fewer than at a similar vote last week.

Yanis Varoufakis, the high-profile former finance minister, supported the measures. Last week he had voted against the first set of bailout conditions, including VAT rises and pension cuts, after resigning his post. But in this case, Varoufakis said, the specific measures being voted on included reforms he had previously put forward himself.

The vote clears the way for Greece to begin formal talks with its lenders on a three-year package of loans that could be worth €86bn.

Before the vote Tsipras had urged MPs to support the bailout, which will save Greece from bankruptcy and preserve its place in the eurozone.

“We made difficult choices and now we must all adapt to the new situation,” he told MPs, repeating that he did not agree with many of the reforms but would do his best to implement them.

Athens was thrown further emergency assistance when the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Central Bank (ECB) increased liquidity for Greek lenders HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"ahead of the crucial vote.

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"The ECB’s governing council agreed on Wednesday to raise the cap on emergency assistance for the country’s fragile banking system by €900m (£629m). The move was immediately received with relief. Greek banks, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"newly opened after three weeks of enforced closure, have become a weather vane for normality in a country whose close brush with bankruptcy has kept it on the frontline of Europe’s debt drama.

The decision – the second such injection of emergency funds since late June – will allow Greece’s cash machines to keep operating as the tourist season gathers pace, despite the continued imposition of capital controls across the banking sector. The ceiling on funds was previously set at €89.5bn.

With continued membership of the eurozone still far from assured, the Greek finance minister, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"Euclid Tsakalotos, kicked off a raucous debate in the 300-seat parliament HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"imploring MPs to support the bailout plan. The passage of reforms, including a new code of civil procedure that would overhaul Greece’s notoriously slow judicial sector, were demanded by the EU and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"International Monetary Fund in exchange for opening talks on a third rescue package.

Related: HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"Business live: Anti-austerity protest in Athens ahead of bailout vote

Tsakalotos told MPs: “It is extremely important to wrap up this procedure of prior actions so that we can start negotiations on Friday.”

A new bailout programme will provide as much as €86bn in loans for Greece, tiding it over for the next three years. But the stringent terms attached to the package have divided the ruling leftwing Syriza party and raised fears of political instability. With at least a third of the governing party vehemently opposed to the measures, and advocating a euro exit and a return to the drachma, the late-night vote was always expected to be a test of the authority over Syriza of Tsipras.

Hardliners, including the flamboyant former finance minister Yanis Varoufakis, have described the policies as unworkable in a country already labouring under record levels of poverty and unemployment. But on Wednesday night even Varoufakis voted yes.

Costas Isychos, the former deputy defence minister who HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"resigned in outrage over the measures, said: “The coping strategies of a large part of society ran out long ago. The road map foreseen by the accord not only cannot be enforced, I believe large parts of society will fight back.”

Ahead of the ballot, anti-austerity protestors took to the streets, with the civil servants union HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"ADEDY and militants from the communist-affiliated PAME organising rallies against reforms denounced as the harbingers of yet more destitution.

Insiders said it was essential that Tsipras at least retained control of the 110 MPs who last week voted in favour of tax rises and pension cuts – measures spurned by the young prime minister until his spectacular U-turn in the face of possible eurozone ejection.

Related: HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"Chances of Greek bailout rest on MPs' vote

The controversial policies were passed with the help of “pro-European” opposition parties, including the main centre-right New Democracy, which have argued that Greece must remain at the heart of Europe, and in the eurozone, at any cost.

But across the political spectrum MPs said it was impossible for the government to continue counting on the opposition for support.

Antigone Limberaki, an MP with the centrist Potami party, said: “Tsipras cannot cohabit with at least a third of his political group and more than half of his central committee totally opposed to the measures [outlined] in the third memorandum. Everything now depends on how he handles the problems in his party. It is very clear that he is burning bridges with the other side, that he feels he is on a one-way track and is going down the road of moderation.”

Guardian Newspapers Limited 

Paquet de cigarettes neutre: où, pourquoi, comment?

Olivier THIBAULT 

22 July 2015

Agence France Presse ECOFI

Le paquet de cigarettes neutre, dont l'introduction en France devait être examinée mercredi en commission au Sénat, suscite une forte colère des buralistes mais constitue la mesure la plus forte de l'arsenal anti-tabac de Marisol Touraine.

La ministre espère faire baisser de 10% en cinq ans le nombre de fumeurs en France (actuellement 13 millions) et surtout combattre la tabagie des jeunes.

Qu'est que le paquet neutre?

Le paquet de cigarette neutre se présente sans logo, dessin ou image de la marque. Tous les paquets sont de même couleur. En France, ce sera vert olive. Le nom de la marque reste inscrit mais en petit, avec une typographie standard, et les avertissements sanitaires couvrent la majeure partie du paquet.

Où et quand sera-t-il introduit?

Le paquet neutre devrait faire son apparition dans les bureaux de tabac français en mai 2016.

L'Australie a été le premier pays instaurer le paquet neutre en décembre 2012.

L'Irlande et la Grande-Bretagne ont décidé en début d'année d'adopter le paquet neutre pour 2016/2017. La Hongrie prévoit également de le mettre en oeuvre en 2016.

Pourquoi un paquet de tabac neutre?

Avec sa couleur rebutante et ses photos de poumons noirs et de tumeurs, les paquets neutres sont des armes anti-marketing conçues pour décourager les fumeurs actuels et dissuader les non-fumeurs de se laisser séduire par la cigarette.

Les emballages actuels "sont conçus comme de véritables supports publicitaires. Ils attirent les jeunes et font oublier la dangerosité du tabac", explique le Comité national contre le tabagisme (CNCT).

"C'est un support essentiel de communication pour l'industrie du tabac dans le recrutement et la fidélisation des consommateurs" alors que depuis des années, toute publicité pour la cigarette est interdite en France, souligne l'association.

Quelle est l'efficacité du paquet neutre?

"Le paquet neutre, ça fonctionne", affirme Marisol Touraine, prenant exemple sur l'Australie où "le nombre de nouveaux fumeurs diminue et le nombre de ceux qui arrêtent augmente".

Selon les cigarettiers, l'expérience australienne, est, au contraire, un "fiasco" sans aucune baisse de consommation, selon le terme utilisé par une porte-parole de Seita, filiale d'HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Imperial Tobacco, quand la mesure a été annoncée en France.

Pourtant, d'après une étude du gouvernement australien, qui a aussi choisi d'augmenter fortement les prix du tabac, le nombre de fumeurs quotidiens âgés de plus de 14 ans a baissé, de 15,1% en 2010 à 12,8% en 2013, et les jeunes se mettent à fumer plus tardivement.

Que disent les études scientifiques?

Des dizaines d'études menées dans différents pays "montrent que le paquet neutre influence les comportements et les perceptions des fumeurs", assurait récemment Karine Gallopel-Morvan, spécialiste du sujet à l'Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Santé Publique, dans Le Monde.

L'impact est surtout pour les jeunes. "Le paquet neutre ne donne pas envie d'être acheté par les adolescents et ne leur donne pas envie de commencer à fumer", a-t-elle affirmé.

Le paquet neutre va imposer la "dénormalisation" du tabac: "ce qui change (...) se lit moins dans les chiffres que dans les comportements et les perceptions", a-t-elle expliqué dans HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"L'Obs.

Le paquet neutre est-il légal?

Selon les cigarettiers, la mesure est inefficace, réduit les rentrées fiscales des Etats (2 milliards d'euros par an en moins pour la France, selon HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Japan Tobacco), favorise le trafic de cigarettes avec les pays frontaliers et est contestable sur le plan du droit.

Cinq Etats producteurs de tabac ont d'ailleurs engagé un recours devant l'Organisation mondiale du commerce (OMC).

Mais pour les anti-tabacs, le droit des marques est respecté puisque les paquets neutres conservent le nom du produit. De plus, la mesure est activement soutenue par l'Organisation Mondiale de la Santé (OMS).

Pourquoi les industriels du tabac "déploient-ils autant d'énergie contre une mesure qui, selon eux, serait inutile?", s'interroge malicieusement Mme Gallopel-Morvan.

ot/na/jpr

Agence France-Presse

END

 

 

 

cid:image001.png@01CC55E4.A4F90770

 

Josep Bosch, Information Officer

Information and External Relations Division

+41227395681

 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.
