Japan, China, S. Korea fail to agree on trade liberalization target
Govt okays change in buffer limit for foodgrain
India to talk sanctions, LNG imports during Obama visit - oil officials
BD needs to do more: USTR
Gov’t may negotiate after WTO ruling
l'Argentine perd en appel à l'OMC pour sa politique d'importation
Taiwan entry into TPP unlikely soon: US experts
Thailand: Firms miss out on FTA advantages
 
Japan, China, S. Korea fail to agree on trade liberalization target
Kyodo
17 January 2015
TOKYO, Jan. 17 -- Japan, China and South Korea concluded their two-day meeting on free trade negotiations Saturday without an agreement on a common target for the level of trade liberalization, negotiators said.
The next trilateral FTA talks are scheduled to take place in South Korea in April.
"Our views on trade liberalization are different," Japanese Deputy Foreign Minister Yasumasa Nagamine told reporters about the outcome of their meeting held in Tokyo.
A negotiation source said one of the reasons they failed to reach an agreement is China's reluctance to make it a common goal to seek a high ratio of zero-tariff trade items.
The three governments agreed to launch the trilateral negotiations in 2012.
They are seeking an agreement in their trade talks to give impetus to the 16-country Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership free trade negotiations. The RCEP members, which include Japan, China and South Korea, target a deal by the end of this year.
 
Govt okays change in buffer limit for foodgrain
17 January 2015
Business Standard
The government on Friday approved raising the quarterly buffer stock and strategic reserve limits of Food Corporation of India (FCI) for both wheat and rice, for the first time since 2005.
FCI must compulsorily now hold 29 per cent more foodgrain in the central pool than the current requirement as on each July 1, and around 45 per cent more as on October 1 every year.
On every April 1 and January 1, it will have to hold around one per cent and 14.4 per cent less grain than the existing stipulation.
The buffer stocks and strategic reserve norms stipulate the amount to be held at the start of each quarter in a financial year, to efficiently run social welfare programmes like the Public Distribution System (PDS).However, due to bumper foodgrain harvest and an open-ended purchase system, it usually stores much more than stipulated by the buffer norms.
Some experts said Friday's move is also aimed at meeting World Trade Organization obligations that governments must not store foodgrain much in excess of requirement.
The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs also cleared the constitution of an inter-ministerial group to offload excess foodgrain stock, if any, in the domestic market through open sale or export.
 
India to talk sanctions, LNG imports during Obama visit - oil officials
17 January 2015
PANAPRESS - Pan African News Agency
India will use an upcoming visit by Barack Obama to press the United States to remove Indian oil companies from a list naming firms doing business in Iran, and to seek priority access to U.S. LNG exports, sources in the Oil Ministry said.
The U.S. president will arrive in New Delhi on Jan. 25 and hold discussions with Prime Minister Narendra Modi, who visited Washington in September. An official agenda has not been released.
The U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO) listed three Indian companies as having commercial activity in Irans energy sector in a report this week, potentially making it difficult for them to do business with other countries, mainly the United States.
Oil and Natural Gas Corp (ONGC.NS), Oil India Ltd (OILI.NS) and Indian Oil Corp (IOC.NS), which have been on the list since 2010, cited interests in Irans Farsi concession in their 2013-14 annual reports but told the GAO they had ceased activity in 2007, the GAO said.
This (mention in the list) could hit Indian companies plans to invest in other countries, particularly in America, said one of the sources.
The United States has imposed sanctions on Irans energy sector to put pressure on the Islamic republic to halt its nuclear programme, which the West suspects may seek to develop atomic weapons. Companies doing business in the sector face exclusion from the U.S. financial system.
Iran says its nuclear programme is solely for peaceful purposes.
Separately, Oil Ministry sources said India will seek preferential access to U.S. exports of liquefied natural gas (LNG), even though India does not have a free-trade agreement (FTA) with the United States.
We want them to give us the freedom to lift LNG from any of their projects on a priority basis, including the ones that are meant for FTA nations, an official said.
State-owned gas firm GAIL (India) Ltd (GAIL.NS) has an agreement to lift 6 million tonnes a year of LNG from two projects in the United States.
U.S. oil and gas production has shot up in recent years as new technology has allowed the worlds largest oil consumer to exploit reserves in shale formations.
But exports are tightly restricted and LNG shipments must be approved by Washington. Exports of crude oil are banned outright, a legacy of the recent past when the United States consumed far more oil than it produced.
Since taking office in May last year, Modi has pledged to improve the performance of Indias power sector, which suffers from frequent blackouts, to fuel economic expansion.
 
BD needs to do more: USTR
Monira Munni 
18 January 2015
The Financial Express (Bangladesh)
Bangladesh, Jan. 18 -- The United States has ruled out the possibility of reinstatement of Bangladesh's trade benefit under its generalised system of preferences (GSP) unless further progress is attained in certain areas, including labour rights and factory inspection.
Furthermore, the US government's trade wing wants effective collaboration among the government, private-sector stakeholders and the ILO (International Labour Organisation).
It is needed to cope with factory-safety issues in Bangladesh's apparel industry, the USTR (United States Trade Representative) office said after an interagency review of the ground situation and Dhaka's strong plea for restoring the trade facility in the US market-the single-largest destination for Bangladesh's main exportable, readymade garments.
".Bangladesh has made progress over the last year to address fire and building safety issues in the ready-made garment (RMG) sector, further progress is needed, including addressing serious worker rights issues, before reinstatement of Bangladesh's trade benefits under the Generalised System of Preferences (GSP) can be considered," the USTR said after the review Friday.
United States Trade Representative Michael Froman made the USTR position available on its official website, in response to Bangladesh's last update, sent in mid-November in 2014, on progress made in line with the US-designed Action Plan.
Washington revoked trade benefits for Bangladesh in mid-2013 following tragedies in the Rana Plaza building collapse and Tazreen Fashions factory fire. More than 1,200 people were killed.
The USTR review found that under government oversight more than 2,000 safety reviews of factories had been carried out in the last year, most by teams organised by private-sector initiatives led by North American and European brands and retailers, resulting in the closure or partial closure of 48 plants.
The government of Bangladesh is responsible for inspection of several hundred more factories, the trade representative pointed out in regretting US inability to restore the trade facility for now.
"We urge the government to complete remaining factory inspections as soon as possible to prevent recurrence of workplace tragedies such as those that occurred in 2012 and 2013," Mr Froman said.
"There is more work to do, building on the collaboration between the government of Bangladesh, private-sector stakeholders, and the International Labor Organization, to address the concerns about factory safety in the apparel sector," he added.
The US government is concerned about continuing reports of "harassment and violence" against union activists seeking to establish new unions or to exercise their legal rights, the USTR statement said.
"We also urge the government to accelerate its efforts to ensure workers' rights and to take measures to address continuing reports of harassment of and violence against labour activists who are attempting to exercise their rights," it added.
There has also been little progress in advancing the labour-law reforms called for in the Action Plan, including changes to ensure that workers are afforded same rights and protections in Export Processing Zones as in the rest of the country, the statement went on listing the dos.
Suspending trade benefits did not directly hit Bangladesh's multi-billion-dollar clothing exports but it put pressure on the country and many of the world's largest garment and fashion companies, which sourced clothes from Bangladesh manufacturers.
In 2012, the total value of US imports from Bangladesh under GSP was $34.7 million. The top GSP imports from Bangladesh included tobacco, sports equipment, porcelain china, and plastic products.
When contacted, Labour Secretary Mikail Shipar said the government was addressing the complaints of harassment and violence against union activists.
"But the incidents are not so frequent as the USTR said."
He said two firms were hired to carry out the factory inspection under a government-ILO joint initiative.
The inspections would hopefully be completed by April next, he said.
Regarding the EPZ law, he said it was now a waiting the law ministry vetting.
"Necessary changes have been made in this regard, considering the entire scenario, including the interest of foreign investment and local employment," he noted.
 
Gov’t may negotiate after WTO ruling
17 January 2015
Buenos Aires Herald
Following the World Trade Organization's (WTO) rejection of Argentina's bid to overturn a ruling in favour of the United States, the European Union (EU) and Japan, Cabinet Chief Jorge Capitanich has said that the government will seek to “establish bilateral negotiation criteria” with the complainants, and that for the moment the country's import rules are still in force.
On Thursday, the WTO rejected Argentina's bid to overturn a ruling in favour of the US, the EU and Japan in a case against national licensing rules that the international body said have been used to unlawfully restrict imports.
The World Trade Organization (WTO) ruling against Argentina triggers “no immediate modification” of the country's trade administration, Cabinet Chief Jorge Capitanich pointed out adding a “comprehensive and detailed analysis of the ruling's terms” is needed.
Capitanich added that an analysis of the economic repercussions was still required, considering the financial crisis is still hitting hard on the global economy. Furthermore, the cabinet chief blasted “media operations” that report an “alleged lack of certain goods and supplies,” something he blamed “companies' lack of planning or speculative actions” for. Shortage of certain goods or supplies, he affirmed, is not a matter of restriction or import authorizations.
President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner's policy of controlling imports to shield local industries and bolster trade surplus could be affected severely by the ruling, but its implementation will not be immediate, with delays over implementation periods, negotiations between the countries and disputes over the reach of the decision likely to occur.
Even though the Domestic Trade Secretariat had been previously restricting some imports through resolutions and informal agreements with importers, the conflict with trading partners escalated in 2012 when Argentina imposed a system requiring prior approval of nearly every purchase from abroad, sparking the WTO case.
The DJAI import permits were at the heart of the US, EU and Japan's cases, and the WTO also saw them as central in its ruling, although other control mechanisms were also mentioned. Japan had also complained about lengthy delays in authorizing DJAI permits before imports could go through, in similar fashion to local importers, who have sparked public clashes with government officials lately.
As a result, the government agreed this week to create an online system that would allow importers to automatize the approval of these permits, looking to ease the process, which today deals with 8,000 permits per day. Changes in the nature of the system could also be used by the government to argue that sanctions should not apply.
 
l'Argentine perd en appel à l'OMC pour sa politique d'importation
17 January 2015
Agence Europe 
Bruxelles, 16/01/2015 (Agence Europe) - L'organe d'appel de l'OMC a entièrement confirmé, jeudi 15 janvier, son verdict du 22 août 2014 concernant les plaintes de l'UE, des États-Unis et du Japon contre une série d'obstacles dressés par l'Argentine à l'importation sur son marché de produits en provenance de ces pays. L'Argentine est donc priée de se mettre en conformité avec les règles du commerce mondial.
L'organe d'appel de l'OMC a confirmé que l'Argentine ne devait plus exiger des firmes étrangères: - de limiter leurs importations ; - de compenser la valeur des importations avec des exportations équivalentes ; - d'atteindre un certain niveau de contenu local dans leur production intérieure ; - d'investir dans le pays et d'y conserver tous leurs bénéfices. L'organe d'appel a aussi confirmé que l'Argentine ne devait pas exiger des entreprises étrangères d'obtenir une approbation pour leurs importations à l'aide de la procédure dite de la 'déclaration d'importation assermentée avancée'.
L'Argentine avait fait appel, fin septembre, de la décision de l'organe de règlement des différends de l'OMC du 22 août concernant trois plaintes distinctes à l'OMC de l'UE (DS 438), des États-Unis (DS 444) et du Japon (DS 445) qui accusaient Buenos Aires d'avoir adopté des restrictions pénalisant leurs exportations vers le marché argentin en obligeant leurs entreprises souhaitant y exporter d'importer en contrepartie des biens argentins. L'obligation faite au constructeur automobile allemand Porsche d'acheter du vin et de l'huile d'olive argentins pour faire entrer une centaine de voitures dans le pays en est l'exemple le plus connu.
« L'Argentine doit maintenant renoncer à ses pratiques et permettre aux entreprises européennes de reprendre un commerce normal avec leurs partenaires argentins », a commenté la Commission, jeudi.
L'objectif des mesures prises par l'Argentine, dans le cadre d'une politique commerciale dite 'contrôlée', était de substituer les importations par des produits d'origine nationale et de réduire son déficit commercial. Ces mesures ont imposé un lourd fardeau aux importateurs de produits de l'UE en Argentine et elles ont porté atteinte à la capacité des entreprises étrangères d'opérer dans le pays. Elles ont déclenché une vive réaction internationale, avec trois différends portés en mai 2012 par l'UE, les États-Unis et le Japon, et conduisant à la condamnation par l'OMC, l'été dernier, du régime d'importation argentin. (EH)
 
Taiwan entry into TPP unlikely soon: US experts 
By William Lowther 
17 January 2015
Taipei Times
Taiwans entry into the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) free-trade pact is unlikely to happen any time soon, Washington experts say.
Taiwan would be a tricky one for the US government, so I dont see any dramatic move in that direction, Asian Development Bank executive director Robert Orr told a conference this week.
Its always a touchy issue for us in terms of our relationship with China, and in my estimation it wont be coming any time in the near term, Orr added.
Victor Cha, director of Asian Studies at Georgetown University, said China would be a factor.
Speaking very plainly, in terms of rounding out TPP, the brass ring is China, thus its going to be hard to have a conversation about Taiwan, Cha said.
However, Cha said that Taiwan had worked very hard to bring itself to the table in all sorts of different international institutions and you cant rule anything out.
If in the long term TPP has a sort of transformational effect on not just the economic, but also the strategic picture, and if the cross-strait relationship continues to improve, you dont know whats possible in the future, he said.
Organized by the Center for Security and International Studies (CSIS) and the Asian Studies Program at Georgetown University, the conference was focused on negotiating growth in Asia.
The proposed TPP agreement between the US, Japan and 10 other countries is not yet complete, and Taiwan hopes to join it as part of a second group of countries after the initial deal is reached.
Representative to the US Shen Lyu-shun says that membership is a must for the next stage of Taiwans national development.
The countries currently involved in TPP talks account for about 40 percent of global economic output and more than a third of world trade.
Shen has told Washington reporters that joining the pact is vital for Taiwan to keep up with increasingly tough competition.
An academic paper on cross-strait relations published by the CSIS this week says that Taiwan continues to be effectively excluded from regional trade regimes such as the TPP and bilateral trade liberalization agreements.
Written by David Brown, a Johns Hopkins University professor of China studies, and Kevin Scott, an associate director of Asian policy studies at the Brookings Institution, the paper says that in October last year, then-minister of economic affairs Woody Duh said several other countries were willing to hold substantive trade negotiations with Taiwan, but that talks had not begun due to interference from China.
The hesitant countries are believed to be India, Indonesia, the Philippines and Malaysia and perhaps Australia, the paper says.
It says that the governments inability to sign high-profile free-trade agreements (FTAs) has seemed like a slow motion crisis for Taiwan and that the risk of marginalization became more urgent when China and South Korea announced the conclusion of substantive negotiations on a bilateral FTA.
While committed to its peaceful development policy, Beijing will have important tactical decisions to make about what can be accomplished in the remaining months of [President] Ma Ying-jeous [] presidency and on how it can position itself most effectively to influence the outcome of the 2016 election, the paper says.
 
Thailand: Firms miss out on FTA advantages
19 January 2015
Thai News Service
The Industry Ministry is encouraging companies to capitalise on the benefits of free trade agreements (FTAs).
If they take full advantage of the FTAs by 2017, it could cut costs and add profit of more than 300 billion baht, it said on Jan.8.
Udom Wongviwatchai, director-general of the Office of Industrial Economics, said if firms used all tariff-free advantages, it could save export costs of up to 252 billion baht and import tax of up to 132 billion baht.
He said many firms did not know how to capitalise on these tax privileges.
"The Industry Ministry is about to discuss this matter with private firms to seek ways to slash tariffs as soon as we can," said Mr Udom.
The ministry will arrange formal talks to be chaired by Prime Minister Prayut Chan-o-cha and Deputy Prime Minister MR Pridiyathorn Devakula, who oversees economic issues.
Thailand has signed FTAs with several countries and joined economic zones, with agreements including the Asean Free Trade Area, Thailand-Australia Free Trade Agreement, Japan-Thailand Economic Partnership Agreement and Thailand-India Free Trade Agreement.
Thailand has also reached out to faraway countries to liberalise trade with the Thailand-Peru Free Trade Agreement and the Asean Free Trade Agreement with China, India, Japan, South Korea, Australia and New Zealand.
The FTAs cover 17 industrial sectors including auto parts, iron and steel, and food and plastics, allowing Thai firms to produce and export at lower costs.
Despite Thailand signing many FTAs, Thai companies have benefited from only about half of the tax-free privileges in recent years, Mr Udom said.
Vallop Vitanakorn, vice-chairman of the Federation of Thai Industries, said the major problem preventing firms from using all the privileges from FTAs was that they did not understand how the agreements provided them with a chance to do business at lower costs.
That hurts them by cutting their competitive advantage, he said.
Some trade partners also had non-tariff barriers to help protect their domestic industries, which was another major problem that prevented Thai companies from taking advantage of FTAs.
"It's a crucial problem that the government will have to tackle immediately by completing more campaigns to let Thai firms realise those FTA privileges and encourage them to understand and use them to greater benefit," Mr Vallop said.
