Business has a key role in restoring confidence in the global economy
TRIPS waiver for LDCs sought until 2025
China calm over TPP isolation as it pursues regional deals
Pro-EU group ready to take on Brexit lobby
 
Business has a key role in restoring confidence in the global economy
SIR MARTIN SORRELL   
988 words
11 October 2015
The Sunday Telegraph
STEL
1; National
4
English
The Sunday Telegraph © 2015. Telegraph Media Group Ltd.   
Good news for the Chancellor last week, when the Ernst & Young ITEM Club predicted that the UK will buck the trend by escaping the global economic doldrums.
This respected forecaster believes strong corporate investment between now and 2019 "will ensure that the expansion of the UK's economy is sustainable."
George Osborne's stock has never been higher. Following his critical role in the Conservatives' general election victory, the nation's chief financial officer seems to have become its chief operating officer - and we know what job may follow that.
The ITEM Club's projections do represent the rosiest end of the spectrum of opinion, and less optimistic voices such as the Centre for Economics and Business Research (CEBR) expect the UK's growth to slow to less than two per cent by 2017. I am pretty confident, however, that the Chancellor will make sure the economy revs up again before the next electoral test in 2020.
In a wider context, former US Treasury secretary Larry Summers and the International Monetary Fund both say the global economy is facing "secular stagnation", a long-term slump in the growth of economic output. Others, not least former Fed chairman Ben Bernanke, disagree, and place a greater emphasis on cyclical factors in explaining low interest rates and tepid growth.
I would choose a little of each. I certainly expect countries like China and India and other so-called emerging (what we call "fast-growth") markets to bounce back over the medium to long term as the explosion in lower-middle and middle-class consumers continues unabated. Not perhaps to previous levels, but still higher than mature markets.
None the less, there seem to be few reasons to think that global GDP will emerge from its low single-digit real growth rate in the immediate future. We may be stuck with a slower-growth world - and all that means for employment and opportunity - for some time to come.
So what, if anything, can we do about it? One group of high-profile business leaders has a few ideas.
The B20 (Business 20) International Business Advisory Council, chaired by Coca-Cola's chairman and CEO, Muhtar Kent, was set up under this year's Turkish G20 presidency to enhance dialogue between the corporate world and governments ahead of November's Antalya Summit.
The job of the council, which comprises a wide range of companies (including WPP), is to put forward recommendations that will support the G20's efforts to build confidence in the global economy and, perhaps, restore those corporate animal spirits.
After wide consultation, the council's members have identified four key areas for action with the greatest potential to boost economic growth and job creation.
The first priority is for governments to ratify and implement the World Trade Organisation's trade facilitation agreement (TFA). The TFA would remove the unnecessary red tape and delays when moving goods across borders that add an estimated 12pc to the global cost of trading internationally.
This is particularly important for small business growth and for entrepreneurs in developing countries. The prize is great: research suggests that implementing the TFA could increase global GDP by up to $1 trillion (£654bn) and create 21 million jobs.
The second area is improving access to finance for SMEs, which are disproportionately affected by adverse credit market conditions. Affordable finance is the lifeblood of small and medium-sized businesses, but the flow has been severely restricted since the financial crisis. Governments can help by removing regulatory and policy barriers to financing by commercial banks, and creating a supportive environment for alternatives like crowdfunding, peer-to-peer lending and hybrid financing instruments.
Thirdly, we need to create more opportunities for women and young people in the labour market. The global unemployment rate stands at 5.9pc. For young people it's 13.1pc. Women are also much more likely to be unemployed, under-employed or in less secure jobs. All of this has a major economic as well as social cost.
The council is asking the G20 to commit to a comprehensive strategy to boost youth and female participation in the workforce. A key aim should be to reduce mismatches in skills, not least through better public-private collaboration on national skills strategies and education plans.
Finally, the world's leading economies need to articulate coherent national strategies to repair and invest in their infrastructure. The worldwide spending gap on infrastructure is forecast to reach $15 trillion to $20 trillion by 2030.
Filling this gap will require unprecedented amounts of private capital, and governments will have to set out credible plans in order to attract investors. The UK has taken a step in the right direction by establishing an independent infrastructure commission under Lord Adonis.
The council believes these four recommendations, if adopted, would encourage stronger and more sustainable growth - both within and beyond the G20 nations.
I would also add a fifth. It is in everyone's interests that the newly adopted sustainable development goals (SDGs) - the UN's ambitious targets "to end poverty, protect the planet, and ensure prosperity for all" - are a success.
At the end of September, the heads of more than 20 of the world's leading businesses signed an open letter calling on political leaders to work with the private sector to help deliver the SDGs.
Governments alone do not have the resources to tackle the huge problems the SDGs seek to address. There are only so many levers they can pull.
By working actively and constructively with business, policymakers will find that many more levers become available to them, and a great deal more can be achieved.
 

TRIPS waiver for LDCs sought until 2025
FE Report
Posted : 11 Oct, 2015 00:00:00 AA-A+ 
printer
 
More than 30 rights-based organisations including civil societies, trade unions and farmers' groups demanded Saturday extension of Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) waiver for Bangladesh as well as for other least developed countries (LDCs) until they are no longer classified as such.
The agreement on TRIPS is an international accord administered by the World Trade Organisation (WTO) that sets minimum standards for many forms of intellectual property (IP) regulation as applied to other WTO members.
According to the WTO, the LDCs can enjoy the IPR waiver until 2016, but concerned countries are seeking extension of the waiver until their economic development reaches a standard level.
The demands were made at a press conference styled "Bangladesh and all LDCs deserve TRIPS waiver until becoming developed countries," held at the National Press Club. It was organised by the Equity and Justice Working Group Bangladesh (EquityBD).   
LDC Watch, Our World is Not for Sale (OWINFS) and Third World Network (TWN) -- the global civil society groups along with their South Asian partner EquityBD are mobilising civil societies in this regard.
The group also announced that they would send letters and memorandum to the chair of WTO, WTO Secretary General, US and Canada Trade Representatives, and other related official delegations and representatives, following the upcoming TRIPS council meeting in Geneva between October 15 and 16.
Director of Equity BD Syed Aminul Hoque presented the keynote speech which revealed the TRIPs agreement will end by 2016, especially on pharmaceutical products.
"But Bangladesh will not be in a position now to compete with global players in pharmaceutical market if IP waver is removed now," he said.
Bangladesh's pharmaceutical sector is still import-dependent for Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (API). This is indicating that the country is not self-sufficient in technology and knowledge to let the industries attain the global standard, he said.
"So withdrawal of such waiver and imposing patent-ship in pharmaceuticals after 2016 would be a cause of higher price and will narrow market demand both at home and export destinations," the paper said.
"As a consequence, the access of poor people to necessary health services will be squeezed further.
 "So, Bangladesh and other LDCs deserve TRIPS waiver for their pharmaceutical industries and other products at least for next 10 years up to 2025."
Convener of the Bangladesh Farmers Federation Md. Badrul Alam criticised representatives of the USA and Canada at the WTO for their negative role in the TRIPS meeting for not announcing its full support to the WTO-LDC group's requests with regard to the pharmaceutical transition period.
He said the two countries are likely to make demands that could create obstacles for Bangladeshi and other LDC products' access to the global market.
Following the situation, they urged the developed countries, especially the USA and Canada, to play their positive roles and facilitate the TRIPS waiver extension proposal in favour of Bangladesh and other LDCs.
Nagorik Shanghati convener Sharifuzzaman pointed out that there has a scope of TRIPS waiver extension for LDCs because, on June 11, 2013, the WTO announced that LDCs will be getting an extension for TRIPS until 2021.
WTO members have no right to deny or condition the requested extension as Article 66.1 of the TRIPS Agreement expressly states that the TRIPS Council 'shall' accord extensions upon a duly-motivated request by LDCs.
"Such a request has been submitted to the TRIPS Council by Bangladesh on behalf of the LDCs", said Kamal Akand, assistant director, the Coast.
Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF or Doctors without Borders) Policy and Analysis Director Rohit Malpani said they welcome the request by Bangladesh, on behalf of least-developed countries, to extend the pharmaceutical transition period until LDCs are no longer classified as such.
MSF works in many LDCs and relies on low-cost affordable generic medicines to provide affordable access to treatment," he said.
 "Any flexibility which safeguards access to low-cost generic medicines and vaccines is welcomed by MSF," he added.
- See more at: http://www.thefinancialexpress-bd.com/2015/10/11/111383#sthash.lNzS2zxY.dpuf

China calm over TPP isolation as it pursues regional deals 
Rebecca DAVIS   
847 words
11 October 2015
06:06
Agence France Presse
AFPR
English
Copyright Agence France-Presse, 2015 All reproduction and presentation rights reserved.   
A new US-led Pacific trade pact that pointedly excludes China could see it lose influence and key export markets, but observers say the web of bilateral deals Beijing has forged is enough to maintain its global clout.
The signing last week of the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) brings together 12 nations that account for about 40 percent of the global economy and would mark the biggest liberalisation of world trade in more than a decade.
And while all signatories championed the benefits it will bring and its importance in kickstarting sluggish global growth, the agreement also provides a strategic bulwark to China's growing power -- both economically and militarily.
In heralding the agreement US President Barack Obama said: "We can't let countries like China write the rules of the global economy."
And Chinese state-media this week labelled it "a massive economic bloc accused of combating China".
However, Chinese officials have softened their stance towards the pact after initially giving it a frosty reception.
Beijing's commerce ministry this week called it "important" and said China is "open to any mechanism that follows the rules of the World Trade Organization and can boost the economic integration of the Asia-Pacific".
The remarks have prompted speculation that China could actually apply to join, although most analysts consider that unlikely, citing the high level of state control over the economy.
The deal comes just months after Washington and Tokyo were left isolated when most of their Western allies agreed to join China's much-vaunted Asian infrastructure bank, set up as a counter to the US-influenced World Bank and International Monetary Fund.
At the same time Beijing continues to ramp up its military might, slowly eating into Washington's sphere of influence in the Pacific while it increasingly flexes its muscles in territorial disputes with Japan and South Korea, among others.
Some argue the deal could hammer Chinese manufacturers -- already struggling with slowing growth in the world's number-two economy -- by cutting off key export markets.
Ma Jun, chief economist at the research institute of China's central bank warned in an article this week that the textiles, clothing and electronics industries will miss out significantly.
And a study in 2014 by two US academics and a Chinese researcher estimated Beijing could lose out on a potential $1.6 trillion boost to its exports by 2025 by not signing up.
China and the US would be "the countries expected to benefit the most" from a widened TPP, they wrote.
Beijing's exclusion "obviously isn't conducive to promoting economic cooperation between China and neighbouring countries", said Chun Jiangyue, director of a think-tank affiliated to China's foreign ministry.
But China's response has been measured, underlining what many see as confidence in cementing its own economic deals in the Pacific.
"We have nothing to be insecure about," the state-run Global Times newspaper said this week.
Of the many free-trade agreements China has signed globally, five are with TPP members -- including Australia and New Zealand -- and as the largest economy in Asia, it is the biggest trading partner of many others.
Beijing is also pursuing a rival vision for trade - the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership, a 16-nation agreement that includes several TPP signatories.
"The impact of the TPP on China won't be a very painful one," Chun said. "China has its own theory for the development of international trade and commerce."
As well as the infrastructure bank, President Xi Jinping has pledged to roll out a massive investment scheme across Asia, known as "One Belt, One Road", as part of a drive to spread Chinese influence.
A plan to make the yuan a more internationally traded currency is also slowly taking shape.
"China has been progressively building an extensive web of free-trade agreements," said Alice Ekman, head China researcher at the French Institute of International Relations.
The country has been "particularly proactive" in promoting regional economic integration, a "long-term trend unlikely to be altered by the signing of the TPP", she added.
Those who wish for deeper free-market reforms in China hope that the pact's standards could drive domestic change, but officials are likely to drag their feet.
"If China wants to open up foreign trade relations according to TPP standards, there would likely be some negative impact to the Chinese economy," said Jia Qingguo, a professor at Peking University who is close to policymakers.
They also say it will be tough for Beijing to meet standards on the environment and worker's rights specified in the deal.
"Labour union provisions and Internet openness could be deal-breakers" which rule out Chinese participation, said Graham Webster, a researcher at Yale Law School.
But he added: "China designs its global and regional development efforts to be compatible with Chinese interests... TPP would do nothing to remove China from its central role in the Asia-Pacific economy."
 
 

Pro-EU group ready to take on Brexit lobby
Stuart Rose heads host of big-name politicians and supporters
Financial Times
October 11, 2015
The campaign to keep Britain in the European Union has unveiled a host of big-name supporters including leading politicians from all major parties ahead of its official launch on Monday.
The announcement comes as Scottish first minister Nicola Sturgeon warned that a vote in favour of “Brexit” could trigger a fresh independence referendum for Scotland while the first signs of a split emerged in the Green party over the issue.
The cross-party campaign for Britain to stay in Europe — officially named Britain Stronger In Europe — will be chaired by the Conservative peer Lord Rose, the man who turned around the fortunes of Marks and Spencer during his spell in charge of the retailer. 

It also features New Labour grandees such as Lord Sainsbury, its biggest donor, Lord Mandelson and the public relations executive Roland Rudd, along with Damien Green, Conservative MP and Danny Alexander, former Liberal Democrat MP and chief secretary to the Treasury.
The “In” campaign has won the support of former TUC leader Brendan Barber, former head of the Army Sir Peter Wall, businessman Richard Reed, PR strategist Jenny Halpern Prince and Baroness Karren Brady, the football executive.
Ms Sturgeon told the BBC’s Andrew Marr Show on Sunday that a vote to leave the EU would “fundamentally change the situation and I think we would see rising demand for another [Scottish] referendum”. 
Ms Sturgeon said she felt another independence ballot was “inevitable” but added that “it all comes down to public opinion”.
“If people who voted no last year start in significant numbers to change their minds then no politician has the right to stand in the way of having another referendum,” she said.
Janet Beer, Liverpool University vice-chancellor; Megan Dunn, NUS president; Jude Kelly, South Bank artistic director; Trevor Phillips, broadcaster and former London Assembly chairman and June Sarpong, television presenter have also signed up to the “In” campaign.
The Green party is divided, with its only MP Caroline Lucas adding her name to Britain Stronger In Europe, while leading London Assembly member Baroness Jenny Jones is supporting the Vote Leave campaign which launched on Friday.
Will Straw, executive director of Britain Stronger In Europe and a former Labour party parliamentary candidate said the name was chosen because in the forthcoming campaign “we will make a positive and patriotic case that it is in Britain’s interest to remain part of Europe”.
“British households get a 10-to-one return on our contributions to the EU, and being in Europe makes our economy stronger, our security stronger and gives us a stronger voice on the world stage,” he said.