WTO AMBASSADORS HAVE YET TAKE UP DOHA QUESTION, EXPORT COMPETITION
Farmers threaten to hold country-wide protests
OFFICIAL SIGNALS U.S. UNWILLING TO REFORM EXPORT CREDIT, FOOD AID POLICIES
Ukraine, Russia hold consultations on Friday on Ukraine's WTO claim regarding railway equipment

TPP may hit patent regime: Think tank

Thane duo to represent India at WTO conference
Opportunities for foreign companies in China will grow, says vice-premier

UNDER LEVIN CUSTOMS PROPOSAL, CURRENCY PANEL WOULD CITE POTENTIAL VIOLATIONS

MAJOR DSB USERS PUSH FOR GREATER ACCOUNTABILITY ON WTO DISPUTE DELAYS

EU LINKS PROVISIONS ON AG STES TO OTHER EXPORT COMPETITION DISCIPLINES

USTR HOPES FOR QUICK ITA WRAP-UP, BUT INDUSTRY REP SEES TALKS STRETCHING


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
WTO AMBASSADORS HAVE YET TAKE UP DOHA QUESTION, EXPORT COMPETITION
Inside U.S. Trade
 
Negotiations at the World Trade Organization on an export competition agreement and whether the Doha
round should be reaffirmed in a ministerial declaration have yet to be taken up directly by WTO ambassadors,
despite less than two weeks remaining before the Dec. 15-18 ministerial conference in Nairobi, Kenya.
 
Discussions on export competition are still taking place at the technical level in the negotiating group on
agriculture, with a range of proposals on the table and no consolidated text.
 
By contrast, WTO members are using as a basis for their discussion on the Nairobi ministerial declaration a
draft submitted last week by three ambassadors who are serving as facilitators.
 
WTO ambassadors discussed the facilitators' draft declaration during an informal heads of delegation
meeting on Dec. 2, but did not get far enough to address the Doha reaffirmation question. In general, some
developing countries have pushed for language reaffirming the Doha round to continue as a single
undertaking, while developed countries oppose the reaffirmation of the round.
 
Ambassadors are expected to take up the Doha affirmation question in the coming days, possibly on Dec. 4,
according to a Geneva source.
 
A U.S. trade official said this issue would likely be resolved by having the Nairobi ministerial declaration
acknowledge that there is no consensus between WTO members on whether the Doha round should
continue.
 
"The best way to reconcile this in Nairobi is to acknowledge this difference and to all agree that what is
important at this late stage is that those core issues which have not been resolved will continue beyond
Nairobi," Mark Linscott, the Assistant U.S. Trade Representative for the WTO and Multilateral Affairs said on
Dec. 3. "We expect there will be future work on agricultural domestic support and market access." Linscott
spoke at an roundtable hosted by the Global Business Dialogue.
 
As a result of these talks not being sufficiently mature, WTO members opted to suspend a General Council
meeting held on Nov. 30 without hearing a report on the Nairobi negotiations from Director-General Roberto
Azevedo in his role as chairman of the trade negotiations committee. The General Council completed all
other items on the agenda for its Nov. 30 meeting.
 
As of press time, the General Council is expected to reconvene on Dec. 7 for Azevedo to make his report,
with the hope that there will be more progress on the Nairobi outcomes by that time. WTO delegations are
likely to leave Geneva at the end of next week to travel to Nairobi.
 
The controversy over the Doha reaffirmation issue has heated up in the wake of the circulation of the
facilitators' draft Nairobi declaration as an unofficial room document on Nov. 27. This is because the wording
of the draft declaration regarding the future work of the WTO generally met the demands of developed
countries, but was criticized by developing countries as putting the Doha round in the past tense.
Although a cover note to the draft declaration states that it does not address the reaffirmation of the Doha
round, the draft does contain two paragraphs that address the future work of the WTO in the third part of the
document.
 
Paragraph 23 states: "We welcome the advances made in the Doha Development Agenda. We regret that it
has not been possible to reach agreement on all areas of the negotiations, including Agriculture,
[non-agricultural market access], Services, Rules, including fisheries subsidies, and TRIPS. In particular, we
note the importance of agriuclture to many WTO members, including LDCs. We will therefore address all
aspects of agriculture reform as a priority."
 
"In reaffirming the centrality of development, we agree that the principles of Special and Differential
Treatment and Less Than Full Reciprocity for developing and least-developed country Members shall remain
integral parts of the WTO's future work," paragraph 24 states.
 
According to one Geneva source, developing countries argue that the language in paragraph 24 is only
necessary if the Doha round is being jettisoned, as the original 2001 Doha declaration reaffirmed special and
differential treatment and less than full reciprocity as key principles of the round.
 
Another Geneva source maintained that a consensus is needed to close the Doha round and that members
know that such a consensus cannot be reached. Roughly 20 percent of WTO members that account for about
70 percent of world trade do not want the Doha round reaffirmed, the source said, because there is no belief
that concluding the round is possible "in our lifetime."
 
The Dec. 2 meeting of WTO ambassadors to discuss the draft declaration focused on part one of the
document, which includes introductory language on the importance of the multilateral trading system.
The facilitators' draft was also discussed by a group of major WTO members during an informal breakfast
meeting on Nov. 28. This group included the United States, European Union, Australia, China, India, Brazil,
Japan, Canada, Jamaica, Norway, Kenya and Switzerland.
 
Two proposals were circulated to members on Dec. 2 proposing language in a ministerial declaration that
would reaffirm the Doha round.
 
The first one -- submitted by China, Ecuador, India, Indonesia, South Africa and Venezuela -- proposes
language to the ministerial declaration's preamble and to paragraph 23 that states: "We reaffirm the Doha
Development Agenda (DDA), and the Declarations and Decisions adopted at Doha and at the Ministerial
Conferences held since then, and further reaffirm our full commitment to conclude the DDA negotiations on
that basis."
 
The second proposal, by the African Group, contained similar language, but also included a specific
reference to the 2004 Hong Kong ministerial declaration.
 
Negotiators are also focusing on developing a deal on export competition, but still only discussing the issue in
general terms, sources said. Members are currently examining the 2008 draft text on export competition on a
paragraph-by-paragraph basis. Members that are seeking an agreement that derogates from that text are
presenting their views when the specific paragraphs they would like to change come up.
 
In addition to the 2008 text, four other proposals have been tabled on export competition. These are a Nov.
17 proposal put forward by the EU, Brazil, and five other members; a proposal submitted by the Philippines
on Nov. 26; a Nov. 30 proposal submitted by Tunisia, and U.S. proposals on agricultural state trading
enterprises and international food aid.
 
One Geneva source said Turkey and Argentina are linking their willingness to show flexibility on export
competition to the inclusion in the Nairobi deal of a special safeguard mechanism proposed by the G30 that
would allow developing countries to protect their agricultural products in the event of import surges or prices
depressions.
 
But this source also doubted that these countries would hold up a deal on export competition if other
members refused to agree to the special safeguard, which is seen as one of the most contentious issues in
the negotiations.
 
If negotiators are able to reach an agreement on export competition, it would be inserted into the second part
of a ministerial declaration, which contains the decisions to be taken by ministers.
The draft put forward by trade facilitators listed three decisions to be taken in Nairobi and left a placeholder
for additional ones.
 
The three decisions it listed were an extension of a moratorium on non-violation cases under the Agreement
on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights; the extension of a moratorium on imposing customs
duties on electronic transmissions; and the adoption of a work program on small economies. These decisions
have regularly been taken at WTO ministerials.
 
 
Farmers threaten to hold country-wide protests
The Hindu,
Farmers on Friday threatened to launch a country-wide agitation against the BJP-led government at the Centre in protest against the alleged apathetic attitude towards their demands, including implementation of Swaminathan Commission report, debt waiver etc.
Under the banner of Bhartiya Kisan Union (BKU), led by its national spokesman Rakesh Tikait, farmers from various States, including Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Karnataka, Himachal Pradesh, Tamil Nadu assembled here and took a decision to hold protest rallies against the government while holding it responsible for “pitiable” condition of the growers.
“We have decided to hold protests and demonstration against the Central government for not giving any attention towards their deplorable condition. Through these protests, we will pressurise the Centre to accept their genuine demands,” Mr, Tikait said here on Friday.
BKU’s national coordinator Yudhvir Singh said it was quite unfortunate that country’s Prime Minister was not ready to listen to their problems.
“We tried several times to meet our PM to apprise him about our demands. We even held a protest rally in Delhi, but PM did not listen to us,” Mr. Singh alleged.
He alleged that farmers were disappointed with present government.
As per the plan, farmers have decided to block all the entry points to Delhi on March 17.
On February 18, protest will be held in Chandigarh.
Besides, protest rallies will be held in Allahabad on January 18, in Madhya Pradesh on March 1, followed by Uttarakhand on March 2 and Karnataka on March 3.
BKU (Punjab) official Ajmer Singh Lakhowal said that farmers were not getting adequate rates for their crops and their financial position has turned from bad to worse.
“Farmers have become debt ridden and they are not able to come out of this crisis situation unless government lends support,” he said.
Giving details about demands, Mr. Lakhowal said that report of Swaminathan Commission should be implemented at the earliest which promises 50 per cent profit over and above the cost.
All debts of farmers should be waived and a farmers’ income commission should be set up to determine minimum income of growers. A separate farm budget be prepared and children of farmers should be given reservation in educational institutions and government jobs, he said.
On this occasion, farmers also asked the Centre not to give approval to any decision like abolition of agricultural subsidies, etc. at 10th WTO Ministerial Conference in Nairobi, Kenya from December 15-18, which could harm the interests of country’s agricultural sector.
Mr. Tikait said a group of farmers will also visit Nairobi to keep a watch on the decisions to be taken at the WTO conference. - PTI
 
OMC -- Alioune Sarr veut une meilleure prise en compte des intérêts des PMA à Nairobi 
All Africa 
Dakar, Dec 04, 2015 (Agence de Presse Sénégalaise/AllAfrica Global Media via COMTEX) - Alioune Sarr, le ministre du Commerce, du Secteur informel, de la Consommation, de la Promotion des produits locaux et des Petites et moyennes entreprises (PME), a plaidé, vendredi, à Dakar, pour une meilleure prise en compte des intérêts des pays les moins avancés (PMA), à l'occasion de la 10e Conférence ministérielle de l'Organisation mondiale du commerce (OMC) à Nairobi (Kenya). 
"Depuis la création en 2001 de l'OMC à Doha en lieu et place de l'Accord général sur les tarifs douaniers et le commerce (AGETAC), force est de constater qu'après 14 années d'intenses négociations, les objectifs escomptés n'ont pas été atteints. Le bilan reste loin des attentes", a dit M. Sarr 
Il intervenait à l'occasion d'un atelier national de préparation de la 10e Conférence ministérielle de l'OMC, qui se tient du 15 au 18 décembre à Nairoby, au Kenya. 
"Des voix de plus en audibles se font entendre pour que les intérêts des PMA, notamment ceux d'Afrique, soient pris en compte. La Conférence de Nairobi ne doit pas être un enterrement des accords de Doha qui ont abouti à la création de l'OMC. Et il nous faut, pour ce faire, à Nairobi, des engagements contraignants qui tiennent compte de nos préoccupations", a-t-il soutenu. 
Il a en outre invité les pays africains à l'élaboration d'accords post Nairobi, estimant que c'est un lieu où des "engagements forts" doivent être pris en faveur de l'Afrique. 
"Le Directeur général de l'OMC, Roberto Azevêdo, a soutenu qu'il est un devoir d'obtenir en Afrique, pour l'Afrique, des résultats à l'occasion de cette conférence", a t-il fait remarquer, non sans inviter les pays africains à une "harmonisation de leurs positions". 
"Nous sommes à un moment ou l'Union africaine (UA) a engagé des travaux de simulation pour l'instauration d'une zone de libre échange. Il est bien de ce point de vue que les pays harmonisent leurs positions, quant aux négociations qu'ils vont devoir mener à Nairobi", a t-il estimé. 
Aussi a t-il insisté sur "l'important rôle que le Sénégal doit jouer" à l'occasion des "négociations", compte tenu notamment des positions qu'il occupe dans différents "organismes" auxquels il est affilié. 
"Les responsabilités qui sont celles du Sénégal au sein de la Communauté économique des Etats de l'Afrique de l'Ouest (CEDEAO), à l'HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Organisation internationale de la francophonie (OIF) et à l'Organisation des Nations unies (ONU) dont il est un membre non permanent du Conseil de sécurité font que nous allons jouer un rôle particulièrement attendu", a-t-il relevé. 
Il s'est ainsi félicité de la réunion tenue à cet égard, par les cadres sénégalais, pour l'élaboration du document que le Sénégal va défendre à la Conférence de Nairobi. 
 
OFFICIAL SIGNALS U.S. UNWILLING TO REFORM EXPORT CREDIT, FOOD AID POLICIES
Inside U.S. Trade
 
A U.S. trade official Thursday (Dec. 3) signaled that the United States is not willing to agree to disciplines on
export credit financing and international food aid at the tenth World Trade Organization ministerial later this
month that would go beyond locking in the reforms it and other trading partners have already undertaken.
 
"There's a broad-based understanding among WTO members that at this late stage that the potential for a
result in [export competition], particularly export subsidies, really should be focused on locking in reforms that
a number of WTO members have taken in recent years," Mark Linscott, the assistant U.S. trade
representative for the WTO and multilateral affairs, said at a discussion hosted by the Global Business
Dialogue.
 
Linscott was responding to a question about whether the U.S. would be willing to take on new obligations on
export credit financing that go beyond the current parameters of its GSM 102 program. These were changed
as part of an October 2014 settlement of a WTO dispute with Brazil over U.S. cotton subsidies.
 
In his comments, the official also cited the elimination of agricultural export subsidies by the European Union
as an example of a reform that should be locked in under an WTO export competition agreement.
But Linscott's signal that the U.S. is unwilling to take on additional obligations on export credit financing and
international food aid run counter to the EU's demand that an outcome cover all areas of export competition
(Inside U.S. Trade, Nov. 27).
 
The latest EU proposal -- submitted jointly with Brazil, Argentina, New Zealand, Paraguay and Uruguay on
Nov. 17 -- included new disciplines on export credit financing and international food aid. The proposal sets a
maximum loan repayment period of 270 days, which is roughly half of the maximum allowed under the GSM
102 program.
 
In response, the U.S. on Nov. 20 tabled proposals on international food aid and agricultural exporting state
trading enterprises, two other aspects of export competition.
 
The U.S. proposal on food aid was criticized bythe EU Ambassador to the WTO Marc Vanheukelen because it did not impose strong enough disciplines. Specifically, the U.S. proposal did not impose a cap on food aid monetization, which is when donated food items are sold within a country receiving the aid. The EU proposal would restrict the amount of monetization that can occur to a percentage of a country's total in-kind food donations, but leaves open to negotiation what
that number should be.
 
 
Ukraine, Russia hold consultations on Friday on Ukraine's WTO claim regarding railway equipment
 
MOSCOW. Dec 4 (Interfax/Interfax-Ukraine) - Ukrainian and Russian delegations held consultations in
Geneva on Friday on a claim lodged by Ukraine with the World Trade Organization (WTO) in connection with
Russia's limitations on the import of wagons and railway switches.
A final decision regarding the claim lies with the Ukrainian side, as it should decide whether to hold a new
round of the consultations or place a request for an arbitration panel, or take any other decision, a source
familiar with the WTO procedures and the outcome of the consultations told Interfax.
As was reported, Ukraine late in October filed a claim at the WTO against Russia's restrictions of the
shipments of Ukrainian-produced wagons and railway switches. The Ukrainian side claims that the
restrictions introduced by Russia since 2013 have been groundless.
 
 

 
TPP may hit patent regime: Think tank
 
The Times of India - Chennai Edition
 
A government think tank on Thursday said the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), which will create the world's
largest free-trade pact, is unlikely to impact India's trade significantly and warned that joining the new
framework would have adverse impact on the country's patent regime, especially access to medicines. 
 
An analysis of the various components of the TPP by the Centre for WTO Studies showed that even investment
and state-owned enterprises could be hit hard and face disputes across any of the member countries. At
present, there are 14 members led by the US with countries such as South Korea and Indonesia having
shown interest in the latest trade grouping. The biggest worry is the impact that the agreement, which is yet to
be ratified, could have on generics medicines segment.
 
The stipulations in the agreement are such that the patent office would be unable to seek information on the
status of patent application in other countri es and scope for revocation will also be reduced, something that
India follows in case of "frivolous patents". But the biggest fear is related to ever-greening of patents as the
threshold for inventive step is being lowered and intellectual property rights protection can be granted even in
case of new uses of known product, using the known product through known methods or for new processes
of using a known product.
 
"It will impact competition negatively and affect diffusion of technology ... It will
delay entry of generics and affect access to medicines," said Chandni Raina, professor at the Centre for WTO
Studies.
 
In addition, it extends the patent term beyond 20 years provided under TRIPs by factoring in the
delays at the patent office and marketing regulator, a move that is seen to be detrimental to investment in
generic drugs. "The provisions mean that section 3(d) of the Indian Patents Act will have to be amended,"
said Abhijit Das, who heads the think tank.
 
The government had incorporated the section in the patents law to ensure to block frivolous claims but has faced criticism from the US and Big Pharma which want India to dilute the provision, something it has resisted over the years. Das also said projections of gains from TPP for developing countries made by American think tanks such as Peterson Institute could be overstated to encourage the poorer nations to join the alliance, and offer steep reduction in import duty . He, however, warned that the agreement was not in India's interest and exporters would not lose significantly if India stayed out.
 
 
Thane duo to represent India at WTO conference
 
Naveeta Singh
DNA
 
While the local government departments and the civic body is busy in turning Thane into a smart city, two
Thanekars are on their way to participate in the World Trade Organisation's (WTO) 10th ministerial
conference.
 
On December 12, Bhatu Sawant and Prashant Sawant, will leave for Kenya to participate in the three-day
conference, which will be held from December 15 to 17. In this conference, commerce ministers of over 162
countries will meet to discuss various international trade and commerce laws applicable to the rest of the
world.
 
"Earlier, WTO was dominated by G7 countries, which took major decisions that would affect other big
countries of the world like India. The public in other countries, like trade unions, professional associations,
farmers associations and others would not know what these laws meant and how it affected them," said
Bhatu, adding, "So, in 1992-1993, following an agitation against this practice, they permitted some NGOs to
send their representatives for this conference."
 
Bhatu and Prashant have attended the WTO's ministeri conference thrice and their first visit to Geneva six
years ago and then to Bali two years ago.
 
In this conference, the duo, along with two others from Pune - Girishant Umerkhedi and Sanjay Safai - will
represent Samarth Bharat Vyaspeeth NGO, which is based in Maharashtra and is active in Pune, Thane,
Solapur, Dhule.
 
In this conference, they will take up the issue of intellectual property rights, voting rights of the nation
according to population, democracy in WTO, among others.
 
"We want intellectual property rights rules not to be encroached upon. Today 80% of USA's GDP comes from
these rights. If anybody discovers something important in trade and commerce, they go and patent it," he
said. "We do not want encroachment on other people's intellectual property and royalty should be stopped.
They can take royalty for important research in medicines but not for everything," he added.
 
They will also raise the issue of voting rights according to population. Bhatu said a small country like
Switzerland and a populated country like India have equal voting rights.
 
 
Opportunities for foreign companies in China will grow, says vice-premier
 
China Daily
Zheng Xin, 
China's economy holds substantial potential and plenty of opportunities despite changes in economic growth, and China will continuously utilize the foreign capital actively and effectively despite changes in the investment climate, said Vice-Premier Wang Yang.
With the economy taking a more sustainable path, increasing new opportunities will emerge, which makes the foreign companies' prospects in the country more promising, said Wang during the 16th AmCham China Annual Seminar & Appreciation Dinner held in Beijing on Friday.
The transformation of government functions, implementation of supervision legalization and ecological environmental protection are all in favor of a more legalized and international business climate in the country, which is in accordance with the appeal of the foreign companies in China, he said.
Themed "Partnership of Prosperity", this is the 16th year AmCham China has hosted this event, which has attracted 450 attendees.
Wang also commented on the chamber's efforts in US-China economic and trade relations over the past few decades, saying it spoke for the US companies in China.
AmCham China Chairman James Zimmerman said as a partner that strongly desires a prosperous China, the chamber has lobbied for strong commercial ties between the US and China over the past few decades, including China's entry into WTO, Chinese access to global institutions, the adoption of sensible and reasonable export controls to allow greater access to American technology by Chinese companies and consumers, and the relaxation of visas for Chinese tourists, students, and business people that seek to travel to, and do business with, the American people.
The chamber has also encouraged the US to negotiate a bilateral investment treaty that is beneficial to both our countries and we'll continue to promote China's international engagement, he said.
According to Zimmerman, the chamber has been strongly supporting Chinese companies for decades, as they seek to capture the opportunities in the global marketplace, including the US market.
"The US is welcoming an ever-greater number of Chinese investment, which is good for the US economy, just as US investment in China is good for the Chinese economy," he said.
AmCham member companies are a reflection of the best that America has to offer and has demonstrated a commitment to a prosperous China, he said.
According to the chamber, the next five years present a crucial time for China to pursue its vision of sustainable economic development, as well as an historic moment for AmCham member companies to seize the timely opportunity to help China achieve its goals.
"We all have a vested interest in strengthening the bonds between the United States and China, and there is undoubtedly much more work to be done in 2016," said Zimmerman.
"For the sake of mutual prosperity, China and US should continue to work together as partners."
 
 
 
UNDER LEVIN CUSTOMS PROPOSAL, CURRENCY PANEL WOULD CITE POTENTIAL VIOLATIONS
 
Inside U.S. Trade
 
A proposal by House Ways & Means Ranking Member Sander Levin (D-MI) to strengthen the currency
provisions of the House customs bill would create an independent expert committee with the mandate to
assess whether major trading partners engage in currency manipulation as defined by the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) and require it to produce a public report on its findings, according to a Ways & Means
Democratic trade staffer.
 
These findings would include a determination whether the foreign exchange rate policies examined are
inconsistent with any international agreement, or nullify or impair the benefits to the U.S. under any such
agreement, the staffer said.
 
The Levin proposal floated last month also would have all panel members appointed by Congress rather than
having one-third each appointed by the president, president pro tempore of the Senate and the House
speaker, as is the case under the House customs bill.
 
Under Levin's proposal, a determination by the expert panel that a trading partner manipulated its currency in
violation of an international agreement would "feed into" in a process for petitioning the administration to take action, the staffer said. But this aspect of the proposal, which has not been fully fleshed out, would not go
beyond the petitioning process that already exists under Section 301 of U.S. trade law, according to the
staffer.
 
Under that process, an interested party can petition the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative to launch an
investigation into foreign trade practices that it alleges either to violate a trade agreement, or burden or
restrict U.S. commerce. Within 45 days of filing, the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative is required to
announce a decision on whether it will launch such an investigation or not.
 
The Ways & Means Democratic trade staffer conceded that is not possible to force the administration to bring
a trade dispute if the expert committee in Levin's proposal determines that a trading partner's manipulation of
its currency has violated an international agreement. "I don't think there's anything we can do to force the
administration to bring a dispute," the staffer said.
 
The staffer maintained that, despite Levin's engagement to strengthen the expert committee, the Michigan
Democrat has not dropped his demands that the final customs conference report include a separate provision
from the Senate customs bill that would urge the Commerce Department to treat undervalued currency as an
export subsidy in countervailing duty (CVD) cases.
 
Several informed sources last week interpreted Levin's new proposal to strengthen the expert committee as a
signal that he is backing down from his position that a final customs bill include the Senate currency CVD
provision (Inside U.S. Trade, Nov. 27).
 
But the staffer went to great lengths to dispel that notion. The staffer said Levin's engagement to improve the
House bill reflects his belief that the issue of currency manipulation needs to be addressed from a variety of
different angles, as well as his desire to play a role in shaping the customs conference report.
 
Levin was non-committal when asked on Dec. 2 whether he would support the customs conference report if it
included his proposal for strengthening the expert committee.
 
"We've been trying to get a currency provision that is considerably stronger, something more meaningful than
in the bill today. Just leave it at that. We've been at this effort for years," he told reporters after a hearing
convened by Ways & Means Democrats on the investment provisions of the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP).
 
Only 12 House Democrats voted for the customs bill in June -- less than half as many as voted for fast-track
legislation the same month -- largely due to its lack of the currency CVD provision and its inclusion of
controversial language on climate change and human trafficking.
 
The House on Dec. 2 rejected a Democratic motion to instruct the customs conferees to seek to maintain the
CVD currency provisions in the final compromise bill, a day after it approved a motion to go to conference on
the customs bill. Also on Dec. 2, Levin was appointed as one of two Democratic House members to serve on
the customs conference committee along with fellow Ways & Means member Rep. Linda Sanchez (D-CA).
 
The panel as laid out in the House version of the customs bill would advise the Treasury Secretary on the
impact of international exchange rates and financial policies on the United States economy, it would not be
required to issue a report or any findings on whether trading partners are manipulating their currencies.
 
The panel is one aspect of the currency provisions in the House customs bill that also call on the 
administration to engage more with countries it has designated currency manipulators in its semi-annual
report to Congress.
 
The staffer said Levin's proposal would require the expert committee to use the three key factors the IMF
considers when determining whether a country has manipulated its currency to gain a trade advantage. Doing
so is prohibited under Article IV of the IMF agreement.
 
They are if countries conduct protracted, large-scale intervention in one direction in the foreign exchange
market; maintain excessive and prolonged official or quasi-official accumulation of foreign assets; and
maintain large and prolonged global current account surpluses.
 
These are the same three criteria that Levin included in his proposal for enforceable currency disciplines in
the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) agreement. The TPP deal reached on Oct. 5 does not address currency,
although TPP countries negotiated a separate declaration that obligates them not to manipulate their
currencies and to follow transparency requirements, albeit without an enforcement mechanism.
 
Levin's staff floated his ideas for improving the expert committee last month to staff for House Ways & Means
Chairman Kevin Brady (R-TX) and the chairmen and ranking member of the Senate Finance Committee.
Those three offices are engaged in an informal conference on the customs bill, passed by the Senate in May
and the House in June, but Levin has not participated in those talks in a comprehensive way.
 
The staffer pointed out that members of Congress and the public already have the ability to petition the
administration to act on currency manipulation under Section 301 of the Trade Act of 1974, and that therefore
any similar provision in the Levin proposal would not break new ground.
 
Section 301 requires USTR to take certain actions if it determines after a year-long investigation that a policy
or practice of a trading partner violates a trade agreement to which the U.S. is a party. USTR has discretion
on whether or not to act if it finds the policy or practice is unreasonable or discriminatory and burdens or
restricts U.S. commerce.
 
If USTR finds a violation of the World Trade Organization agreement, it must pursue dispute settlement at the
WTO rather than retaliating unilaterally. This is because the WTO agreement prevents the U.S. from
unilaterally retaliating against trading partners by revoking their WTO benefits.
 
In the last decade, there have been several Section 301 petitions on currency. Most recently, a bipartisan
group of 42 House members in 2007 filed a Section 301 petition alleging, among other things, that China's
currency manipulation violates its IMF commitments by keeping a currency peg in place that creates a trade
advantage, and violates several WTO obligations (Inside U.S. Trade, May 18. 2007).
 
The petition, which was rejected by USTR along with similar ones filed in April 2005 by House and Senate
members, argued that a WTO case against China is possible under Article XV of the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade (GATT).
 
C. Fred Bergsten of the Peterson Institute for International Economics, a long-time critic of China's currency
policy, advocated in 2010 for bringing such a WTO case against China, even as he acknowledged it would be
difficult to win (Inside U.S. Trade, March 26, 2010). Article XV obligates countries to refrain from using
exchange rate policy to "frustrate" the intent of the provisions of the GATT, or by undertaking trade action to
frustrate the intent of the provisions in the IMF Articles of Agreement.
 
The article stipulates in an addendum that another specific GATT article must be frustrated in an important
way before the article can be invoked, and Bergsten has said this threshold would be hard to meet.
 
 

 
MAJOR DSB USERS PUSH FOR GREATER ACCOUNTABILITY ON WTO DISPUTE DELAYS
 
Inside U.S. Trade
 
Major users of the World Trade Organization's Dispute Settlement Body (DSB) are continuing to push for
greater accountability from the WTO Secretariat on the status of disputes and the reasons for any delays,
amid growing doubts that the Nairobi ministerial will produce an outcome aimed at tackling the DSB's
workload challenges.
 
At a Nov. 25 DSB meeting, Chairman Harald Neple for the first time in that setting provided member's
information on the body's current workload, the number of disputes in the panel queue and at the panel
composition stage, and the ability of the Secretariat to meet expected demand in the near future.
 
But the briefing was met with complaints from members that all that information is already publicly available,
albeit not in a consolidated form. They are pressing for specific information about how many staff have been
assigned to work on a dispute, where their dispute sits in relation to others in the pipeline and when exactly
they are expected to advance in dispute settlement proceedings.
 
Geneva sources said members hope to achieve two goals by gaining this information. On the one hand, they
simply want to be able to inform their domestic constituents affected by the measures at issue in the dispute
know where the case stands. But they also hope that greater transparency will better enable members to
pressure the secretariat to act differently if they feel that resources are not being allocated efficiently.
 
The secretariat, for its part, seems to be resisting this scrutiny. It has refused to disclose information about
the status of a given dispute if the inquiring member is not a party to the case -- arguing this is confidential
(Inside U.S. Trade, Sept. 11). But certain members have proposed that they simply share the timetables of
disputes they are party to with other members not involved the disputes, bypassing the secretariat altogether.
Neple, who is also Norway's ambassador to the WTO, will deliver regular briefings about the status of the
dispute at every DSB meeting. Even though the substance of the information has failed to satisfy members
thus far, the monthly nature of the briefings will keep the delay issue on the agenda, making it difficult for
members to ignore, sources said.
 
That pressure, however, seems unlikely to lead to any concrete moves to address the chronic failure of the
secretariat to meet mandatory deadlines in dispute settlement cases at the Dec. 15-18 ministerial in Nairobi.
WTO Director-General Roberto Azevedo has made clear in no uncertain terms that what is really needed is
additional funding for the institution to hire more lawyers -- something governments are reluctant to do.
Even barring that, members have been stymied in attempts to create procedural efficiencies that would
smooth the workflow of the disputes division.
 
Brazil on Nov. 24 suggested language calling for reforming the DSU be included in the Nairobi ministerial
declaration. Brazil's proposal reads: "The current workload challenges faced by the dispute settlement
mechanism must be addressed equally by the Secretariat and by Members ... We decide to tackle the reform
of the DSU -- under discussion for many years -- through a renewed and focused process towards the
improvement and clarification of the dispute settlement mechanism."
 
But Geneva sources noted that ministerial declarations calling for renegotiation of the DSU have been
repeatedly endorsed at previous ministerial meetings, but have resulted in no progress on resolving deep
divisions between members on how best to reform the text (Inside U.S. Trade, Nov. 6). Sources also said this
historical failure ensures that language endorsing efforts to change the DSU will not make it into the Nairobi
Ministerial declaration.
 
Sources did say, however, that language relating to challenges currently faced by the DSB similar to what is
found in a so-called facilitator's proposal -- a draft proposal for the Nairobi outcome document crafted by three ambassadors, including Neple, to the WTO in consultation with members -- is likely to make it into the final declaration.
 
The facilitator's proposal does not mention the DSU but recognizes "the increasing number and growing
complexity of disputes present challenges to the system," and commits to "further strengthen it, including
through effective implementation of the rulings and recommendations of the Dispute Settlement Body."
But this language is vague and does not require members to make specific commitments aimed at quickening
dispute settlement proceedings, and therefore will not improve the DSB's current situation, sources said.
Another complicating factor, sources said, is that least developed countries (LDCs) -- which are not frequent
users of the dispute settlement system -- would likely see any major focus in the declaration on the dispute
settlement process as coming at the costs of their own interests and thus likely oppose the move.
At the previous WTO ministerial in Indonesia, LDCs expressed frustration that the Trade Facilitation
Agreement, a developed-country priority, was a major focus and a binding deal while elements of the
ministerial package intended to benefit the poorest countries were all non-binding.
 
In light of this dynamic, major DSB users have revived discussions on a variety of non-binding,
member-driven best practices intended to speed up dispute settlement proceedings. They have been
discussing a 11-page draft proposal forwarded by Canada that aims to strike a balance between different
factions of major DSB users by addressing issues within the Dispute Settlement Understanding (DSU) but
stopping short of amending the actual text of the agreement.
 
Two members of the DSB's Appellate Body were also reappointed at the Nov. 25 meeting: Ujal Singh Bathita
and Thomas Graham. Their terms -- which are their second and therefore last -- will last four years and begin
on Dec. 11.
 
One Geneva source said Neple also made members aware that appellate body member Yuejia Zhang's term
expires on May 31, 2016 and having served two terms she is not eligible for reappointment. Neple proposed
to members that March 15 be set as a deadline for members to nominate candidates to replace Zhang.
 
That source noted that the chairman also told members that appellate body member Seung Wa Chang's first
term will expire on May 31 and that he is willing to serve a second term. Because of this, Neple will begin to
consult with delegations on Chang's reappointment.
 
 

 
EU LINKS PROVISIONS ON AG STES TO OTHER EXPORT COMPETITION DISCIPLINES
 
Inside U.S. Trade
 
A proposal by the European Union, Brazil, and five other World Trade Organization members on export
competition maintains the link from the 2008 Doha Round agriculture draft text between proposed disciplines
on agricultural state trading enterprises (STEs), an offensive interest for the U.S., and parallel cuts on other
forms of export subsidies including those related to food aid and export credits.
 
The provisions on agricultural STEs in the Nov. 17 proposal submitted by the EU, Brazil, Argentina, New
Zealand, Paraguay, Peru and Uruguay are mostly verbatim to the 2008 Doha agriculture text, but included
changes to language on monitoring and surveillance.
 
The United States responded with a Nov. 20 proposal that stripped many of the obligations it would have
been newly required to take on, according to a Geneva source. Additionally, the U.S. proposal removed a
carveout that excluded developing countries from having to implement the obligations on agricultural
exporting STEs.
 
The U.S. proposal would institute a ban on STEs "having export monopoly powers with respect to one or
more agricultural products" after a bracketed date, but includes a carveout for least-developed countries
provided that the monopoly powers are not inconsistent with other WTO rules.
 
The EU and Brazilian proposal calls for the elimination of government financing of STEs, government
underwriting of losses by such enterprises, and the use of agricultural export monopoly powers by 2020. But
it also says that this elimination should occur "in parallel and in proportion to the elimination of all forms of
export subsidies including those related to food aid and export credits."
 
One former U.S. agricultural trade negotiator said this provision would require the U.S. to change its export
credit program and international food aid system, which it is loath to do. The U.S. has maintained that it does
not want to take on any obligations that would require it to change its GSM 102 export credit financing
program, which was already changed as part of an October 2014 settlement of a WTO dispute with Brazil
over U.S. cotton subsidies.
 
India and China are also reluctant to agree to new disciplines on agricultural exporting STEs because they
have programs that could be impacted, a Geneva source said. Agricultural exporting STEs with monopoly
powers have complete control over the domestic supply of a product, which allows it to control the price at
which a commodity is sold on the world market, the former U.S. trade official said.
 
The EU has long held that disciplines on export competition need to be applied in parallel and is seeking
disciplines on all four areas: export subsidies, export credit financing, agricultural STEs and international food
aid.
 
USTR HOPES FOR QUICK ITA WRAP-UP, BUT INDUSTRY REP SEES TALKS STRETCHING
 
Inside U.S. Trade
 
Senior U.S. trade officials on Thursday (Dec. 3) expressed hope that a deal to expand the Information
Technology Agreement (ITA) can be finalized quickly -- possibly as early as Friday -- even while a tech
industry representative said talks will almost certainly stretch into the World Trade Organization ministerial
conference in Nairobi, Kenya.
 
Speaking at the President's Export Council, U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman acknowledged that
he has expressed optimism about concluding a deal many times before, but nevertheless said he is hopeful
the talks will be wrapped up soon. "I feel a little like the boy who cried wolf. But we are in what we think are
the last throes of those negotiations. We hope to get that done very quickly," he said.
 
Assistant USTR for the WTO and Multilateral Affairs Mark Linscott separately said at an event hosted by the
Global Business Dialogue that USTR is "extremely hopeful that these negotiations can be concluded
tomorrow [Dec. 4]," he said at an event hosted by the Global Business Dialogue. Friday is the self-imposed
deadline members set for wrapping up talks on the phaseout periods for tariffs covered by a tentative July
deal on the ITA product scope.
 
Meanwhile, Ed Brzytwa, a director at the Information Technology Industry Council and former USTR official,
said that while countries may succeed in ensuring their individual tariff schedules accurately reflect the
product scope deal by Friday, talks on the tariff phaseouts would likely not be fully wrapped up before Nairobi.
 
"I personally think any further concessions will happen at the last minute," he said. "What the last minute is, is
really hard to tell. Is it right before the statement gets issued? Possibly. China is going to sit on their hands
until the very end. They've got a lot of leverage here."
 
However, there is no indication that China is willing to respond to demands by the U.S. and other trading
partners to reduce number of tariff lines it has proposed for five and seven-year phaseout periods -- which
Brzytwa said amount to about 34 percent of the 201 products covered by the expanded ITA.
 
Earlier in the week, when asked by a reporter whether China was willing to cut down the number of products
subject to five or seven-year tariff phaseouts in response to U.S. tech industry demands, Chinese Vice
Minister of Finance Zhu Guangyao seemed to dismiss the notion.
 
"[Every] country has its interest groups. Some industries certainly have their interests," Zhu said, speaking in
Washington at the Peterson Institute for International Economics on Dec. 1. "But every country needs internal
coordination [and] balance that really reflects the country's interest."
 
He also noted that China and the U.S. have cooperated to advance the ITA negotiations, in what appeared to
be a reference to a November 2014 breakthrough in which China agreed to eliminate tariffs on commercial
priorities for the U.S. like semiconductors and medical devices.
 
That led to a restart of talks on the expanded product scope, which had been deadlocked for more than a
year. "I think [it's] China-U.S. coordination that has a big contribution for the completion of negotiations of the
ITA," he said.
 
China's Finance Ministry has authority over tariffs and has long been seen by the U.S. industry as reluctant to
give up the tariff revenue it would lose through the ITA deal -- which Chinese officials have estimated
amounts to more than $27 billion (Inside U.S. Trade, March 21, 2014).
 
Tariff phaseout negotiations have been ongoing since July, when participants finalized the draft list of
products covered by the deal. Last week's U.S.-China Joint Commission on Commerce and Trade failed to
yield a firm commitment that China would move from that position 
