HEADLINES:

·         What Trade-Deal Critics Are Missing 

·         Food prices are staying lower for longer periods: UN agency 

·         Working together to boost developing nations 

·         The great trade slowdown 

·         Trans-Pacific Partnership Arrives as World Trade Growth Slows 

·         TPP more about economy than anti-China regional alliances

·         TPP and India: Lasting lessons 

·         Spotlight: IMF confident of China's economy, highlights structural change, labor productivity 

 

What Trade-Deal Critics Are Missing 

By Zachary Karabell, The Wall Street Journal, 9 October 2015 -- The 12-nation Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal signed Monday is poised to become an election-year pinata as the Obama administration works to get it through Congress. Hillary Clinton, who supported the TPP when she was secretary of state, came out against it on Wednesday: "I don't believe it's going to meet the high bar I have set." Sen. Bernie Sanders, her rival for the Democratic presidential nomination, issued a caustic statement: "It is time for the rest of us to stop letting multinational corporations rig the system to pad their profits at our expense." On the Republican side of the presidential-nomination race, Donald Trump and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Carly Fiorina separately denounced the pact as an assault on American business. Labor leaders in turn excoriated the TPP for accelerating the loss of American jobs, while companies such as HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Ford Motors came out against it because of the perceived lack of protection against currency manipulation. The TPP is the definition of a Big Deal. The dozen countries involved, including Japan, Malaysia, Australia and Mexico, account for about 40% of global GDP. President Obama has made passage a priority, couching the pact in terms of who will write the rules of the new global economy, China or the U.S. Yet much of the passion stirred by the deal is reminiscent of the wrangling over the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"North American Free Trade Agreement two decades ago -- and feels about 20 years out of date. It isn't simply that commerce has increased, regardless of tariffs and friction. Supply chains have evolved into an interlocking global lattice in which few countries are unaffected, and the ones left out tend to be the basket cases of the international system, from Afghanistan to North Korea. The dispersion and complexity of supply chains has happened too rapidly for our statistical map of the world to catch up. Much of global trade today consists of companies shifting parts from factory to factory, country to country, to make a finished good. The result is that our centuries-old understanding of trade hardly captures its reality today. Think of the iPhone. On the back of each handset, in print so tiny you may need a magnifying glass, it says "Designed by Apple in California. Assembled in China." That is Apple's way of communicating a complicated reality that, in the land of trade statistics and common understanding, is reduced to a simple formula: A product is made where it has undergone its last "substantial transformation." The product is then assigned to that place, and hence an iPhone is, in trade terms, "Made in China." But it isn't, really. The phone is assembled from parts made in multiple countries, and as researchers have found, only a small portion of its value comes from China or goes to China. In trade land's calculation of imports and exports, however, all of that is moot. The same is true for thousands of products large and small that have multiple parts, from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Boeing 787 Dreamliner to the engine in your car. The way things are actually made in the world today is largely invisible. But the correlations between the world today and trade pacts are all too visible. Since the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade became the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization in 1995, since Nafta and since dozens of smaller trade agreements in the period that followed, wages in the developed world have been flat and manufacturing jobs have evaporated at an alarming rate. Farmers, whose goods do indeed come from one country and one country only, have faced an uphill battle to maintain domestic prices protected only by tariffs. It is, therefore, easy enough to establish a simple logic that trade pacts cause wage stagnation and job losses. But it's much more complicated than that. Tracking the economic effect of the free flow of goods and ideas isn't easy. (The TPP takes an antiquated approach to intellectual property that could impede the free flow of ideas by strengthening the enforcement of trademarks and copyrights.) A binary view of trade as countries making stuff and selling stuff overlooks not only the multiple-countries-of-origin problem, but also the vast trade in services that we struggle to measure and understand. Tourism and travel of foreign visitors to America, for instance, are counted as a U.S. export of services. And it is one of the major U.S. exports to the world today -- at more than $150 billion, it accounts for nearly 9% of all U.S. exports. Yet the trade debate primarily focuses on goods, because that is what most people think of when they think of trade, and because monthly Census Bureau trade figures by country report only goods. Over the past few decades, the U.S. has imported more and more goods, such as the iPhone, and exported more and more services, such as ideas and tourism. Millions of jobs directly relied on the old export of goods in traditional industries, but the new model of ideas and services employs fewer people directly and who-knows-how-many indirectly. We know how to count what has been lost; we have hardly begun to figure out what is being gained. That helps explain why so many associate more trade with fewer jobs. The fight over the TPP is a 20th-century argument over who makes what and sells what across borders that are increasingly porous -- and cannot contain the flow of ideas and commerce that will define the years ahead. 

 

Food prices are staying lower for longer periods: UN agency 

India Blooms News Service, Distributed by Contify.com, 9 October 2015, New York, Oct 9 (IBNS) -- Food prices are staying lower for longer periods, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"FAO) reported on Thursday, saying lower food prices "seem to be a boon to food security and are indeed just that for households who spend a large share of their income on food purchases." The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"FAO Food Outlook released today also said that trade in cassava is poised to grow by 19 per cent and to hit a record high, due mostly to demand from China for a cheaper raw material for its animal feed, energy and industrial sectors, while trade volumes in seafood are also rising. On the prices of agricultural commodities, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"FAO said that after several dramatic upward price spikes from 2007 through early 2011, most cereal and vegetable oil prices are on a trajectory that is both steady and declining. Among the reasons are high inventory levels, sharply lower oil prices and the renewed strength of the US dollar, none of which appear likely to be reversed in the short term, although unexpected shocks, such as weather-driven impacts on harvests, can never be excluded, the report noted. The reports authors Adam Prakash and Friederike Greb, both commodity specialists at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"FAO, wrote that the takeaway message here is that statistically, the most recent shifts in behaviour foresee downward price momentum with lower volatility. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"FAO Food Price Index, a trade-weighted index tracking international market prices for five major food commodity groups also release today, fell to a six-year low in August. New figures, also released today, show it inched up by about two-thirds of a percentage point from its August low to 165.3 points, which is still 18.9 percent less than a year earlier, according to the index. But HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"FAO also noted that the price path of the past few years and the prospective path ahead, are not the same for all food groups. Staple grains are at the core of the declining price trend, as a result of several years of robust harvests around the world as well as stockpiling that has taken reserves to record highs, according to the agency. Analyzing the latest figures, the report said lower food prices seem to be a boon to food security and are indeed just that for households who spend a large share of their income on food purchases. On trade, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"FAO said that global production is robust and inventory still high, but the volume of cereals being traded internationally is declining, driven by wheat mostly due to lower imports in Asia, especially Iran and North Africa and by coarse grains, where demand from Asia is lower, even though Africa and Europe are both expected to increase their imports. Photo: FAO/Paballo Thekiso 

 

Working together to boost developing nations 

By Agi Veres, China Daily-Europe Weekly, 9 October 2015 -- HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"UN celebrates and supports China's longtime assistance to emerging economics around the world- Since the 1950s, China has been providing what is known as South-South Cooperation to other developing countries in Asia, Africa, the Caribbean and elsewhere. Such cooperation has been received with open arms by all countries, and has increasingly been delivered in partnership with organizations such as ours, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"United Nations Development Programme. During his recent visit to China, United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon emphasized the need to reflect on the past. In 2004, the strongest earthquake the world had seen in 40 years - 9.3 in magnitude - unleashed a tsunami that swept across the coastlines of Asia and Africa, killing more than 290,000 people. China, then evolving into a responsible global power, provided an unprecedented package to support the victims that totaled $62 million. In that same year, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Hu Jintao, then Chinese president, visited Brazil, Argentina, Chile and Cuba and signed 39 cooperation agreements with the four countries. Elsewhere, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Facebook was launched as a social networking site for HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Harvard students, and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union underwent its largest extension, accepting countries such as Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic into its fold. Indeed, 2004 was a year of transition: a starting point for expansion for many around the world, and the first celebration of South-South Cooperation Day on Sept 12 marked it as such. Since then, the Chinese government has increased its South-South support by an average of 12 percent per year. This expansion has been unique and necessary for three reasons. First, we see China's support for other countries as holistic. It's not simply generous "handouts". China provides trade, investment, low-carbon energy, scholarships, tourism, language and vocational education establishments, technology demonstration centers and more. In addition, it has recently begun to deploy peacekeepers to help other countries end conflicts. China increasingly recognizes the impact of its own domestic policies on other countries. For example, last year, China and the United States acknowledged their critical roles in combating climate change, one of the greatest threats facing humanity. Second, China's support draws from its own experience. It has shared recent, relevant and replicable solutions to the challenges faced by other developing countries in alleviating widespread poverty and adapting to climate change. Finally, China's support has been truly "owned" by governments - responding to their country's requests and their development plans, often in areas where others have been unable to respond - for instance, infrastructure. These three reasons are why the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"UNDP, as the world's largest development organization, has invested a great deal of resources in supporting China to deliver and improve its South-South cooperation. Indeed, this September also marked the 50th anniversary of a unique agreement between the government of China and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"UNDP on South-South Cooperation. Over these five years, we have delivered many results together, including support for poverty reduction in countries such as Cambodia and Zambia.  We hope this partnership will keep growing so that we can continue to help other developing countries achieve the targets in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"UN's new Sustainable Development Goals. 

 

The great trade slowdown 

Niranjan Rajadhyaksha, MintAsia, 9 October 2015, India, Oct. 9 -- Has the golden era of global trade that began with the collapse of communism finally come to an end? And what does this mean for Indian economic strategy? The latest trade statistics from around the world do not make for happy reading. Economists at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization have recently cut their forecast of global trade in 2015 by 50 basis points, to 2.8%. Trade volumes are falling in many countries such as China. The Indian trade numbers too have been weak. The immediate news on the trade front should not be a surprise for most people who follow economic trends. But there could be more structural damage as well that is not captured in the headlines. The trouble began a few years ago. Annual global trade growth averaged a splendid 6% between 1990 and 2008, or broadly twice the growth rate of global output. Then trade between nations collapsed in the aftermath of the North Atlantic financial crisis. The recovery since then has been weak. A simple extrapolation shows that global trade is even now around a fifth less than what it would have been if the trend of the 18 years after 1990 had been maintained. Trade growth has averaged an anaemic 2.5% over the past four years. That is just a little less than the growth in global output in that period. In other words, a comparison of the data between 1990 and 2008 on the one hand, and between 2011 to 2015 on the other, shows that trade elasticity has nearly halved between the two periods. The most immediate causes for the sluggish growth in global trade are well known, but the sharp decline in trade elasticity suggests that there are structural challenges that are deeper than the usual reasons such as the slowdown in China or weak demand in the developed countries. What does this mean for policymakers? Here are three issues that deserve attention. First, countries that faced weak domestic demand have traditionally tried to export their way out of trouble. What has been happening in recent years may mean that net exports will be of less importance as an engine of economic recovery. Many countries are still trying the old strategy by pushing down their currencies. In fact, the current debates about currency wars need to be looked at against the backdrop of sluggish global trade. The inability to depend on net exports could mean that the classic Keynesian strategy- higher public spending-will become more important when countries are battling weak demand from the private sector. Second, most Asian countries that raced out of poverty over the past five decades have depended heavily on export growth. China is the latest example. This strategy worked with countries such as India that chose autarky because of export pessimism and languished in the growth race. The technology revolutions as well as the fall in transaction costs after 1990 also made it possible for large firms to splinter their production processes. Integrated companies were replaced by global value chains. Trade in intermediate goods grew in importance. It is not at all clear what is happening, but yet worth asking whether ambitious programmes such as Make In India will struggle when there are such important structural changes in the global economy. Third, will onshoring become enough of a threat to offshoring as energy costs decline and the use of robotics on a large scale reduces the importance of wage differentials between different countries? Of course, one must not forget the basic Ricardian insight that trade can be beneficial even if one country produces all goods cheaper than another country, or that comparative advantage is more important than absolute advantage. This is what Paul Krugman wrote in September 2013: "The point is that it's entirely reasonable to believe that the big factors driving globalization were one-time changes that are receding in the rear-view mirror, so that we should expect the share of trade in GDP to plateau-and that this doesn't represent any kind of problem. In fact, it's conceivable that things like rising fuel costs and automation (which makes labour costs less central) will lead to some 'reshoring' of manufacturing to advanced countries, and a corresponding decline in trade share." Most economists agree trade lowers costs, promotes specialization and helps in transfer of knowledge. That is why the recent trends in global trade deserve more attention. Unlike the 1930s, when global trade collapsed because of myopic protectionism unleashed by governments, what is happening now could be more endogenous changes. Global trade may stage a spectacular recovery in the coming years, but what is happening right now cannot be ignored. Finally, take a look at trade intensity. China's trade-to-GDP ratio was 32.2% in 1990, peaked at 61.8% in 2007, and was down 41.5% in 2014. That perhaps tells us something. 

 

Trans-Pacific Partnership Arrives as World Trade Growth Slows 

The TPP lowers or wipes out tariffs on thousands of items. Bloomberg, Simon Kennedy, Isabel Reynolds, Keiko Ujikane, October 8, 2015 — 10:14 PM CEST -- The Trans-Pacific Partnership took five years and 19 formal rounds of talks to forge. Negotiators met in Ho Chi Minh City, Kuala Lumpur, Lima, Melbourne, San Diego, and elsewhere on the Pacific Rim, hammering out nettlesome details on tariffs for everything from meat to auto parts. The result is the biggest regional trade agreement in history. When the TPP’s completion was announced on Oct. 5, it was heralded as a boon to the 12 countries involved, which together account for 40 percent of the global economy. Not only would rich nations such as the U.S., Canada, Australia, and Japan benefit, so would less-developed partners such as Peru, Indonesia, and the Philippines. The full effects of the TPP, which has yet to be sold to a dozen legislatures, including the U.S. Congress, may not be felt for years. Japan’s beef tariffs, for one, will drop from 38.5 percent to 9 percent, but over 15 years, to the frustration of U.S. and Australian cattle ranchers. It’s hard to even figure out what the TPP’s impact will be on global trade. “We haven’t done a calculation of this type,” Trevor Kincaid, deputy assistant U.S. trade representative, said in an e-mail.

http://assets.bwbx.io/images/i0PIpHt978eA/v1/-1x-1.jpg

For now, the world’s economies are finding it difficult to trade their way toward prosperity. On Sept. 28 the World Trade Organization cut its forecast for growth in trade this year to 2.8 percent from 3.3 percent. It added that its forecast could be “over-optimistic.” The WTO does predict an acceleration to 3.9 percent next year. That’s still well below the 5 percent average of the past two decades. The 1990s and early 2000s, when trade grew twice as fast as gross domestic product, are long gone. Carl Weinberg, chief economist at High Frequency Economics, points out that total world exports for the year through June were 11 percent below those from a year earlier. “The contraction of world trade has yet to show a bottom,” he says. “This could be more than an economic headwind. It could be a tornado.” One problem with the TPP is that for years it’s been used as a cudgel against the other enormous part of the global economy: China, itself in the middle of a slowdown. The country’s role as the world’s No. 1 exporter could make it an adversary of the TPP—or a candidate for future membership. Its foreign ministry offered a conciliatory note, saying, “China hopes the agreement and other free-trade arrangements can be mutually beneficial.” The U.S. has signaled it might consider Chinese TPP membership, but that would take years to negotiate. The TPP may be the most important deal since 1994’s North American Free Trade Agreement, but the rest of the world continues to battle over tariffs, duties, and incipient protectionism. Big free-trade agreements are rare. A pact between the U.S. and the European Union, the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, has yet to be concluded, though the TPP may provide an impetus. Although the WTO has pulled off such coups as negotiating China’s entry into the organization, for the last few years it hasn’t been able to expand global free trade further. If trade growth fails to pick up, says Adam Slater, a senior economist at Oxford Economics, countries may try to devalue their way to prosperity—a form of trade cheating. Says Slater: “The temptation to try to grab a bigger slice of a given trade pie is likely to increase.”

The bottom line: The TPP holds promise, but the world economy has yet to regain the strong trade growth of the past two decades.

 

TPP more about economy than anti-China regional alliances 
By Tao Wenzhao, Global Times, 9 October 2015 -- The US and 11 other Pacific Rim countries clinched the largest ever trade-liberalizing deal on Monday. The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) agreement will create a free trade zone in the Asia-Pacific region, within which duties on various services and goods will be reduced or eliminated. The deal, which still requires ratification from lawmakers, is expected to affect 40 percent of the world economy. Upon the announcement, the TPP, after years of negotiations, has aroused heated discussions in China. The TPP, initiated by the US, includes Australia, Brunei, Chile, Canada, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore and Vietnam, but not China. Some argue that while these nations may hope to stay friendly with China, they will have to accept the economic claims by the US. And thus it is conjectured that the trade deal is aimed at Beijing, the key player in the Asia-Pacific region. Many analysts expect the TPP to balance Beijing's increasing clout and may even overwhelm China's economy. Trade agreements have strategic significance and influence, but the TPP pact is fundamentally a trade agreement, rather than a strategic deal. It handles creating a free trade zone, establishing common rules and enhancing economic growth within the TPP members. Washington, by taking advantage of the lowered tariffs, is expecting to enlarge its exports to other nations. Although it may have some detrimental effects on China, it's an over-interpretation to say that the deal is aimed at containing China. China is too large to be ring-fenced by a trade deal. Beijing is the largest trading partner for many neighboring nations, such as Singapore, Japan and Australia. These countries will, by no means, sever their economic and financial ties with China after joining the TPP. It is impossible to keep China away in the increasingly interdependent global economy. Although Beijing may not meet the requirements to join the TPP at the current stage, its trading conditions are getting better. China has signed free trade agreements with South Korea and Australia. This has reflected China's efforts in upgrading its free trade zones with neighboring countries. It also foresees the nation's increasingly important role in the global trade in the near future. Admittedly, Washington, in promoting the TPP, has some geopolitical considerations. US President Barack Obama said in a statement on Monday that "We can't let countries like China write the rules of the global economy. We should write those rules, opening new markets to American products while setting high standards for protecting workers and preserving our environment." To write future trade rules is another reason for the US to initiate the TPP. The US hopes the TPP will be accepted as an international standard. After both the TPP and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership are finalized and scrutinized, Washington may require these rules to be written into the standards of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization. By then, China may have to abide by the rules written by the US. Despite the obstacles in fields including intellectual property, agriculture and medical patents, China should be aware of the possibility that the White House will get to write the new global trade rules. To tackle the potential challenges posed by the TPP, the Chinese government should focus its attention on reform and opening up. At the same time, Beijing ought to facilitate the signing of a Bilateral Investment Trade with Washington. It would be wise for China to bring its advantages into full play when facing the US-initiated TPP. 

 

TPP and India: Lasting lessons 

By Amitendu Palit, Financial Express, 9 October 2015 -- The conclusion of the TPP (Trans Pacific Partnership) negotiations in Atlanta earlier this week brought down curtains on the most intense regional trade negotiations in modern history. Having gone on for more than five years-the first round of negotiations were held in Melbourne in March 2010-and almost two full terms of the Obama presidency, the TPP talks survived anxieties, scepticism and doubts to eventually reach consensus. There is still some ground to cover. The deal needs to be sanctioned by individual country legislatures. Some TPP members like the US, Australia, Canada, and Japan might find selling it to domestic constituencies a tough task. An ambitious and controversial deal like the TPP can hardly please all. Different constituencies will be happy, or unhappy, depending on what the TPP fetches, or snatches. Lobbies in legislatures will be accordingly aligned for or against. Much will depend on how the heads of states of TPP member nations 'package' the deal to their legislatures. If they are able to highlight pieces that can appeal to constituencies opposed to the deal, some of the opposition will be moderated. Having come this far though, it would be very surprising if the deal isn't passed by individual country legislatures as the leaders would have already had consultations with domestic stakeholders. Till the text of the TPP is available in the public domain, it is not possible to figure out how far it has gone in becoming a 21st century 'gold standard' trade deal by providing comprehensive market-access removing trade and non-trade barriers. Given the stark difference among negotiating parties on various issues-intellectual property, government procurement, rules of origin, investor-state disputes and even tariffs-compromises were inevitable. To that extent, some aspects of the agreement should be 'watered down' editions of original aspirations. Nonetheless, the TPP marks a significant advance in modern trade given the far-reaching impact it would have on trade governance. The TPP's economic and strategic implications would extend to India notwithstanding its distance from the TPP. There are implications for Indian exports to TPP members from the greater preferential access they will now have to compete with vis-a-vis exports from one TPP member to another. There are also long-term challenges of adapting to stronger quality standards implemented by TPP members that might become generic across these markets. These apart, the TPP, or more precisely the story of its conclusion despite numerous odds and hiccups has important policy lessons for India. A major take-away from the conclusion of the TPP deal is the importance of being persistent in trade diplomacy. Time and again, there have been occasions during the TPP negotiations, when contrasting postures have nearly torn negotiations apart. Negotiating rooms have been fraught with tension over multiple offers tabled at periodic intervals. Since the Uruguay round of the GATT talks, no other trade deal has aroused as much attention of the stakeholders as the TPP. Both business lobbies and civil society organisations have meticulously probed leaked documents of the TPP talks for preparing submissions to negotiators. Indeed, since the TPP began accepting public submissions and engaging in stakeholder consultations, it became a far more dense, exhaustive and complicated exercise. Despite such intensity, pressure and tension, negotiators stuck to their guns to bring the deal to a close. This points to the importance of not abandoning trade diplomacy, particularly after investing precious time and resources. India's decision to call off the FTA negotiations with EU were rather hasty and immature in this regard given the distance the talks had covered and the expectations that major garment exporters like those from the Tirupur apparel clusters have from the FTA. The fact that the TPP went on and eventually concluded on a consensus shows the importance of sticking on and quid pro quo in trade diplomacy. The latter is all about exchanging market-accesses with negotiators required to trade-off multiple interests for achieving maximum gains-a point that current Indian trade diplomacy appears to be overlooking. The TPP also drives home the importance of building a common foundation for foreign and trade policies. In a globalised world, the two can hardly remain disconnected. Mega-RTAs like the TPP represent strategic partnerships between countries across a wide range of issues over which many of the parties might disagree, but nonetheless agree to find working solutions for regional and national benefits. Strategic partnerships cut across foreign and trade policy objectives and should be approached together. This is the reason why many countries in the Asia-Pacific-Australia, Canada, and New Zealand-have merged foreign and trade policies into the composite DFATs (Department for Foreign Affairs and Trade). Better exchange and coordination between foreign and trade offices and diplomats can produce clearer negotiating perceptions. A live and kicking TPP in the Asia-Pacific has to be factored into India's strategic ambition of membership of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"APEC. India's foreign policy has been robust in this regard and has succeeded in creating strategic goodwill for India's entry in HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"APEC. But will India's trade policy be able to match up to the goodwill, particularly if some of the TPP's standards become benchmarks of external liberalisation commitments for the region as more countries express interest in docking on to the TPP? TPP might have brought on for India its biggest challenge for convergence in foreign and trade policies.

 

Spotlight: IMF confident of China's economy, highlights structural change, labor productivity 

Xinhua's China Economic Information Service, 9 October 2015 08:06, by Wang Zhengrun, Liang Junqian, Chu Yi LIMA, Oct. 8-- Structural transformation and labor productivity growth are key to China's economic growth, Deputy Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"IMF) Zhu Min said here on Thursday, ahead of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"the World Bank Group-IMF's annual meetings on Oct.9-11. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"IMF recently downgraded its forecast for global economic growth this year to 3.1 percent, lower than its forecasts of 3.3 percent and 3.5 percent in July and in April respectively. However, it forecast China's gross domestic product (GDP) growth will remain steady at 6.8 percent in 2015. China faces a process of rebalancing as it steadily adjusts its economic structure, moving away from an investment and export-driven economy to a service and domestic demand-led model of economic development, Zhu told HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Xinhua. The service sector in China outperformed the industrial sector for the first time last year, and consumption overtook investment as the main contributor to overall GDP growth, demonstrating that the macrostructure of China's economy is sailing in the right direction, Zhu said. The slower growth of China's economy cannot be forcibly revved up as it minimizes risks while improving quality, he added. Zhu is confident of China's economic growth, saying the sustainable growth of labor productivity is key to economic growth and long-term development. "At present, the biggest pressure on China's economy comes from continuous internal rebalancing and structural adjustment, including labor market reform, industrial structure adjustment and more investment in education and innovation, the goal of which is to boost labor productivity," he said. In addition, Zhu believes that as the world's second biggest economy and one of the most open countries, China should try to raise the international status of its currency. The RMB's ability to go global, becoming a transaction currency and a settlement currency of trade, is significant to the stable development of China's finance and economy, he said. "Whether the RMB can be included in the Special Drawing Rights (SDR) basket is an important implication concerning the status of the RMB in the global community, which will promote the wide use of the RMB in international trade," Zhu said. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"IMF has conducted a preliminary assessment of the feasibility of having the RMB as a reserve currency, in preparation for a review of the SDR basket composition at the end of this year, which takes place once every five years. "If the RMB makes it into the SDR basket, it will become a global currency in the real sense, marking the first time the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"IMF accepts the currency of an emerging economy into its currency reserves," Zhu said. The move, he added, would greatly increase the status of the RMB in the international arena, allowing the voices of emerging markets to draw more attention and promoting the reform of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"IMF into a more inclusive organization. Zhu believes the internationalization of the RMB has developed rapidly in the past decade. The RMB's circulation abroad has undergone great changes, with many countries willing to accept the RMB as part of their foreign reserves. "Further down the road, the SDR will have a great influence on RMB's internationalization," Zhu said. 

 

END

 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.
