HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "The WTO Director-General Roberto Azevedo to deliver a public professional lecture on issues of international trade
·         HYPERLINK \l "Muted Response From Officials Regarding New Zealand's Monitoring WTO Candidates
·         HYPERLINK \l "John Key hits back at Nicky Hager over GCSB claims
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO spy revelations uncomfortable at any time
·         HYPERLINK \l "Government seals foreign trade permits
·         HYPERLINK \l "Turkey urged to shun Vestel's bid to protect mobile phone sector
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S. Catfish Farmers Go After Asian Rival
·         HYPERLINK \l "China steel firms turn overseas as domestic woes mount
·         HYPERLINK \l "Philippines Bans Poultry Imports Coming From Idaho and Washington
·         HYPERLINK \l "EU and Turkey look to deepen trade ties
·         HYPERLINK \l "Obama calls for TPA, Ex-Im renewal
·         HYPERLINK \l "Waiting for the next 'WTO moment'
 
 
The WTO Director-General Roberto Azevedo to deliver a public professional lecture on issues of international trade
March 23, 2015
Latvian News Agency
 
The following is a press release from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs:
 
At 15.00 on 24 March, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Latvia in cooperation with the Stockholm School of Economics in Riga invites you to a public lecture by Roberto Azevedo, Director-General of the World Trade Organisation (WTO). The lecture will take place at the Stockholm School of Economics in Riga, at Strēlnieku 4a, Soros Auditorium.
 
In his lecture, Roberto Azevedo will provide his first-hand views on a range of issues on the global trading agenda: WTO 20 years on – key achievements and challenges of the organisation; the importance of the multilateral rules-based trading system in the current geopolitical climate; prospects of the Doha Development Agenda – how the multilateral trading system can contribute to the global growth and development; and the development of regional trade agreements such as TTIP and TPP in the context of the WTO.
 
Opening remarks will be made by Andrejs Pildegovičs, State Secretary of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and Anders Paalzow, Rector at SSE Riga. The lecture will be followed by a questions and answers session.
 
 
Muted Response From Officials Regarding New Zealand's Monitoring WTO Candidates
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, March 24, 2016
 
March 23 — Reports that New Zealand monitored e-mails about candidates to lead the World Trade Organization did not come as a surprise to trade officials in Washington and Geneva, sources familiar with the WTO told Bloomberg BNA.
 
In 2013 New Zealand's government utilized the U.S. XKeyscore surveillance program to monitor Internet traffic and e-mails that contained information related to the selection of the WTO's next director-general, according to a leaked document published by the New Zealand Herald.
 
It is generally understood that international governments monitor Web traffic for information related to trade negotiations, trade observers in Washington told Bloomberg BNA. “Most countries are in this game one way or another, despite claims to the contrary,” said Bill Reinsch, president of the National Foreign Trade Council.
 
New Zealand's delegation to the WTO did not respond to Bloomberg BNA's request for comment and a WTO spokesman declined to comment.
 
No Surprises
 
The leaked document detailed efforts by New Zealand's Government Communications Security Bureau (GCSB) to monitor Web traffic for information, including references to nine candidates who were seeking to succeed former WTO Director-General Pascal Lamy.
 
The nine candidates were: New Zealand's Minister of Trade, Tim Grosner; Alan John Kwadwo Kyerematen of Ghana; Amina Mohamed of Kenya; Anabel Gonzalez of Costa Rica; Herminio Blanco of Mexico; Mari Elka Pangestu of Indonesia; Taeho Bark of South Korea; Ahmad Thougan Hindawi of Jordan; and Roberto Azevedo of Brazil. Azevedo was elected director-general in May 2013.
 
The document surfaced more than a year after National Security Agency contractor, Edward Snowden, released details of the “Five Eyes” electronic surveillance alliance of the U.S., U.K., New Zealand, Australia, and Canada.
 
Following the Snowden revelations, U.S. Director of National Intelligence James Clapper confirmed that the U.S. collects foreign intelligence to protect domestic interests and those of its international allies. “The intelligence Community's efforts to understand economic systems and policies and monitor anomalous economic activities is critical to providing policy makers with the information they need to make informed decisions that are in the best interest of our national security,” Clapper said in a September 2013 statement.
 
Last year, a leaked 2013 document disclosed how Australia had monitored the e-mail communications of Mayer Brown, a U.S. law firm that was representing Indonesia's trade interests. The intelligence was shared with the NSA at a time when the U.S. was fighting an Indonesian WTO dispute over its ban on flavored cigarettes.
 
Scant Impact Seen
 
New Zealand's 2013 monitoring efforts shouldn't have a detrimental impact on the current negotiations to conclude the 2001 Doha round or the Trans-Pacific Partnership, trade officials told Bloomberg BNA.
 
“I don't think it will have a major impact on the [Doha] round, or on any negotiations, for that matter,” Reinsch said. “Most diplomats assume they're being spied on by somebody and act accordingly.”
 
“I don't think this will have a significant or long-term impact on the negotiations,” said Timothy Brightbill, a partner at Wiley Rein LLP. “New Zealand is not the only TPP country that has been accused of some combination of spying or leaking documents related to trade negotiations,” he said.
 
“I suspect the news will become a talking point for some,” said Scott Miller, a senior advisor at the Center for Strategic and International Studies. “On the other hand, I would not be surprised to learn that many governments conduct surveillance on negotiating partners all the time.”
 
 
John Key hits back at Nicky Hager over GCSB claims 
3News
Tuesday 24 Mar 2015 5:10 a.m.
 
Prime Minister John Key believes the latest spying allegations were timed to coincide with his visit to South Korea.

"Of course they were, it's all part of a particular agenda by Nicky Hager and some others," he told reporters in Seoul.

"There's no question there's an anti-government, anti-American agenda."

The allegations that the GCSB snooped on Trade Minister Tim Groser's competitors for the top job at the World Trade Organisation were published yesterday.
 
They're based on documents leaked by fugitive US whistleblower Edward Snowden and released by Hager, an investigative journalist.

Mr Key says the South Korean leaders he met had no interest in the allegations, and didn't raise them.

"They're just not interested in Snowden," he said.

"It's just a 2012, backward-looking anti-American bunch of plonkers - that's what these guys are, they're not interested in the future of New Zealand or making it stronger, they're just opposed to the government."

Mr Key said Hager wasn't a journalist.

"The guy's a protester. Well, fair enough but just don't take him too seriously. I don't."

Mr Key repeated the government's stance that the GCSB operates within the law.

"We don't have that many resources, and we have strong oversight," he said.

Labour leader Andrew Little says the allegations involve "totally inappropriate" activity by the GCSB and he wants the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security, Cheryl Gwyn, to investigate.

"The GCSB isn't there to advance the career prospects of politicians," he said.

"Our security agencies are there to deal with threats to New Zealand and if the GCSB has been used that way it's wrong and, I would think, unlawful."

The GCSB's "WTO Project" reportedly used the US's XKeyscore surveillance system - which it has access to under the Five Eyes agreement - to scour the internet and communications for keywords which would alert them to information about Mr Groser's rivals.

 
WTO spy revelations uncomfortable at any time
David Fisher
New Zealand Herald
1:05 PM Tuesday Mar 24, 2015 
 
Planned? Hardly.

But that was the allegation from the Prime Minister today over the latest revelations about the activities of the GCSB.

The Herald and The Intercept news site yesterday revealed a top secret GCSB tasking document which showed its powerful electronic surveillance equipment was used to sniff out emails which mentioned Trade Minister Tim Groser and his competitors for the top job at the World Trade Organisation.

The news came the day John Key and Mr Groser signed a Free Trade Agreement in South Korea - one of the eight countries to put forward candidates for the WTO job sought by Mr Groser.
 
Mr Key would not discuss the facts of the story. But when asked if he thought the Herald's WTO stories were timed to coincide with the signing, he said: "Of course they were, it's all part of a particular agenda by Nicky Hager and some others."

These are the facts.

Some weeks ago, Hager and I met to discuss the broad sweep of the issues on which we would be writing. He had done the bridge-building with The Intercept and had been analysing material using the specialist knowledge for which he is held in high regard internationally.

The first few stories were in sharp focus. We knew when they were going to run. The others were less clear and needed more work. It was only as weeks passed that a date of publication for the WTO story became clear - initially, last Wednesday.

As we entered last week, Hager had a draft ready for Monday but there was more work to do.

We were talking on the phone about running on the following Saturday or Monday when it was announced by Mr Key's office he and Mr Groser were flying to South Korea on Sunday to sign the Free Trade Agreement.

Hager had no idea of the trip to South Korea until I told him. Both of us were discomforted by the timing and talked about the possibility there would be allegations it was planned around the trip because the South Korean delegate was one of those competing against Mr Groser.

Hager suggested holding until today or tomorrow, or even waiting a week or more. I argued against holding it because, almost exclusively, news runs when it is ready to run. Holding off on something - unless a matter of life or death - is as bad as planning to run it on a particular day for a particular objective.

I consulted with the editor, explaining the dilemma. He could see the issue but was comfortable proceeding. News was news. It runs when it is ready.

Hager's contribution was done by Thursday. I worked through the weekend - as did Gallagher - to have the story ready for Monday.

Of Mr Groser's competitors, the South Korean candidate was the only one who commented. He was the only one able to be contacted directly as he now works at the University of Seoul and has a current telephone number and email address listed publicly. 
 
The others were approached through press offices or by email.

The first spying stories were said to be timed to target the Government during the Northland by-election. Mr Key has alleged this latest story was timed to impact on the FTA with South Korea.

Not the case. It also landed in a week during which he and Mr Groser are out of the country and unable to be questioned in Parliament. The story ran during a fever-pitch of cricket excitement, the consequence being the story about the "WTO Project", as the GCSB called it, ran on page five of the newspaper instead of its otherwise likely front page treatment.

With future stories, it is likely they will also arrive at an uncomfortable time - but that is because of the facts in the story.

These are uncomfortable issues at any time. - NZ Herald 
 
 
Government seals foreign trade permits 
23 March 2015
Buenos Aires Herald
 
The government is signing more agreements with private companies to outline their import needs for the year despite pressure from the World Trade Organization (WTO) for the country to loosen up its restrictions on buying goods from abroad.

The Secretary of Commerce has already tied up more than 3,000 agreements with small, medium-sized and large companies on the foreign exchange requirements they expect for 2015, a key factor for the government to decide later whether to green-light each import permit request known as the DJAI.

DJAI import permits were at the heart of WTO's appelate court's ruling against the country, in a case brought by the United States, the European Union and Japan against national licensing rules that the international body has said have been used to unlawfully limit imports.

This week, a report by the European Commission said that Argentina's “requirement to fill out a sworn affidavit prior to any imports — a form known as the DJAI — for all imports remains a major challenge” to free trade. “(WTO's) appellate body confirmed the previous panel ruling which had found Argentina's administration of the DJAI breaches WTO law.”

Argentina's response, so far, has been ambivalent.

While Domestic Trade Secretary Augusto Costa told the Herald that Argentina will obey WTO's ruling, adding that he expected a proposal outlining how the country planned to fulfill all requirements to be filed soon, he has remained a staunch defender of DJAI import permits.

Costa's argument is that DJAI import permits are or can be made compatible with the requirements of the international trade watchdog.

“This doesn't mean that we will eliminate the DJAI system,” Costa said. “We are awaiting suggestions from the countries that denounced in order to elaborate a proposal that fits the possibilities of our economy.”

The Argentine government has highlighted that imports have actually increased between 2008 and 2014 in Argentina, questioning the US, the EU and Japan for leading international complaints against developing countries in the WTO while their government's still protect local production through a host of different policies.

“The highest tariffs applied by Argentina amount to 35 percent, while the United States charges 131 percent to fruit importers and Japan 450 percent for rice bought outside the country,” the government said.
 
 
Turkey urged to shun Vestel's bid to protect mobile phone sector 
 
* Vestel says facing surge in mobile phone imports to Turkey 
* EU, Taiwan say no such surge, complain of protectionism 
* WTO allows safeguard tariffs under strict conditions 
 
By Tom Miles 
 
GENEVA, March 23 (Reuters) - The European Union and Taiwan have said a bid by Turkish appliance manufacturer Vestel to get Ankara to impose emergency import tariffs on mobile phones would probably be illegal if it is approved, according to documents published on Monday. 
 
Turkey notified the World Trade Organization (WTO) in December that Vestel had sought "safeguard" tariffs to protect Turkish phone producers against a surge in imports. 
 
If Turkey accepts the request, it could effectively bar imported phones such as Apple's iphone and Samsung's Galaxy by making them prohibitively expensive. 
 
That would help Vestel, which launched a smartphone last September running Google's Android operating system. Vestel, best known for its fridges, televisions and washing machines, has said it expects to sell 1 million mobile phones in the domestic market in 2015. 
 
Safeguard tariffs are allowed under WTO rules, subject to strict conditions. One condition is that a country considering their use must solicit opinions from interested parties, whose submissions Turkey published on Monday. 
 
In its submission, the 28-nation EU said Vestel's petition was "very surprising" because it had only just started making phones so it could not demonstrate it had suffered from a surge in imports - and there had been no such surge in any case. 
 
"It is almost impossible in this case to establish any kind of injury (to Turkey's mobile phone sector)," said the EU, which Turkey aspires to join. 
 
Taiwan said data submitted by Vestel showed the growth of imports had not been "recent, sudden, sharp and significant" as required by the WTO to justify safeguard tariffs. 
 
"Such safeguard measures are completely unnecessary for protecting domestic industry and risk harming R&D investments and consumers' interests," Taiwan said, adding that its own exports should be exempt from any tariffs due to its recognised status as a developing country. 
 
If Turkey does impose safeguard tariffs, it would take years for any legal challenge to work its way through the WTO system, giving Vestel's young product a clear run at a protected market. 
 
Other submissions published by Turkey came from manufacturers ZTE Corporation, Samsung, Nokia , LG Electronics Inc and China's Huawei Group, which argued that "none of the conditions" had been met for invoking safeguard tariffs. 
 
 
U.S. Catfish Farmers Go After Asian Rival
New rules jeopardize Vietnamese fish that in recent years has topped cod in U.S. sales
By Tennille Tracy 
24 March 2015
The Wall Street Journal
 
A white flaky fish that recently overtook cod and crab to become the sixth most popular seafood in the U.S. could soon disappear from American dinner plates.

Depending on whom you ask, the reason stems from either imported food safety concerns or a bureaucratic entanglement designed to protect the shrinking market share of American-produced catfish.

The fish in question -- pangasius -- is produced in Southeast Asia, mostly in Vietnam, and often appears on restaurant menus as basa or swai.

Pangasius lives in fresh water and has barbels or "whiskers" just like American catfish, which is a closely related cousin. Indeed, it used to be called catfish until Congress prohibited that labeling in 2002.

Pangasius supplies could dry up as early as this year as the Agriculture Department assumes control over catfish and pangasius this spring -- a job currently done by the Food and Drug Administration. The USDA is expected to impose tough new standards on Vietnam and other countries that export pangasius to the U.S.

There have been no major illnesses linked to pangasius in the U.S., or at least not any more than with other fish. But U.S. catfish farmers, who are mainly in Mississippi and a couple of other Southern states, pressed for tighter import standards. They say they fear a potential health scare related to pangasius would undermine the reputation of the catfish industry.

Despite labeling laws, pangasius is often marketed and presented as catfish, said Dickie Stevens, chief executive of Consolidated Catfish Producers, a Mississippi company that sells fish under the Delta Pride and Country Select brands.

"There's a lack of safety controls outside the U.S.," Mr. Stevens said. "The domestic catfish industry has been tarred with the same brush."

Others see protectionism at work. The fight over catfish "is not about food safety and never has been," said Lisa Weddig, a regulatory expert at the National Fisheries Institute, a trade group for the seafood industry. "For years, there has been an ongoing attempt to block imports and thus stifle competition. The food-safety part of the equation is a charade."

With a mild flavor and a moderate price tag, pangasius enjoyed a swift rise in popularity in the last decade. The amount of frozen fillets shipped to the U.S. soared to 215 million pounds in 2014, up from 7 million pounds in 2004, according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. The imports are now valued at more than $300 million a year, according to the agency.

In roughly that same time, U.S. farm-raised catfish production fell by nearly 50% from 630 million pounds in 2004 to 340 million pounds in 2012, the latest year for which data are available.

Data on the two species aren't directly comparable because the pangasius numbers track the weight of frozen fillets while the catfish numbers count the weight of the whole fish.

Pangasius, often raised in the Mekong River Delta of Vietnam, is shipped frozen to the U.S. and then offered in restaurants and grocery stores.

Pangasius was the sixth most popular seafood in 2013, just behind pollock and tilapia, according to the most recent data from the National Fisheries Institute. The top three were shrimp, canned tuna and salmon.

Seafood companies are bracing for a yearslong supply disruption as Vietnam works to meet the new USDA rules for export approval.

A pause in supplies could stifle the long-term growth of what has been a rising star in the seafood industry.

"A few [catfish] businesses in the South have a selfish and myopic viewpoint," said Bill DiMento, an executive with High Liner Foods, which makes fish sandwiches for the fast-food restaurants Burger King and Wendy's. "They don't care to realize that thousands of jobs here in the U.S. rely mostly on imports."

In 2008, Congress changed the food-safety laws so that the Agriculture Department would oversee catfish and pangasius, instead of the FDA. The driving force behind the change was Republican Sen. Thad Cochran of Mississippi, one of the largest catfish-producing states in the U.S.

Sen. Cochran's office declined to comment.

That handoff doesn't become official until the USDA issues a final rule over how it will proceed with its inspection of catfish and pangasius, a move that is expected in April. Generally the USDA requires a country to set up a regulatory system similar to the U.S., a standard that could take years to meet, seafood companies said. The FDA will continue to oversee all other seafood, such as shrimp and salmon.

Vietnam isn't ready to cede the business. The issue eventually could make its way to the World Trade Organization, where Vietnam could argue the U.S. is violating treaty obligations, said James Bacchus, a lawyer with Greenberg Traurig who has been hired by the Vietnamese Association of Seafood Exporters and Producers.

"A law is illegal if it has the effect of denying imported products an equal competitive opportunity in the domestic market," Mr. Bacchus said.

Many U.S. seafood companies, meanwhile, will have to comply with requirements from both the FDA and USDA, since the USDA will handle catfish and pangasius while the FDA oversees the rest.

Even if pangasius supplies are blocked, domestic catfish will come under heavier regulation. The USDA is likely to require on-site inspectors in the U.S. and could ask seafood companies to set aside office space for the inspectors and be responsible for laundering their work clothes, among other new mandates.

The Agriculture Department has estimated its inspection program will cost $14 million a year. The Government Accountability Office said in February that the catfish program was an "inefficient use of taxpayer funds."

Kim Gorton, chief executive of the Boston-based seafood company Slade Gorton, said she would consider eliminating catfish altogether to avoid the added regulation.

"It makes absolutely no sense," Ms. Gorton said. "My costs would go up so much, it would defeat the purpose."
 
 
China steel firms turn overseas as domestic woes mount 
* Crisis-hit steel sector wants govt backing as turns abroad
* Looking to escape oversupply at home
* Shift could offer some support to iron ore prices

By Ruby Lian and David Stanway

SHANGHAI, March 23 (Reuters) - Laden with debt and struggling to make money as the world's No.2 economy loses momentum, China's steel mills do not appear obvious candidates for overseas expansion.

But the country's crisis-hit steel sector is calling for strong government backing for plans to ramp up foreign acquisitions, as it looks to escape weak demand-growth and soaring environmental costs at home.

In a draft of a revised restructuring plan for the industry issued late last week, Beijing included a line saying it would support mills' efforts to buy assets abroad, with attention now turning to more detailed measures that could be announced later in the year.

"There is capacity that we can shift abroad, to regions that need it like Southeast Asia and Eastern Europe, as well as places like Indonesia and Africa where demand for steel is huge but production capacity is very low," said Deng Qilin, Chairman of Wuhan Iron and Steel Group, China's No.4 producer.

Foreign expansion by the world's biggest steel sector would offer some support to prices of steelmaking ingredient iron ore <.IO62-CNI=SI>, which plunged to record lows this month as Beijing ramps up environmental checks that could shut more mills in an industry where production capacity is 300 million tonnes above demand.

The export market offered one of the few bright spots for Chinese producers last year, but trade barriers erected amid accusations that China has been dumping products overseas mean exporting is becoming more difficult, with firms increasingly looking to shift actual output abroad.

Beijing has already rolled out measures to broadly encourage the foreign expansion of Chinese industry including simplifying currency rules and making it easier to raise money through bond markets, with sectors such as nuclear at the forefront of the drive overseas.

At this year's full session of parliament, Wuhan Iron and Steel along with another major producer, Anshan Iron and Steel Group, urged the government to provide financial and policy support for the steel sector's expansion abroad.

China's top steelmaking province of Hebei has also called for greater backing for its plan to move 20 million tonnes of capacity overseas by 2023.

PLAYING AWAY

Some are already making the leap, with Hebei Steel Group, China's largest steelmaker, looking to build a 5-million-tonne-per-year steel project under a joint venture in Africa.

Shougang, one of the largest mills, in February started production at a Malaysian project with an annual capacity of 3 million tonnes.

A smaller company, Bazhou New Asia Metal Products Co. Ltd, bought a stake in an Indonesian firm in 2013 to build a steel strip project, with vice-president Xing Xiuying saying it made the move as there was little room to expand in China.

"Investing abroad will help China to cut the excess capacity at home in the long run, as some companies will shift their focus to overseas markets and thus reduce output and competition domestically."

Others have found moving more tricky, with the Baosteel Group and Wuhan Iron and Steel both dropping plans to build plants in Brazil, blaming high costs.

"It will depend on how much capital is eventually engaged in helping Chinese firms go abroad, but generally speaking, the overseas expansion strategy will have a positive impact on Chinese steelmakers in seeking new growth," said Lawrence Lu, analyst at Standard & Poor's Ratings Services in Hong Kong.

Some were more sceptical, questioning whether there would be cost advantages to shifting output.

"The government should not use this as a main solution to ease domestic overcapacity as any blind push would bring consequences," said Jiang Feitao, policy researcher at the China Academy of Social Sciences. (Editing by Joseph Radford) 
 
 
Philippines Bans Poultry Imports Coming From Idaho and Washington
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, March 24, 2016
 
March 23 — The Philippines banned the import of domesticated and wild birds and their products from Idaho and Washington, according to a recent notification to the World Trade Organization.
 
The temporary ban stems from the recent outbreak of highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) virus serotype H5N2 found in backyard flock of geese, ducks, and chickens in Canyon County, Idaho and Clallam County, Washington.
 
In December 2014, the U.S. Department of Agriculture confirmed findings of HPAI in guinea fowl in Winston, Ore., and in wild gyrfalcons in Washington (10 WTO, 1/15/15). HPAI has since been found in commercial turkey flocks in California, Minnesota, Missouri, and Arkansas, among other locations.
 
Secretary of the Philippines Department of Agriculture Proceso Alcala said the country would immediately stop importing, and would confiscate all shipments of, poultry meat, day-old chicks, eggs and semen from Idaho and Washington.
 
The Philippines joins a growing list of more than 30 countries, including China and Mexico, that have implemented bans on U.S. poultry meat originating from the affected areas.
 
 
EU and Turkey look to deepen trade ties
Alex Barker in Brussels and Daniel Dombey in Istanbul 
Financial Times
March 23, 2015 9:14 am
 
Turkey and the EU are preparing to strengthen their two-decade old customs union, in an effort to deepen ties despite Ankara’s stalled membership negotiations and tensions over foreign fighters travelling through Turkish territory. 
 
Senior officials have agreed to explore extending the customs zone to areas such as services, agriculture and public procurement — a move Ankara long resisted by saying the trade deal should be superseded only by full EU membership.

 “We are open-minded about these issues now — we weren’t before,” said one Turkish official. “Both sides are taking a more creative approach.” 
 
The initiative reflects thinking in Brussels and Ankara — but not necessarily all EU capitals — that the relationship between Turkey and the bloc is too important in economic and strategic terms to deteriorate further. 
 
“This is no panacea, the talks on a customs union will be hard, but this is an important first step,” said one EU official.

EU membership talks, already troubled, have been further stricken in recent years. There is resistance to Turkish accession in member states such as Germany and Austria, Ankara’s own interest in membership has declined, and the EU is alarmed by an alleged lurch towards authoritarianism under Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the country’s president.

The faltering membership talks have largely framed Turkey-EU relations, making it difficult to strengthen ties in areas that have not been formally opened for negotiation. Since they began in 2005, 13 of 35 chapters — which range from company law to fundamental rights — have been opened for negotiations but only one has been provisionally closed.

“You cannot make progress on accession because the political conditions are not met any more,” said Marc Pierini, a former EU ambassador to Turkey. “So you are trying other things . . . the only relatively innocuous thing is customs union.”

However, the Turkish official denied the bid to deepen the customs union was an attempt to bypass the membership talks. “This is not a divergence from our goal of membership,” he said. “On the contrary, it will actually help us get there.”

When the customs union was struck in 1995, it was one of the EU’s most ambitious agreements with an outside country. But while its lifting of barriers on manufacturing trade has encouraged foreign investment into Turkish sectors such as the automotive and textile industries, the union does not cover the wider range of economic activities covered by more recent EU trade deals.

Ankara is also concerned that if the EU and US succeed in talks to conclude a transatlantic trade and investment partnership, the customs union will give American manufactured goods backdoor access to the Turkish market without the US having to offer reciprocal access. Proponents of a broader customs union argue that an updated EU-Turkish deal will eventually make it easier for Ankara to accede to TTIP.

Yet even with fresh political impetus to start talks on a deeper customs union, membership negotiations are still likely to be difficult and drawn-out.

Formal talks are unlikely to begin before summer 2016 and the European Commission will need to prepare an impact assessment, which would probably take until the end of this year. Subsequent approval for talks from EU member states may prove difficult given potential objections from Cyprus, which has no diplomatic relations with Turkey. 
 
Securing agreement on extending the customs deal will also prove politically fraught with Italy, France and Greece likely to be among those with deep concerns over removing customs restrictions on agricultural products. Adapting to EU requirements on public procurement and competition law would also be a deep and perhaps unwelcome challenge to Mr Erdogan. Such contentious issues have often been left towards the end of EU negotiations.

The Turkish president has also increasingly employed anti-western rhetoric, while western and Turkish officials have criticised each other for not doing more to stop foreign fighters from travelling through Turkey and crossing the porous border with Syria to join the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant.
 
 
Obama calls for TPA, Ex-Im renewal
POLITICO
3/23/15 3:27 PM EDT
 
President Barack Obama today called for renewal of both trade promotion authority and the Export-Import Bank, whose charter runs out at the end of September.
The president, at the annual SelectUSA Summit hosted by the Gaylord National Resort, in Maryland, said he and Congress are "working together on a bipartisan trade promotion authority," as well as to get new trade deals with countries in the Asia-Pacific and Europe.
"I'm confident we can get together to reauthorize the Export-Import Bank of the United States, giving our businesses one more tool that they need to compete," he said.
Obama also announced new policies aimed at increasing foreign investment in the United States, including reforming the non-immigrant visa process to make it easier for foreign nationals to temporarily visit a U.S. branch of a company they work for.
U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services will released a "long-anticipated policy guidance" on L-1B visas, according to a White House press release, "which is of particular interest to global companies participating in the SelectUSA Investment Summit."
He also stressed the need for comprehensive immigration reform, saying he would "push, prod, poke and cajole" Republicans to get on board with this idea, to applause from business representatives in the audience.
— Victoria Guida
 
 
Waiting for the next 'WTO moment' 
Zheng Yangpeng 
24 March 2015
China Daily-Hong Kong Edition
 
China's decision to join global organization led to unimaginable changes within just one decade

The historic significance of many events can only be appreciated in hindsight.

In 2001, when China entered the World Trade Organization to a mix of praise and apprehension, even the most optimistic observers did not realize what it meant for the Chinese people and for people all over the world.

In that year, China's foreign trade was a mere $500 billion. Last year, it was $4.3 trillion, which made China the world's largest merchandise trader.

The flow of goods and services and capital, and changes in the value chain, transformed the country in just a decade, lifting hundreds of millions of people out of poverty by putting them on the assembly line.

There are many people to honor, among whom Long Yongtu is a legend.

Long, former vice-minister of foreign trade, was the chief negotiator for China's accession into the WTO. Few now can imagine what headwinds he faced when he sought to integrate the country into the world economy.

Last week, I attended a luncheon at which both Long and Wu Jianmin, former ambassador to France, were present.

Wu recalled that in 1999, when Long, in a casual talk with United States trade officials, realized there was a chance to talk with the US about China joining the WTO, he excitedly knocked on the door of his superior, who gave him the cold shoulder.

"Yongtu, you are too politically naive. Don't be fooled by Americans," the senior official said.

In a political culture that does not reward aggressiveness, Long could choose to stay calm and follow orders, and if that was the case China's accession could be delayed. But that is not Long. He directly went to Zhu Rongji, then premier, a reform-minded leader. Zhu reacted positively to Long's idea, which made the ensuing talks possible.

Long himself has long moved on from those memories.

Still active in the public sphere, he would like to talk about China's current economic conditions and champion further opening-up. But what he did 15 years ago will always define him.

And it is precisely what he did then, that makes his argument now persuasive.

At the luncheon, one of his top concerns was China's talks with the US over a bilateral investment treaty. As many know, the drawing up of a "negative list" is at the center of the talks.

A "negative list" specifies areas that are banned or restricted when it comes to foreign investors. These lists are also pivotal to China's domestic experiment to set up free trade zones.

Long admitted that there is immense pressure against shorter lists. That is not difficult to understand, because shorter lists would take power away from officials sitting in Beijing.

But Long also acknowledged that "without the BIT talks, the domestic 'negative list' can never be really shortened".

He said: "Many domestic issues can only be solved under international pressure. That's been proven over time."

His simple words reverberated. After more than a decade of high-speed growth following the WTO accession, China's growth engine cooled in the past three years. Many domestic and foreign observers lament the lack of a new source of momentum, or what is called the "reform dividend".

They long for a "WTO moment" or a "1992 moment", the latter being the year of late leader Deng Xiaoping's southern tour that ushered in unprecedented entrepreneurial fervor.

I have not had the chance to consult Long on what the next "WTO moment" might be. Is it a BIT with the US? Or domestic FTZs?

But I am sure he would agree that opening-up in China is never inevitable, as many may think.

Unlike smaller countries that would not survive without integrating into the world market, China has a long history and a natural tendency to be introverted and self-indulgent.

Further opening-up requires a push that defies gravity by someone like Long. END