India junks US IPR report, terms it ‘inconsistent’
EU and partners for enhanced economic cooperation
Customs reforms key for petrochemical industry in Gulf countries
China's weak April trade stirs talk of more stimulus measures
Nation’s economy on the path of recovery: CEA
Taiwan must seize TPP moment
Obama pitches for Trans-Pacific Partnership at Nike factory
Obama plaide pour une zone de libre-échange Asie-Pacifique
 
 
 
India junks US IPR report, terms it ‘inconsistent’
9 May 2015
Business Standard
 
The government on Friday rejected the annual report from the US Trade Representative (USTR) on intellectual property rights (IPR), terming it ‘inconsistent’ with global trading rules.
 
The report, Special 301, released by the USTR on April 30, had put India under a ‘priority watch list’ (PWL) category, citing ‘inadequate’ IPR laws. The US keeps a close tab on the developments of the IPR and patents laws of countries in the PWL category.
 
“The Special 301 Report issued by the United States under their Trade Act of 1974 is a unilateral measure to create pressure on countries to enhance IPR protection beyond the TRIPS (trade-related aspects of intellectual property rights) agreement,” Minister for Commerce & Industry Nirmala Sitharaman told the Lok Sabha on Friday.
 
Sitharaman added the issue related to IPR should be referred to the Dispute Settlement Body of the World Trade Organization (WTO) and unilateral actions such as those enumerated in Special 301 were “not tenable under this regime.”
 
“Special 301, an extra territorial application of the domestic law of a country, is inconsistent with the established norms of WTO,” Sitharaman noted.
 
Meanwhile, the US International Trade Commission (USITC), a quasi-judicial federal agency giving trade policy advice to the US government, has initiated yet another round of investigations on the country’s trade policies at the behest of the American government. The first hearing took place on May 4, in which it heard the viewpoints of various US industry lobbies across all sectors from information technology to pharmaceuticals.
 
The USITC is expected to hear such viewpoints on India’s trade policies till June 2, after which it will make a report and present it to the Senate by September. The agency had conducted similar investigations last year. India and the US have set a target to achieve bilateral trade worth
 
$500 billion in goods and services compared to $103 billion at present.
 
 

EU and partners for enhanced economic cooperation
9 May 2015
Bulletin Quotidien Europe
 
During a press conference at the end of the European Trade Council on Thursday 7 May, Latvia's Foreign Minister Edgars Rinkevics announced that the European trade ministers, their counterparts from the Eastern Partnership countries and the European Commission had underlined their resolve to enhance their economic cooperation.
 
“The Presidency and the Commission confirmed that they were ready to work on the differentiated strengthening of trade relations with each of the partners”, said the Latvian Presidency and Commission in a joint press release. They also spoke of the need to work for “inclusive and sustainable” economic development. “There is a range of fairly diverse and varied relations with the partner countries”, Rinkevics stated.
 
The EU has signed association agreements, with deep and comprehensive free trade areas, with Georgia, the Republic of Moldova and Ukraine. According to European Commissioner for Trade Cecilia Malmström, the Commission will continue to support Georgia and Moldova for the full implementation of the free trade area. She reiterated that the entry into force of the free trade area with Ukraine is planned for 1 January 2016. A political meeting between Russia's Economic Development Minister Alexei Ulyukayev and Ukraine's Foreign Minister Pavlo Klimkin, chaired by Malmström, will be held in Brussels on 18 May to see how to respond to Russia's concerns about this agreement.
 
As Armenia decided to turn towards the Customs Union at the Eastern Partnership summit, negotiations could be launched for a new agreement which would take account of its participation in this union (see EUROPE 11234).
 
Rinkevics also stated that the EU was ready to help Belarus and Azerbaijan, which are not members of the WTO, to become so. He added that, for Minsk, a more structured and more regular dialogue was possible. According to European calculations, trade between the EU and Belarus stands at €11 billion per year. As regards Azerbaijan, more cooperation in the area of energy is reportedly planned.
 
Rinkevics said that the meeting between the trade ministers of the EU and partner countries - the first of its kind (which took place exactly six years to the day after the launch of the Eastern Partnership in Prague on 7 May 2009) - enabled an exchange of views and a better understanding of what the partners want to gain from the Riga summit (on 21-22 May) and beyond. A business summit is also being organised alongside the Eastern Partnership summit in Riga, and Malmström will attend this. (Camille-Cerise Gessant)
 
 
 
Customs reforms key for petrochemical industry in Gulf countries
9 May 2015
Times Of Oman
 
Customs regulation reforms will be crucial for the export-oriented Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) petrochemical industry to reach the milestone of manufacturing 190 million tonnes of products by 2020, said industry leaders at the 7th Supply Chain Conference in Dubai, hosted by the Gulf Petrochemicals and Chemicals Association (GPCA).
 
"The GCC petrochemicals industry has been growing on a CAGR of 8 per cent over the past five years increasing from 37.2 in 2008 to 67.6 million tonnes by the year 2014," said Dr Abdulwahab Al Sadoun, secretary general, GPCA. "Countries in the Arabian Gulf also have varying degrees of success in terms of optimising their supply chains. Details such as export times, the number of documents required for trade or trade tariffs measure how easy it is to do business, and these are areas that need to be improved to ensure that the GCC chemical industry will maintain its competitive advantage," he said.
 
According to the GPCA research, the GCC countries have significantly improved their global rankings among the leading chemical-exporting countries over the past five years.
 
The UAE is ranked 38th in the world in terms of chemicals export volumes, up six places from 2008, as per data collated from the GPCA and World Trade Organisation (WTO).
 
According to the World Bank's "Doing Business Report-2015", export cost per container for petrochemicals from the Emirates averaged $656 in 2014, which is the lowest in the Arabian Gulf, with clearance times estimated at seven working days, a figure that is the lowest in the GCC.
 
"The UAE is a leader in terms of ease of export procedures and accessibility, which is certainly a testament to the business-friendly strategy led by the government," said Dr Al Sadoun.
 
"However, aspects such as container costs have marginally risen in the last two years, so stakeholders must work together to ensure that this position is maintained," he added.
 
Petrochemical products manufactured in the GCC amounted to 80 per cent of the region's product portfolio in 2014, or 67.6 million tonnes of chemicals, according to GPCA estimates. As the GCC's chemical industry is expected to add an additional 50 million tonnes in capacity by the end of this decade, the region's petrochemicals sector clearly has potential, with exports expected to account for a sizeable percentage of this share.
 
"As an industry with increasingly competitive worldwide players, operating agile and flexible supply chains will be essential in the development of our export portfolio," continued Dr Al Sadoun.
 
"In order to ensure that we are preferred partners for wide-ranging customers, introducing customs and clearance procedures reforms will be the key to ensuring global market share," he said.
 
Commenting on the ongoing challenge of the fluctuating oil prices, which have dropped by nearly 50 per cent since June 2014, Mohammed Husain, chairman of the GPCA Supply Chain Committee and chairman and CEO of Equate said, "We are in a volatile period where everyone in the oil and gas industry strives to win.
 
And as everyone asks about the effect of oil prices, we face additional challenges as petrochemical producers in this region."
 
"Our exports are dependent on Europe, which will hopefully pick up and even China needs to grow consistently by 8 per cent for us to reach our potential. And if something happens to the petrochemical supply chain, our companies will lose money, their reputation and the trust of customers," warned Husain.
 
"At the end of the day, due to the limited domestic market size, our industry is predominantly export oriented. Easing access to our products destined for the export markets will help enhance the competitiveness of our players in an increasingly competitive global market," concluded Dr. Al Sadoun.
 
Held on the theme of "Strengthening the Supply Chain Backbone – Paving the Way Forward for 2020", the GPCA Supply Chain Conference featured 20 speakers from petrochemical companies, ports, consultancies and customs authorities who shared their insights with 350 delegates from the region.
 
 
 
China's weak April  trade  stirs talk of more stimulus measures
9 May 2015
Business Times Singapore
 
CHINA'S trade fared poorly in April, with exports falling unexpectedly and imports continuing their downward trajectory.
 
Exports dipped 6.4 per cent year on year during the month, while imports fell 16.2 per cent in the sixth monthly decline, prompting analysts to expect further stimulus measures in the coming month.
 
Total trade surplus for the month stood at US$34.13 billion.
 
The figures surprised analysts, who had expected a rise in exports after the end of the Chinese New Year holiday, which distorts the first-quarter trade figures every year.
 
HSBC's China economist Julia Wang said: "Export growth is clearly on a much weaker path than in the past few years. This means that the official target of 6 per cent export growth will be very challenging to meet. Almost all major export destinations recorded year-on-year contraction, with demand from the European Union and Japan looking particularly weak."
 
Last year, China's trade grew 3.4 per cent, missing the government's growth target of 7.5 per cent.
 
On the import side, part of the drop came from lower commodity prices, which depressed the value of imports. Analysts warned that lacklustre demand for products such as industrial commodities are also weighing down on imports.
 
Julian Evans-Pritchard of Capital Economics said: "The ongoing slowdown in investment, particularly in property, has further weighed on domestic demand."
 
China's economy has gone into a downward trend due in part to Beijing's switch to a more sustainable growth model powered mainly by domestic demand and innovation. But the government has become increasingly nervous about the rate of the slowdown hurting employment and sparking social instability.
 
Since the end of last year, it has rolled out measures to support certain sectors of the economy, with these taking the form of tax rebates and cuts to interest rates and reserve-ratio requirements.
 
In the first quarter, the economy grew 7 per cent; the particularly worrying data for March prompted the central bank to implement stimulus measures and inject more credit into the economy.
 
Analysts said that the data released on Friday, along with the low purchasing managers' index (PMI) unveiled this month, will put more heat on the government to pursue loosening policies.
 
HSBC's PMI recorded its worst contraction in a year in April, it said this week.
 
ANZ economists Liu Li-Gang and Zhou Hao said: "As the port throughput data remains soft, we continue to see strong headwinds in China's trade sector in the foreseeable future.
 
"It is likely that China needs to add targeted stimulus to both fiscal and industrial sectors."
 
Looking forward, analysts say the brighter economic outlook in the United States and Europe will be offset by a higher local currency and that trade growth will be led by imports, which are expected to stabilise.
 
HSBC's Ms Wang said: "As the base effect on commodity prices fades in the second half, and as monetary and fiscal pro-growth policies start to show effect, we expect import growth to stabilise and improve in the second half of the year.
 
"For the whole year, we expect the contribution of net exports to growth to remain modest and for growth to remain domestically driven."
 
 
 
 
Nation’s economy on the path of recovery: CEA
The Hindu, 
10 May 2015
 
Stagnating exports and weak private investment pose major challenges to the recovering Indian economy, even though the devolution of tax revenues to the States is expected to spur growth, Chief Economic Advisor (CEA) to the Government of India Arvind Subramanian has said.
 
Addressing an outreach session on the Economic Survey 2014-15 held at the Centre for Development Studies (CDS) on Saturday, he said the balance of evidence showed that the Indian economy was recovering robustly, not surging.
 
“But the deteriorating external trade environment has led to stagnating exports and private investment remains weak because of the legacy of distress assets and a weak exit mechanism. While this provides a reason for more public investment, the challenge is how we can do this without diluting fiscal consolidation targets,” he said.
 
States, Mr. Subramanian said, had been more prudent than the Centre over the last 10 years, contributing to the reduction in fiscal and revenue deficit and increase in capital expenditure. Terming the recommendations of the 14th Finance Commission as a watershed in federalism, he said, “in 2015-16, about 62 per cent of total tax revenues will accrue to the States, compared to 55 per cent the previous year. This will lead to better fiscal consolidation and expenditure control than at the level of the Union government.”
 
He said cooperative federalism along with competitive federalism would help spur growth. Highlighting the example of the Tata Nano factory shifting from West Bengal to Gujarat, he said, “a combination of democratic politics and competitive federalism will promote healthy competition among States to attract investment and act as models and magnets for change.”
 
Fielding questions on the Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) system, Mr. Subramanian said the goal was to reach as many citizens as possible by creating technology platforms and incentivising States to move forward as in the case of GST. He stressed the need to move away from the low-productive, unorganised manufacturing sector by creating new job opportunities.
 
He also called for rapid productivity increase in the agriculture sector. Kerala State Planning Board Vice Chairman K.M. Chandrasekhar was the guest of honour.
 
 
 
 
Taiwan must seize TPP moment
Taipei Times 
10 May 2015
 
The decisive moment of the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) might finally arrive this year. After Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s historic visit to Washington, the latest US-Japan joint statement indicated that the two nations — the largest economies in the TPP — are working to finalize the trade deal.
 
Although leaders from both sides were reluctant to reveal any concessions in negotiations, political will from Washington and Tokyo to close this trade pact has never been so strong since the launch of intensive TPP talks in 2009.
 
Domestic politics and a fast-changing geopolitical environment have contributed to the latest push to wrapping up the TPP.
 
From the US side, the primary reason for US President Barack Obama to double his efforts in promoting the TPP is largely due to his limited time left in office. The conclusion of this trade pact would be one of his most important political legacies, not only fulfilling his “rebalance to Asia” policy, but also reinforcing the economic relevance of the US in Asia. It would help revitalize US strategic interests in the region and meet the challenges of China’s rise.
 
On the other hand, a successful outcome of the trade deal in Asia could also deflect many criticisms of Obama’s diplomatic failures, such as the protracted Ukraine crisis, escalating civil war in Syria and the growing threat of the Islamic State.
 
Compared with those simmering geopolitical perils, Asia seems a more promising place for Obama to improve his mediocre performance in foreign affairs.
 
A recent interview with Obama by the Wall Street Journal on the TPP explicitly revealed why he regards the completion of this trade deal as crucial for the US. Obama said that the TPP is a key instrument to achieve his primary task of reviving the fortunes of the US’ middle class. Nevertheless, legislators from his Democratic Party thought differently, accusing the trade agreement of eliminating US jobs, favoring the interests of big corporations and hurting US labor, among other charges. Facing mounting criticism, Obama not only rejected the assaults as ungrounded, but emphasized that he takes this deal personally.

Obama said the TPP would allow the US to engage with Asia’s fast-growing economies. He also said that the TPP is designed to level the playing field, so US-made products received better access to the Asian market. More importantly, he said that if the US did not set the rules, China would soon write its own rules for the region and ultimately become the dominant economic power in Asia.
 
In terms of creating jobs, Obama also emphasized — saying that the TPP would boost US exports and that export jobs usually pay better — that the trade agreement would increase income for the middle class.
 
Finally, since the TPP would significantly raise the bar on many trade regulations, such as labor standards, environmental protection, intellectual property rights and state-owned enterprises, the implementation of the the proposal would become an important template for reducing unfair competition in developing economies and improve the competitiveness of US industries.
 
With an upcoming presidential election, Obama knows that his last chance to finalize the TPP will hinge on whether the US Congress can pass the Trade Promotion Authority (TPA), the so-called first-track legislation, this month. Despite a TPA bill passed last month by the US Senate, TPA review and approval from the US House of Representatives remains a critical challenge.
 
 
 
 
Obama pitches for Trans-Pacific Partnership at Nike factory
9 May 2015
Domain-B
 
President Obama made his pitch for free trade dressing it up in the rhetoric of "middle class economics" on Friday, calling on his liberal base to support a Pacific trade deal that would help US workers.
 
Speaking at the world headquarters of Nike yesterday, Obama offered arguments similar to the ones he offered in his efforts to pass universal health care, adoption of clean energy and raising the minimum wage. "Passing trade agreements is part of that agenda - if those trade agreements are the right kinds of trade agreements," he said.
 
"Like other issues we've waged slow, steady fights on over the last seven years, this is also a question of the past versus the present," he said.
 
However, Obama made his case for free trade at a company that is seen by many liberals - notably Vermont senator Bernie Sanders, a presidential candidate, as a symbol of failed trade policies.
 
Nike, the world's largest athletic shoe manufacturer, imported shoes produced in contract factories in low-wage countries like Vietnam, where the minimum wage was 56 cents an hour.
 
Obama said Vietnam, where 330,000 workers made Nike shoes, would need to raise the minimum wage, improve working conditions and even establish the right of workers to join a union.
 
"It doesn't mean that suddenly working conditions in Vietnam will be like they are here at Nike, or here in Portland right away, but it moves us in the right direction," he told a supportive audience of 1,200 - mostly Nike employees. "If you're a country that wants into this agreement, you have to meet higher standards. If you don't you're out."
 
Meanwhile, according to commentators, at a time when economic inequality around the globe continued to widen, the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) would only make things worse. They say, unlike what president Obama claims, the agreement would only encourage a race to the bottom, in which a small percentage of people got ridiculously rich while most workers around the globe continued to be miserably poor.
 
That should not be allowed to happen.
 
According to commentators, the Nike factory was an apt place for Obama to beat the free-trade drum, as Nike, like the TPP, was associated with offshoring US jobs, widening the income inequality gap, and increasing the number of people making slave wages overseas.
 
Since NAFTA was passed in 1993, 5 million US manufacturing jobs had gone, 57,000 plus factories, and wages continued to remain stagnant. The deal now would be no different, they claim.
 
 
 
Obama plaide pour une zone de libre-échange Asie-Pacifique
LaPresseAffaires.com
9 May 2015
 
Barack Obama a prononcé vendredi, au siège de Nike à Beaverton dans l'Oregon, un long plaidoyer en faveur d'une zone de libre-échange Asie-Pacifique, jugeant que les États-Unis devaient «écrire les règles de l'économie mondiale».
 
«Let's just do it», a lancé le président américain, reprenant, dans un sourire, le célèbre slogan du groupe d'articles de sport.
 
S'adressant à ceux qui, dans son propre camp, doutent du bien-fondé de la démarche et redoutent des pertes d'emplois, M. Obama a appelé à ne pas s'arc-bouter sur des positions de principe.
 
«Sur ce sujet précis, je pense que certains de mes très bons amis ont tort. Ils ont tout simplement tort», a-t-il lancé devant des employés de Nike et des représentants du monde de l'entreprise.
 
«Je n'ai plus d'élection devant moi», a souligné M. Obama qui quittera la Maison-Blanche en janvier 2017 après deux mandats de quatre ans. «L'unique raison pour laquelle je fais cela est que je pense que c'est bon pour les travailleurs américains et l'économie américaine», a-t-il poursuivi.
 
Ce partenariat transpacifique (TPP), qui rassemblerait 12 pays dont les États-Unis et le Japon mais pas la Chine, représenterait 40 % du PIB mondial. Une proposition de loi accordant au président américain des pouvoirs accrus pour négocier cet accord est actuellement au coeur d'un intense combat politique au Congrès.
 
Reprenant un thème qu'il décline depuis plusieurs semaines, M. Obama a souligné que les règles n'étaient «pas les mêmes pour tout le monde» dans nombre de pays, ce qui plaçait les entreprises américaines dans une position défavorable.
 
«La question est: que faire? Certains pensent que nous devrions simplement nous retirer et ne même pas essayer d'avoir des échanges commerciaux avec ces pays. Je ne suis pas d'accord», a-t-il poursuivi.
 
Le PDG de Nike avait lui assuré, peu avant le discours présidentiel que, si cet accord de libre-échange était conclu, il serait en mesure de renforcer la production aux États-Unis et pourrait ainsi créer jusqu'à 10 000 emplois.


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.