WTO asks PH's help for TFA ratification, expansion of IT agreement
APEC ministers seek to push new free trade area
India to oppose WTO's expansion of ITA products list
US Senate votes to grant Obama fast-track power on trade deals
Obama Presses Currency Compromise in Trade Pact; Nod to lawmakers who want strong anti-manipulation provisions is aimed at saving accord
Turning protectionist will not help growth: Niti Aayog VC Arvind Panagariya
S. Korea keeps importing fish from Japan after Fukushima disaster
INTERVIEW-U.S. Steel to file 'several' anti-dumping complaints
EU anti-fraud office probing imports of Chinese solar panels
 
WTO asks PH's help for TFA ratification, expansion of IT agreement
23 May 2015
Manila Bulletin
World Trade Organization (WTO) Director-General Roberto Azevedo has sought Philippines' help as chair of the 2015 APEC to push for the ratification of the Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA) and the expansion of the Information Technology Agreement (ITA) to further liberalize global trade and enable poor countries to access of the benefits offered under these important deals.
In a Roundtable on "Multilateral Trade for Inclusive Growth: Progress and Prospects" held at the Asian Development Bank headquarters in Manila on Wednesday, Azevedo noted the importance of the TFA, which was delivered during last year's WTO ministerial meeting in Bali.
The Bali Package forms part of the Doha Development Agenda -- the current trade-negotiation round of the WTO. TFA seeks to lower trade barriers around the world to help facilitate increased global trade.
 "The TFA is very important agreement," Azevedo stressed as he pointed out that this agreement will make movement of goods across borders faster, easier and cheaper.
It is estimated that this agreement will reduce trade costs at the border by up to 15 percent for developing countries.
Once implemented, the TFA could inject up to $1 trillion per year into the global economy, creating 21 million jobs worldwide.
For the first time in the WTO's history, the TFA offers a practical help with implementation for developing countries via a new initiative called the Trade Facilitation Agreement Facility (TFAF).
The TFAF ensures that LDCs and developing countries get the help they need to develop projects and access the necessary funds to achieve this.
TFAF seeks to provide project implementation grants related to the implementation of TFA provisions in circumstances where attempts to attract funding from other sources have failed. These grants will be limited to -"soft infrastructure" projects, such as modernization of customs laws through consulting services, in-country workshops, or training of officials.
The TFA, however, requires that two-thirds of WTO members must ratify the Agreement for it to come into force. So far, only 12 countries have ratified the TFA. Many WTO member countries have affirmed their hope of seeing the agreement enter into force by the WTO's 10th Ministerial Conference in Nairobi next December.
Some members have started the ratification process, but the challenge is that the process is domestic in nature and differs from country to country. A number of developing country members highlighted the domestic legislative hurdles that will need to be overcome to secure acceptance.  Several indicated they were not in a position to ensure ratification by the Nairobi meeting on December 15-18.
 "We need to accelerate the process. I am therefore urging the Philippines, like I have been doing with all other members, to take the necessary steps to ratify this Agreement, and thereby to seize the benefits it offers," the WTO Director-General said.
Azevedo finds APEC a more appropriate venue to push WTO's TFA agenda because the roots of trade facilitation initiatives were taken and began within the APEC. APEC promotes trade facilitation among its 21-member countries.
As such its agreements are non-binding, but APEC has been used as a building block for some trade initiatives of the WTO.
At the same time, Azevedo said it is also important to note that there are many big issues, such as agricultural or fisheries subsidies, which simply cannot be efficiently tackled outside the WTO.
 "Therefore the different types of trade agreement must live, exist as well as work together and complement each other," he added.
Azevedo cited the Philippines leadership throughout the Bali process. Philippine support was vital in striking the Agreement with special mention to Ambassador Esteban Conejos for playing a crucial role in chairing the implementation committee and driving the Agreement forward so that it can come into force.
On the ITA, Azevedo has pushed for the expansion of the product under the agreement which was approved in 1997 eliminating duties on components and finished products allowing for the global integration of the productive chains of IT products. The ITA has been instrumental in the boom in global trade of IT products seen over the last two decades.
Azevedo said the semiconductor and electronics industry ranks as the Philippines' top exporter, accounting for half of export revenues.
Despite the global economic slowdown, he said, the Philippines' high-tech companies earned over $25 billion last year in exports - which was a year-on-year increase of more than 8 percent.
 "All of these issues are crucial for the Philippine economy. In fact, I was impressed to see that the competitive position of the IT sector here is increasingly being matched in services," he added.
Negotiations are underway to expand the Information Technology Agreement, which is now called ITA 2, to cover a wide range of new products which cover over $1 trillion of trade flows.
Azevedo also warned against delaying the agreement for ITA2 stressing that "the rapid evolution of information technology products also demonstrates that standing still on trade opening can mean losing ground."
 "I'm hopeful that this week, at the APEC Ministerial Meeting in Boracay, we will see some further progress being made towards clearing the few remaining hurdles," Azevedo said.
Azevedo also cited WTO's accomplishments in supporting economic growth and development the past 20 years.
 "With all of this in mind I think that the value of the system in supporting inclusive growth is beyond any doubt. It is the platform on which so much of global growth and development has been achieved over the last two decades - including here in the Philippines," he said.
Being one of the beneficiaries of WTO's trade liberalization efforts, the Philippines has become   one of the fastest-growing economies in the region.
Aside from the competitiveness of the country's exports, Azevedo cited good governance, openness and dynamism have combined to build a strong trading economy in the Philippines.
 
APEC ministers seek to push new free trade area
Kyodo News
BORACAY ISLAND, Philippines, May 23 -- Trade ministers from 21 Asia-Pacific economies kicked off a meeting in the Philippines on Saturday, seeking to accelerate efforts toward the creation of a region-wide free trade zone and boosting regional integration.
During the two-day conference on the resort island of Boracay, the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum ministers are expected to agree on details of how to proceed with a study that will look into the possibility of implementing a new trade scheme known as the Free Trade Area of the Asia-Pacific, according to a draft of their declaration, obtained by Kyodo News, which will be adopted on Sunday.
The APEC members are continuing efforts toward crystallizing FTAAP following their leaders' summit held in November in Beijing, where they affirmed commitment to realizing the initiative "as early as possible" and agreed to launch a "collective strategic study" whose results are expected to be reported by the end of 2016.
The meeting comes at a time when negotiations for a Trans-Pacific Partnership free trade initiative -- which include the United States, Japan and 10 other countries but not China -- have stalled despite Washington striving to secure a deal by this summer.
Other agenda items include promotion of service trade, fighting protectionist movement in world trade, and building better infrastructure in the fast-growing region.
During the gathering, Japan is advocating an initiative to plan and build infrastructure based on considerations of safety, long-term durability and the environment, arguing that saving on initial costs for infrastructure development often results in higher overall costs for maintenance, according to government officials.
The idea is strongly supported by the United States amid China's growing influence in the region's infrastructure development, underscored by the establishment of the Beijing-led Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, the officials said.
The 21-member APEC forum, established in 1989, groups Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Japan, South Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Peru, the Philippines, Russia, Singapore, Taiwan, Thailand, the United States and Vietnam.
 
India to oppose WTO's expansion of ITA products list
Muntazir Abbas
22 May 2015
The Times of India
NEW DELHI: India will oppose any expansion of the products list under the Information Technology Agreement of the WTO whereby the signatories, including India, committed to total elimination of customs duties on IT and electronics products.
The department of electronics and IT (DeitY) has said any such move would hurt the Make in India initiative and discourage investments towards local manufacturing of electronics products where the country had attracted Rs 22,000-crore investment proposals from multinationals last year.
"It's a situation (WTO deal) that we can't change but we are not in favour of ITA expansion in the process of electronic manufacturing," Ajay Kumar, Joint Secretary at DeitY, said. "Globally, there is also a concern over adding new products to this regime," he said.
Some world powers have been pushing for adding around 256 products to the list that has not been updated since the treaty was signed in 1997, which, if implemented, will remove tariffs on an additional $1 trillion global trade annually.
Currently, 203 ICT products, including laptops, PCs, mobile devices, monitors, displays, network equipment, set-top boxes and disc storage units, are covered under the ITA. About 75 World Trade Organization countries, including the US, China, Japan, and all the 27 European Union nations, are signatories to it.
A round of talks for increasing the scope of the ITA collapsed late last year, but is expected to be revived this year.
India is strongly opposed to any expansion as a zero customs duty regime will discourages local R&D and manufacturing as companies will prefer to import electronic goods rather than invest in domestic production capabilities.
India's domestic consumption of electronics goods is already highly dependent on imports that, according to experts, roughly translate into Rs 50,000-crore missed opportunity for local production.
Meanwhile, the government has received nine fresh investment proposals worth Rs 4,000 since January this year, taking the total investment proposals in the electronics system design and manufacturing (ESDM) segment in 2014-15 to Rs 22,000 crore.
Kumar said the department has received 63 investment proposals from global multinationals asking benefits under the Modified Special Incentive Package Scheme (M-SIPS). The government has already cleared 30 proposals entailing investments of Rs 6,000 crore.
M-SIPS offers incentives for setting up new facilities or for scaling up production that include 20% for investments in Special Economic Zones (SEZ) and 25% in non-SEZs for 10 years.
Aimed at net zero-import by 2020, the incentives are available for entire value chain and include mobile devices and accessories, telecom equipment, IT hardware, consumer electronics, and automotive and medical electronics.
Under the12th Five-Year Plan, the Centre has allocated Rs 10,000 crore for M-SIPS.
 
US Senate votes to grant Obama fast-track power on trade deals
By Richard Cowan and Jason Lange
WASHINGTON, May 22 (Reuters) - President Barack Obama scored a major victory on Friday when the U.S. Senate voted to give him "fast-track" powers that would help wrap up negotiations on a 12-nation Pacific Rim trade deal central to projecting American influence in Asia.
Attention now turns to the House of Representatives, where opposition is deeper to granting the president power to negotiate trade deals that can be approved or rejected by Congress but not amended.
Obama needs trade promotion authority (TPA) to complete the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) trade agreement this year, an economic alliance that would encompass 40 percent of the world's economies in countries ranging from Japan to Chile.
"Today's bipartisan Senate vote is an important step toward ensuring the United States can negotiate and enforce strong, high-standards trade agreements," Obama said in a statement issued immediately after the Senate passage.
If eventually enacted into law, the up to six-year TPA would extend to any trade deals negotiated by Obama's successor, who would take office in January 2017.
The Senate voted 62-37 for TPA, or fast-track as it is known in Washington, following weeks of bitter debate and White House lobbying.
Senate Finance Committee Chairman Orrin Hatch, the Republican who shepherded the legislation through the Senate, said: "This is an historic piece of legislation...likely the most important bill we'll pass this year."
Before the final vote, the Senate defeated, 51-48, an amendment that the White House considered toxic, which would have imposed penalties on countries found to be manipulating their currencies in order to sell more goods abroad.
Opponents argued that the amendment would sink the TPP and would violate international trade rules, while also making it harder for central bankers to manage their economies.
Instead, the Senate approved milder currency manipulation language that lacks enforcement tools. This version was supported by the White House.
Democratic Senator Sherrod Brown, a leading opponent of fast-track, said the lobbying against the tough currency manipulation amendment was overwhelming.
"The president has been lobbying against it and Wall Street's been lobbying against it and...the same people that pushed this trade agreement are lobbying against it. It's a lot of power," Brown said.
Given the close vote on the amendment in the Senate, some supporters of tough enforcement against currency manipulation vowed to continue to fight for it.
Ford Motor Co Vice President Ziad Ojakli said in a statement that the company will "work with lawmakers to address this critical issue as TPA moves through the legislative process."
Ford is among U.S. automakers that fear increased competition from Japan.
Earlier on Friday, Japanese Economy Minister Akira Amari said ministerial meetings on TPP are unlikely until Congress approves fast-track authority for Obama.
The deep divisions within the U.S. Congress were on display on Friday.
"We all know that by passing this legislation, we can show we're serious about advancing new opportunities for bigger American paychecks, better American jobs, and a stronger American economy," said Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, a Republican.
Senate Democratic leader Harry Reid dismissed the emerging TPP as just another trade deal, like past ones, that does little more than help rich, multinational corporations while jeopardizing American jobs.
"This trade bill is another example of how we have ignored in this Congress working men and women in this country," Reid said.
As the action moves to the House, when it returns on June 1 from a 10-day Memorial Day holiday recess, labor unions and environmentalists opposed to free-trade deals are expected to ratchet up pressure on Democrats to vote against the legislation.
Meanwhile, House Speaker John Boehner, who backs fast track, will also have to try to minimize opposition from fellow Republicans, some of whom do not want to give Obama the additional powers. (Additional reporting by Krista Hughes; Editing by Leslie Adler)
 
Obama Presses Currency Compromise in Trade Pact; Nod to lawmakers who want strong anti-manipulation provisions is aimed at saving accord
By Ian Talley
23 May 2015
The Wall Street Journal Online
The White House, facing a push by U.S. lawmakers to insert language that targets currency manipulation in a major Pacific trade deal, is pitching a less-aggressive approach that would bolster international oversight and transparency of currency policies.
The Treasury Department says the "historic new approach" it envisions would bring exchange-rate provisions into trade negotiations for the first time and strengthen U.S. efforts to persuade countries not to use their currencies to gain unfair competitive advantages.
The administration hopes its strategy will help fend off efforts—largely by members of his own party—to include provisions for binding sanctions against currency manipulators. The White House says those measures would sink the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal, a pillar of President Barack Obama's plan to boost the U.S. economy and fortify economic and strategic ties in Asia.
The Senate late Friday passed legislation on what is known as fast-track authority, propelling the bill toward what is expected to be an even-more difficult path in the House next month. The Senate rejected a currency-manipulation amendment in the measure, also known as trade promotion authority, which would allow the Obama administration to complete the trade pact with Japan and 10 other nations and bring it to Congress for up-or-down votes as soon as this fall.
The Treasury Department's proposal—pitched to TPP member countries in recent weeks—is still preliminary and faces major hurdles. One option under consideration is to require better data on the key metrics for gauging currency intervention such as details on foreign currency reserves and interventions. Many countries don't provide that data to international institutions such as the International Monetary Fund, often leaving outside economists guessing about the extent of exchange-rate interventions.
Better data, the Obama administration argues, would give the U.S. a much stronger hand in diplomatic negotiations over currency policies.
It "will shed new light on country exchange rate practices" and promote greater accountability, U.S. Treasury Secretary Jacob Lew told lawmakers in a letter this week.
Critics say the strategy is a political ploy. "It's essentially window dressing," said Simon Johnson, a Massachusetts Institute of Technology professor and former chief economist at the IMF who is advising lawmakers on crafting tough anti-manipulation legislation. "It would have no substantial effect on the issue."
Lawmakers advocating for binding currency rules, such as Rep. Sander Levin, (D., Mich.), the ranking member of the House committee responsible for trade policy, likewise argue that surveillance alone is insufficient.
The administration argues its plan could bring 40% of the global economy into a new regime in which currency interventions and foreign-exchange reserves are brought out of the dark. If agreed to by TPP countries, it could also force greater exchange-rate transparency from countries such as China and South Korea that may want to join the TPP in the future.
Besides the U.S. and Japan, the TPP trade deal under negotiation includes 10 other advanced and emerging economies [http://si.wsj.net/public/resources/images/AI-CP210_TPP041_16U_20150417015420.jpg] around the Pacific Rim including Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile and Malaysia.
Mr. Obama indicated this past week that he would veto the fast-track legislation if it contained measures that would penalize countries for devaluing their currencies.
Other countries negotiating with the U.S. have shared the Obama administration's position. Akira Amari, the Japanese minister in charge of trade talks said enforceable currency policies don't belong in TPP talks. "Japan's stance won't change on this issue," he told reporters in Tokyo earlier this month.
The administration argues that lawmakers' anti-manipulation measures could constrain U.S. monetary policy, which is designed to be independent. Proponents of tough sanctions say that the legislation clearly distinguishes between healthy monetary policy and direct intervention in currency markets.
Some emerging-market officials have blasted the Federal Reserve's easy-money policies over the past several years—an effort to jump-start growth in the wake of the financial crisis—as currency manipulation to depreciate the dollar, though central-bank officials maintain their efforts were primarily aimed at domestic objectives.
 "The reality is that the countries that we've talked to in the TPP have said they don't want anything enforceable, and if we were to do something enforceable, it would have to also apply to the U.S.," said an Obama administration official familiar with the talks.
Mr. Lew, however, told lawmakers in another recent letter that TPP members "indicated a willingness to constructively discuss our concerns about inappropriate currency policies," including exploring stronger currency surveillance." As part of its effort to bolster its exchange-rate diplomacy, the administration is also supporting a measure in Congress that would give it the ability to reject currency-manipulating countries from entering free-trade deals in the future.
Treasury officials credit the administration's use of diplomacy for getting China to gradually boost the value of the yuan, curb currency interventions and improve transparency on its exchange-rate operations. The administration also points to Japan's agreement in 2013 to avoid targeting specific exchange-rate levels.
Mr. Johnson said if oversight could fix the problem, the IMF would have been able to prevent, or at least curb, one of the biggest currency interventions in the past several decades: China's management of the yuan.
Many U.S. companies and economists accused China of using a devalued exchange rate to supercharge exports and catapult the country into its position as the world's the No. 2 economy at the expense of the U.S. and other nations.
Fred Bergsten, the founding director of the Peterson Institute for International Economics, said China's currency practices in recent years cost the U.S. up to five million lost jobs.
Many analysts say the IMF, which is supposed to be the world's independent arbiter of currency policies, has long had sufficient data to censure China's exchange-rate policy. The fund's rules prohibit competitive currency devaluation. But politics prevented the IMF from being an effective currency cop, they argue.
That is why lawmakers from manufacturing-heavy states are trying to shift responsibility as the world's currency cop from the IMF to the World Trade Organization. Under their proposals, if a country is shown to be keeping its finger on the exchange-rate scales by buying foreign currencies, U.S. firms could seek remedy through the WTO.
But the administration official familiar with the talks said TPP-negotiating countries such as Singapore and Peru are worried that their monetary policies intended to ensure financial stability could be construed as competitive devaluations.
 "The right solution will make sure the U.S. gets the upside of cracking down on currency manipulators, and avoids the downside of restricting our monetary-policy tool kit," said Sen. Ron Wyden, (D., Ore.), the ranking member on the Senate Finance Committee. He's backing the administration's approach, saying the most effective tools are "transparency, reporting, monitoring and cooperative mechanisms."
It is unclear whether the administration's wider monitoring regime would prove more effective than the IMF's existing surveillance of exchange-rate policies. That is a question of "whether the cosmetics of the issue differ very significantly from the substance" said Cornell University economist Eswar Prasad, a former head of the IMF's China division.
 "If the U.S. can somehow dress up what it is already being done and argue that it is going to be enhanced surveillance--with some additional indicators and monitoring--that could give them some cover," he said.
 
Turning protectionist will not help growth: Niti Aayog VC Arvind Panagariya
23 May 2015
The Economic Times
NEW DELHI: The NITI Aayog has cautioned against a protectionist approach to trade policy to encourage domestic manufacturing as it could impact economic growth in the country, an advice that comes at a time when the Narendra Modi government is aggressively pushing its 'Make In India' campaign.
"Turning protectionist will not help because if trade doesn't grow, the economy would not grow," Arvind Panagariya, vice chairman of the Aayog said on Thursday, citing examples of the co-relation between growth in exports and GDP growth.
NITI Aayog, the think tank set up by the Modi government to replace the erstwhile Planning Commission, is headed by the Prime Minister. Panagariya was speaking at the international conference on India's trade policy, jointly organised by the Jindal Global Law School and the World Trade Institute. According to Panagariya, the average growth of 8 per cent in India between 2003-04 and 2011-12 was because of increase in the rate of exports, as a result of which the share of exports to GDP grew substantially.
India's total merchandise trade as a proportion of GDP increased from 29 per cent in 2004-05 to 41.8 per cent in 2013-14 while its merchandise exports as a proportion of GDP increased from 12.1 per cent to 17 per cent during the same period.
Panagariya's comments hit at the heart of the government's prime focus to revive manufacturing in the country. The Modiled NDA government is under tremendous pressure from several industries to adopt measures that will restrict imports and encourage companies to manufacture in India. The three panelists at the conference were unanimous in their view that India's trade policy is not in sync with its industrial or economic policy and there is not enough focus on agriculture, as a result of which there are limitations to growth in trade. "Without adequate attention to the growth of agriculture, we will not be able to achieve our full economic potential," said Janyant Dasgupta, former permanent representative of India to the WTO.
Manoj Pant of JNU said that a good trade policy is one which is neutral to exports and imports. "The reform measures of the government are restricted to the Centre and not really moving to states that handle agriculture," said Pant.
Echoing a similar view, Aditya Bhattacharjee of the Delhi School of Economics said that the Centre may be pro-trade but states are not on board and the government needs to ensure that its trade policy is in sync with economic policy, besides addressing the human capital issue that restricts India's potential.
 
S. Korea keeps importing fish from Japan after Fukushima disaster
SEJONG, May 22 (Yonhap) -- South Korea has imported more than 100,000 tons of fish from Japan even after the Fukushima nuclear disaster caused local consumers to shun products from the neighboring country due to health concerns, government data showed Friday.
According to the data by the Korea Customs Office (KCS), South Korea brought in 130,973 tons of fish products from Japan between March 2011, when a powerful earthquake and subsequent tsunami crippled a nuclear power plant, and last month, with their value topping US$420 million.
Reflecting health concerns, however, imports from Japan had been decreasing every year. In 2014, Japanese imports made up just 2.3 percent of all fishery products brought into the country, down from 7.6 percent in 2010.
A local poll conducted last year by the Korea Consumer Agency showed 92.6 percent of respondents still expressed health concerns about the nuclear disaster, with 52.9 percent saying products from Japanese fisheries were the most worrisome.
The government said South Koreans had bought fish from Japan because South Korea only banned imports from eight prefectures near Fukushima since September 2011. This measure was taken after the nuclear plant dumped large quantities of radioactive materials into the ocean.
The government also made it mandatory for all fish imports to be reported and compelled them to be screened for cesium and iodine, although products that had permissible traces of radiation were allowed into the country.
After September 2013, all fish that contained radioactive materials were returned.
The latest data came a day after Tokyo said it will formally raise an issue with the World Trade Organization (WTO) in regards to South Korea's import ban. Japanese officials have claimed they have called on the import ban to be lifted, but Seoul has yet to respond to the demand.
South Korean officials said Thursday that it is regrettable that Japan has taken such a step and made clear that the ban is aimed at protecting local consumers.
 
INTERVIEW-U.S. Steel to file 'several' anti-dumping complaints
By Maytaal Angel
LONDON, May 22 (Reuters) - U.S. Steel Corp said it is close to filing several anti-dumping complaints with U.S. authorities, adding it is still having to consider idling more plants because of difficult market conditions.
The Pittsburgh-based company has idled plants in Indiana, Illinois, Alabama, Texas, Ohio and Arkansas this year. It gave 'WARN' notices to 9,000 employees earlier this year, but has so far laid off only about 2,700 employees, meaning another 6,300 could lose their jobs if market conditions don't improve.
"The surge in imports is unprecedented. It's no longer a matter of if we're going to file, it's a matter of when," Chief Executive Mario Longhi told Reuters in London.
The U.S. steel industry is under huge pressure this year from cheap imports, a strong dollar, and from falling oil prices, which have decimated demand for steel tubes used by the oil and gas industry.
According to the American Iron and Steel Institute, importers supplied 31 percent of the US steel market in April, versus just 20 percent a year ago. U.S. steel prices <ST-CRUNAM-IDX> have dropped 21 percent this year.
"We are very diligently adjusting production to (meet) demand. We could see more plant closures," said Longhi.
About 15 percent of U.S. Steel's output involves making steel tubes, known as oil country tubular goods (OCTG), for the oil and gas industry, but the OCTG unit is fully supplied with raw product by another U.S. Steel unit.
"For us its a double whammy. We're not really producing any tubular goods at the moment," said Longhi.
Moody's lowered its outlook for the U.S. Steel sector to negative this month, saying selling prices have fallen rapidly this year to levels that will negatively affect steelmakers' profitability.
Meanwhile the battle to rebuff imports continues.
This month alone, U.S. steelmakers formally complained about Chinese producers circumventing import duties on steel plate, while the Commerce Department found dumping of welded line pipe from South Korea and Turkey.
U.S. steel producers demanded this month that the Commerce Department scrap a trade deal sparing Russian producers of carbon steel plate from import duties.
"I'd expect (US steel) production grows no more than 2 percent this year, and consumption (grows) about 2 percent. The market would be balanced without imports," said Longhi. (Editing by Susan Fenton)
 
EU anti-fraud office probing imports of Chinese solar panels
BRUSSELS, May 22 (Reuters) - The European Union's anti-fraud office is investigating producers and importers of Chinese solar panels on suspicion that they are evading import duties designed to ensure a fair market, according to a source familiar with the study.
The investigation is part of a series of challenges to Chinese solar equipment producers since the European Commission put in place in 2013 an arrangement allowing Chinese producers to sell into the EU at a minimum price.
EU ProSun, a grouping of EU producers, has complained that Chinese rivals have been getting around this and selling at lower prices by falsely claiming the product is not Chinese or by routing it via other countries not subject to tariffs.
Chinese solar modules not imported under the 2013 minimum price arrangement are subject to anti-dumping and anti-subsidy duties ranging from 33.7 to 64.9 percent.
The investigation by the EU anti-fraud office (OLAF) is "ongoing and well under way", the source familiar with the study said.
If OLAF establishes customs fraud it can recommend that EU member states recover the evaded duties from the EU importers concerned and possibly launch criminal prosecutions against importers who knowingly imported goods with false declarations.
Dutch tax inspectors in March carried out searches at a number of sites on suspicion an importer there had evaded duties of 65 percent, or 1.2 million euros ($1.3 million), by bringing in panels via free ports in Malaysia and Taiwan.
EU ProSun lodged a complaint with EU regulators in April, accusing Chinese producers of trying to dodge the import tariffs by dispatching panels via Malaysia and Taiwan and asking the European Commission to cut off these channels.
In 2013, OLAF detected a similar practice for Chinese screws and bolts, also subject to anti-dumping duties, which were sent to a free trade zone in Indonesia and then re-exported to the EU with documents claiming they were from Indonesia. ($1 = 0.8962 euros) (Reporting by Francesco Guarascio and Philip Blenkinsop; Editing by Mark Heinrich)
END




Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.