HEADLINES:
 
·         Govt to support domestic solar industry 
·         Foreign ﬁrms fear a nationalist China 
·         China Exports Mark Latest Soft Reading for Economy 
·         Farewell to the Era of No Fences 
·         Depreciating rupee to benefit Indian apparel exporters 
·         Trade pact a ‘shot in arm’ for Irish economy 
·         THE TPP IS ABOUT REMAINING COMPETITIVE 
·         Bill Shorten demands job safeguards for supporting China free trade deal 
 
Govt to support domestic solar industry 
Business Line (The Hindu), By M Ramesh, 8 September 2015 - May make up for losing the buy-local rule case at WTO Public sector companies may bring the sun out for the domestic solar manufacturing industry. “We are committed to supporting the domestic solar industry,” said Tarun Kapoor, Joint Secretary (Solar), Ministry of New and Renewable Energy. “We will find some ways of doing that,” Kapoor told BusinessLine recently.
India on the backfoot 
This assertion comes against the backdrop of India losing its case at the World Trade Organisation, against a mandatory buy-local rule, called ‘domestic content requirement’, or DCR. Under the DCR rule, the Ministry reserves a slice of the market for the domestic industry, making it mandatory for those who put up specified solar projects to use India-made cells in their plants. The US complained against this rule to the WTO and won. Asked for a comment on what India would do next, Kapoor said the WTO ruling had not yet come out officially, and he did not wish to comment on the basis of media reports. However, he stressed that the Centre would continue to support the domestic industry.
Not a big deal?
While Kapoor did not spell out the “means” of protecting the domestic industry, sources note that it wouldn’t be a big deal for the Centre to ask public sector undertakings to use locally made cells in their solar projects. They recall how the Centre in May 2014 had refrained from slapping anti-dumping duties on solar cells from the US, China, Taiwan and Malaysia, but assured the domestic industry that they would get support from PSUs. India has close to 1,400 MW of cell capacity and about 2,900 MW of module capacity (cells are used to make modules), which can be easily absorbed by PSUs. Large PSUs such as NTPC, ONGC and Coal India, and departments such as the Defence and the Railways, intend to put up several gigawatts of solar plants. In an e-mailed response to BusinessLine , Rhone Resch, President and CEO of US body Solar Energy Industries Association, observed that there are “a whole host of WTO-compliant incentives that India could rely on to help nurture its domestic solar manufacturing base”.
SEIA has welcomed the WTO decision, saying “global trade rules clearly prohibit localisation measures”.
‘PSUs, major drivers’
HR Gupta, Managing Director of IndoSolar Ltd, a member of the Indian Solar Manufacturers’ Association, believes that PSUs are “major drivers” of solar installations in the country. “They have land and access to capital,” he says. Pointing out that many other countries, “ironically including the US”, have a buy-local rule in some form or the other, Gupta observes that not supporting local manufacture would lead to a geo-political risk. “Eighty per cent of solar manufacture would be in the hands of two countries — China and Taiwan,” he said. India has a large solar programme and the year 2016-17 alone would see fresh installations of over 10,000 MW; largescale imports would then mean bloated payments outgo, warned Gupta. India has close to 1,400 MW of cell capacity and about 2,900 MW of module capacity, which could be easily absorbed by PSUs. NTPC, ONGC, Coal India are some PSUs that intend to put up several gigawatts of solar plants.
 
Foreign ﬁrms fear a nationalist China 
Washington Post.com, Simon Denyer, 8 September 2015, BEIJING — "Reform and opening up" was the slogan that guided China's economic transformation of the past three decades and its emergence as a major world power. Yet today, as China's economy slows and its politics turn increasingly nationalistic under President Xi Jinping, foreign businesses fear a new era could be underway.
It is an era, they say, when reform is still happening slowly and fitfully, but when doors may be closing rather than opening to foreign investment. As China's giant economy slows, Xi's government seems to be taking a more nationalist, protectionist approach to policymaking, while its handling of a stock market crash has raised fresh questions about its competence and attitude toward market forces.
The American business community here often boasts that the extensive economic ties between China and the United States form the bedrock of their broader relationship. Now, however, the mounting concerns will provide an uneasy backdrop when Xi pays an important state visit to the United States this month."They talk about reform, they in fact do reforms, but at the same time we see them closing up — they regress for foreign businesses and make it more difficult," said Joerg Wuttke, president of the European Chamber of Commerce in China."It gives a feeling that they are renovating the house, but we as foreign companies might not be able to move into the house," he said. In November 2013, at an important congress of China's top leaders known as the Third Plenum, Xi's government had encouraged foreign businesses by promising to allow market forces to play a "decisive role" in the economy. Now, some of that reform momentum has been lost, and the mood among foreign businesses has become more subdued, Wuttke said, summing up the results of a survey of his group's nearly 1,800 member companies. Increasingly, he said, companies were questioning or delaying investment decisions, and even laying off workers.
Wuttke said it was not clear whether China's top leaders were willing to take on powerful state-owned enterprises or the protectionist impulses of provincial governments in order to promote a more level playing field. "Do you have not only the vision, do you have the audacity to change, the political clout and guts to change?" he asked of China's leaders. Similar questions are being asked by U.S. companies. "The perception in the business community is that reform has stalled and doors may be closing to much-needed foreign investment," said James Zimmerman, chairman of the American Chamber of Commerce in China, arguing that Beijing needed to harness market forces rather than "turning inward for solutions to address a slowing economy." Optimism has been buffeted by the slowdown in China's economy, while confidence in its leadership to handle that slowdown has been shaken by its clumsy handling of a stock market crash and a currency devaluation in recent weeks, as well as by an explosion at a chemical warehouse in the city of Tianjin last month that killed at least 145 people. "The near-religious belief in the foreign business community of technocratic, enlightened decision-making by China's top leadership is being challenged by the kind of actions that recently took place," Wuttke said. After committing itself to the rule of law at another gathering of its top leaders in 2014, the Communist Party has this year introduced new national security legislation and a law to regulate nongovernmental organizations that have provoked widespread concern in the foreign business community, who fear the specter of national security could be used to justify protectionism.
"Yes, China needs a national security law, but the wording is so opaque and so vague that a lot of possible mergers by foreign business could be impossible," Wuttke said. "In the time of an economic slowdown, the last thing you need is legislative uncertainty." One of the frustrations that foreign companies face is that, as China tries to rebalance its economy, some of the most enticing market opportunities lie in service-sector industries — such as financial, health care, education and logistics. Yet those are sectors that tend to be dominated by state-owned companies and largely closed to foreign businesses.
In an Aug. 28 report, Zimmerman said U.S. service-sector companies faced many hurdles, including "regulatory ambiguity and unequal approval procedures, standards that favor domestic service providers, de-facto technology transfer requirements, and market access limitations." Wuttke said China's banks are some of the largest in the world and are aggressively opening branches in Europe — while China's domestic financial sector is still largely closed off to foreigners. Foreign companies have helped build the largest car market in the world in China in the past two or three decades, but they still face a web of restrictions on investment, equity ownership and procurement of parts, he said. There was optimism when China established a new Free Trade Zone in Shanghai in September 2013, but most of the benefits have flowed to local companies, business leaders say. The government's handling of the stock market this year also has dismayed foreign business leaders — first it talked up the market, helping to create a bubble, then it intervened heavily to prevent a crash, seeking scapegoats from hostile foreign forces to domestic brokers, from "malicious" short-sellers to a local journalist and even the U.S. Federal Reserve. "The stock market is a sad story," Wuttke said."They need a functioning stock market in order to get the money where business is. They need other avenues for Chinese citizens to invest. But it is going to take five to 10 years to make the stock market a credible financial vehicle for the economy." Wuttke said last month's blast in Tianjin has not done his industry any favors. "After Tianjin, when I go and say I want to build a chemical plant, the mayor says: 'Are you kidding me? Not in my back yard.' " 
 
China Exports Mark Latest Soft Reading for Economy 
Dow Jones Institutional News, 8 September 2015, BEIJING—Weaker demand for Chinese goods in most global markets led to a drop in exports for the second consecutive month, as the economy continued its struggle to regain momentum. China's exports fell 5.5% in August from a year earlier in dollar terms, after a drop of 8.3% in July, data from the General Administration of Customs showed Tuesday. Customs said in a statement that China's exports will continue to face "relatively big pressure" in the fourth quarter. Export weakness last month was broad-based, ANZ economist Li-Gang Liu said, with shipments to the U.S., HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union, Japan and Southeast Asia all down. Earlier this year, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization lowered its 2015 global trade forecast to 3.3% from 4%. Imports in August fell 13.8% in dollar terms from a year earlier, compared with a 8.1% decrease in July, fueling another significant trade gap, Customs said. China's trade surplus widened in August to $60.2 billion from $43.03 billion in July. The weak trade data mark the latest soft readout from the Chinese economy. Indicators of industrial production, financial services and factory and real-estate investment point to slowing growth in the second half of the year, raising questions about China's ability to meet its annual growth target of about 7% and denting investor confidence world-wide. Beijing last month devalued its currency in a surprise move that experts said was aimed at helping its struggling exporters. Lower currency values can help exports by reducing the price that buyers pay in foreign markets. So far, the devaluation has done little to help increase the nation's outbound trade, economists say, though they add it could take two to three months to have an impact. Larissa Braun, a spokeswoman at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Volkswagen AG's HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Volkswagen (China) Investment Co. affiliate, said the yuan devaluation has had a minor impact for the company. "We have a very high localization ratio which makes us rather independent" from short-term devaluation pressures, she said. The company also operates regional and group currency hedging centers that offer additional protection, Ms. Braun added. While August's trade figures were disappointing, the weakness isn't as bad as it looks, said research firm Capital Economics. A recent chemical explosion in the city of Tianjin and pollution-related factory closures tied to a major military parade in Beijing last week probably eroded trade volumes, it said. Strong exports a year earlier also made year-over-year comparison less favorable, while the sharp global drop in commodity prices makes imports look weak in dollar terms, the research group added in a report. "Trade has actually been quite healthy recently in volume terms," Capital Economics said. China said Monday that its foreign exchange reserves fell by a record $93.9 billion in August from July, the largest-ever decline in dollar terms, as the central bank intervened in an effort to prop up the yuan after the devaluation. Capital Economics estimates that about $130 billion worth of funds were transferred out of China in August compared with its estimate of $75 billion in outflows in July. In a statement over the weekend after a G-20 finance ministers meeting in Turkey, Chinese Finance Minister Lou Jiwei said "there is no basis for long-term depreciation" of the Chinese currency. Economic growth in China has remained weak despite five interest rate cuts and several reductions in required bank reserves since November. In further signs of a slowdown, China on Monday cut its 2014 growth rate to 7.3% from 7.4% due to a weaker contribution from the service sector than originally reported, suggesting that Beijing's effort last year to meet its official growth target of about 7.5% was more difficult than it appeared. In a bid to bring some stability to China's volatile stock markets and improve confidence in the government's economic management, Mr. Lou, China's finance minister, also said in the statement that economic growth would remain around 7% for the next four to five years and the stock market correction was nearly finished. Grace Zhu and Rose Yu contributed to this article.
 
Farewell to the Era of No Fences 
Bret Stephens, The Wall Street Journal, 8 September 2015 - This was supposed to be the Era of No Fences. No walls between blocs. No borders between countries. No barriers to trade. Visa-free tourism. The single market. A global Internet. Frictionless transactions and seamless exchanges. In short, a flat world. Whatever happened to that? In the early 1990s, Israel's then-Foreign Minister Shimon Peres published a book called "The New Middle East," in which he predicted what was soon to be in store for his neighborhood. "Regional common markets reflect the new Zeitgeist," he gushed. It was only a matter of time before it would become true in his part of the world, too. I read the book in college, and while it struck me as far-fetched it didn't seem altogether crazy. The decade from 1989 to 1999 was an age of political, economic, social and technological miracles. The Berlin Wall fell. The Soviet Union dissolved. Apartheid ended. The euro and Nafta were born. The first Internet browser was introduced. Oil dropped below $10 a barrel, the Dow topped 10,000, Times Square became safe again. America won a war in Kosovo without losing a single man in combat. Would Israeli businessmen soon be selling hummus and pita to quality-conscious consumers in Damascus? Well, why not? Contrast this promised utopia with the mind-boggling scenes of tens of thousands of Middle East migrants, marching up the roads and railways of Europe, headed for their German promised land. The images seem like a 21st-century version of the Volkerwanderung, the migration of nations in the late Roman and early Medieval periods. Desperate people, needing a place to go, sweeping a broad landscape like an unchanneled flood. How did this happen? We mistook a holiday from history for the end of it. We built a fenceless world on the wrong set of assumptions about the future. We wanted a new liberal order -- one with a lot of liberalism and not a lot of order. We wanted to be a generous civilization without doing the things required to be a prosperous one. In 2003 the political theorist HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Robert Kagan wrote a thoughtful book, "Of Paradise and Power," in which he took stock of the philosophical divide between Americans and Europeans. Americans, he wrote, inhabited the world of Thomas Hobbes, in which "true security and the defense and promotion of a liberal order still depend on the possession and use of military might." Europeans, by contrast, lived in the world of Immanuel Kant, in which "perpetual peace" was guaranteed by a set of cultural conventions, consensually agreed rules and a belief in the virtues of social solidarity overseen by a redistributive state. These differences didn't matter much as long as they were confined to panel discussions at Davos. Then came the presidency of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Barack Obama, which has adopted the Kantian view. For seven years, the U.S. and Europe have largely been on the same side -- the European side -- of most of the big issues, especially in the Mideast: getting out of Iraq, drawing down in Afghanistan, lightly intervening in Libya, staying out of Syria, making up with Iran. The result is our metastasizing global disorder. It's only going to get worse. The graciousness that Germans have shown the first wave of refugees is a tribute to the country's sense of humanity and history. But just as the warm welcome is destined to create an irresistible magnet for future migrants, it is also bound to lead to a backlash among Germans. This year, some 800,000 newcomers are expected in Germany -- about 1% of the country's population. Berlin wants an EU-wide quota system to divvy up the influx, but once the migrants are in Europe they are free to go wherever the jobs and opportunities may be. Germany (with 4.7% unemployment) is going to be a bigger draw than France (10.4%), to say nothing of Italy (12%) or Spain (22%). If Germany had robust economic and demographic growth, it could absorb and assimilate the influx. It doesn't, so it can't. Growth has averaged 0.31% a year since 1991. The country has the world's lowest birthrate. Tolerant modern Germany now looks with justified disdain toward the petty nationalism, burden-shifting and fence-building of the populist Hungarian government of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Viktor Orban. But it would be foolish to think of Hungary as a political throwback rather than as a harbinger. There is no such thing as a lesson from the past that people won't ignore for the sake of the convenience of the present. Is there a way out? Suddenly, there's talk in Europe about using military power to establish safe zones in Syria to contain the exodus of refugees. If U.S. administrations decide on adopting Kant, Europe, even Germany, may have no choice but to reacquaint itself with Hobbes by rebuilding its military and using hard power against unraveling neighbors. Europeans will not easily embrace that option. The alternative is to hasten the return to the era of fences. Openness is a virtue purchased through strength.
 
Depreciating rupee to benefit Indian apparel exporters 
dilip kumar jha, Business Standard, 8 September 2015 - Indian apparel exporters are likely to reap benefits of depreciating rupee against the dollar. Rupee has declined more than currencies of competing countries such as China, Vietnam and Bangladesh. Since Chinese currency – yuan – was first devalued on August 10, rupee has recorded its sharpest depreciation among its competitors including China, Vietnam and Bangladesh. Since August 10, rupee has depreciated by 4.63% to 66.83, while yuan (renminbi) is down 2.51% to 6.37 against the dollar as of Monday. Among other competing countries, Vietnamese dong slumped by 2.96% to 22468 against the dollar on Monday from 21823 dong on August 10. On the other had, Bangladesh's currency appreciated by a negligible 0.06% to 77.73 on Monday against the dollar from 77.78 on August 10. “Indian apparel will be more competitive. The quantum of competitiveness, however, would depend upon relative currency movement of the major apparel exporters such as China, Bangladesh and Vietnam,” said Rahul Mehta, President, Clothing Manufacturers’ Association of India (CMAI). Meanwhile, overseas buyers would immediately start re-negotiating terms of existing contracts. According to industry sources, drafts of new contracts mention renegotiation clause if rupee depreciates beyond 2-3%. An Icra study also says that the depreciation in rupee would benefit apparel exporters. But it adds that as yuan has also depreciated and given that China enjoys dominant position in international export markets, India would see increased pricing competition which will affect the profitability of Indian exporters. “However given that the rupee has depreciated more than that of other competing countries, and India’s share in overall trade is relatively small, we expect the export volumes may not be impacted severely. Fabric exports, on the other hand are geographically well diversified as against other segments in textile exports. Given the fragmented nature of India’s fabric industry, the Indian exporters will require to pass on the benefits of depreciated rupee by way of lower dollar price,” said the study. India’s cotton exporters would see improved competitiveness, being the second largest exporter of the natural fibre after the United States. Nevertheless, as China is the largest market for both cotton and cotton yarn exports from India, the higher devaluation of China’s Yuan will require Indian exporters to offer lower dollar prices for these products to maintain competitive prices in yuan terms. Meanwhile, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Cotton Textiles Export Promotion Council (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Texprocil) has urged the government to extend benefits for garments exporters to help them compete with players in the countries where India has free trade agreements (FTA). R K Dalmia, chairman of Texprocil, said that considering the infrastructural disabilities, cascading effect of un-rebated taxes, high cost of inputs and preferential benefits granted to our competitors, the government has to play an important role by continuing the export benefits for some more time. "The emergence of mega trade agreements being promoted by United States of America and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union amongst themselves and among other key trading partners like Korea, Vietnam and Japan also pose challenges to countries like India. It therefore would be best if India takes an integrated approach rather than an ad-hoc approach while negotiating new FTA or re-negotiating old ones," he added.
 
Trade pact a ‘shot in arm’ for Irish economy 
John Walsh, thetimes.co.uk, 8 September 2015 - A controversial new trade deal between Europe and America would have huge benefits for the Irish economy, a senior EU official has claimed.
David O’Sullivan, the EU ambassador to the United States, said that the transatlantic trade and investment pact (TTIP) would be “a powerful shot in the arm for Ireland as it rebuilds its economy on a more diversified, sustainable basis”. The proposed pact is far more comprehensive than previous deals and has provoked a backlash among organisations and trade unions.
Mr O’Sullivan, speaking in Dublin, said: “Free trade, unfortunately has become a politically divisive issue on both sides of the Atlantic, even in places that have benefited most from trade.”
He added that unfettered trade flows improved the economic performance of the countries involved. Mr O’Sullivan acknowledged that there were always winners and losers when trade was liberalised and it was important that each country adopted economic policies to adjust to the changes. Tom Healy, chief economist at the Nevin Economic Research Institute, a think tank supported by the Irish Congress of Trade Unions, told the seminar that he was against the pact, which the congress voted overwhelmingly to reject at its annual conference in July. He said the “investor state dispute settlement” (ISDS) clause in TTIP would enable international corporations to sue governments, undermining Ireland’s ability to regulate key sectors of the economy. TTIP would also impair a government’s ability to deliver public services because the pact contains a commitment to open all sectors of the economy to competition, he added. Mr Healy said the economic benefits of TTIP were “marginal at best” and might only create 5,000-10,000 extra Irish jobs. He said the negative consequences of the deal were potentially enormous. Mr O’Sullivan, who was director-general for trade at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Commission before he became ambassador in November, admitted that there were controversial elements to TTIP. “I am aware that there are people and organisations here that are less enthusiastic. This is not surprising coming on the back of a period of difficult austerity which made some people rightly resentful, like they were not at the Celtic Tiger party but somehow have ended up with the bill,” he said. “For this reason, the EU has gone out of its way to ensure an unprecedented level of transparency in these negotiations, at least on the European side, but that has not prevented the scare mongering. Mr O’Sullivan said that an ISDS clause was an essential part of any trade deal because it offered investors protection against changes in national law. Negotiations on the TTIP started in 2013 and are expected to conclude over the next 12 months. The pact will have to be approved by each EU member state as well as win a majority in the European parliament. Mr O’Sullivan said this would ensure that the final agreement would not contain any clauses that do not have widespread support.
“Let’s make it happen. The world is always a much better place when Europe and the United States work together. As vice-president Biden said, we are each other’s best friends of first resort,” he said.
“TTIP is not just a trade agreement. It is an important expression of trust between the EU and the United States as we work to deepen our relationship and project our common values in a dangerous world. If we fail to do that, more than our economic wellbeing will be at stake.” 
 
THE TPP IS ABOUT REMAINING COMPETITIVE 
The Marlborough Express, 8 September 2015 - A lot has been said about the proposed Trans Pacific Partnership (TPP) trade agreement and what it means for our country.
As a small, island nation, trade is incredibly important to New Zealand. We need to trade with other countries to ensure we are not left behind - after all, we can't get richer by selling to ourselves.
That means we need to be competitive. We need to keep up with rapidly changing international markets and we need to be able to respond to those changing needs in a more efficient manner to further our own economy. Over time, the way countries trade with each other has changed. Traditionally, products were made in one country and then sold to another, but this trade model is fast becoming less and less relevant.
Now, goods and services are made in "the world", with final products often being the result of inputs from multiple countries. New Zealand needs to be part of this rapidly changing landscape - for the betterment of our own future, we cannot be left behind. The TPP aims to create a regional free trade agreement involving 12 Asia Pacific countries: Australia, Brunei, Chile, Japan, Malaysia, Peru, Singapore, the United States, Vietnam, Mexico, Canada and New Zealand. Improved access to markets in Asia and the Pacific is vital to the growth of our economy. To put it into numbers, the 12 participating economies account for NZ$40 trillion in GDP and over 800 million potential customers for New Zealand. As these countries continue to grow and get wealthier - particularly those in Asia - their demand for high quality products increases.
The TPP trade agreement would provide much better access to these markets to help us take advantage of opportunities like this. This improved access would deliver massive benefits to our region: it will help us to diversify, create more jobs, lift incomes and build a more productive and competitive economy. I firmly believe the TPP will be hugely beneficial to our region's export industries, from the large wine and aquaculture industries to our smallest traders, if we are able to secure a deal. This is about getting the best possible deal for our country, not a deal at any cost. 
 
Bill Shorten demands job safeguards for supporting China free trade deal 
Daniel Hurst Political correspondent, The Guardian, 8 September 2015 - HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Tony Abbott says agreement ‘can’t be renegotiated’ and scuttling the deal would be ‘unconscionable’. Bill Shorten has spelled out Labor’s minimalist demands for supporting the China-Australia free trade agreement (Chafta) after HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Tony Abbott sought to put pressure on the opposition for considering the “unconscionable” option of scuttling the deal.
Abbott proposed a symbolic motion in the parliament on Tuesday to note the “enormous” potential of the agreement to deliver Australian jobs, growth and investment, and to “fully support” it in its negotiated form.
“It can’t be renegotiated. It is a done deal. It’s a deal that we either take or leave and I put it to the house that it would be absolutely unconscionable for us not to take the deal as negotiated by this government with the Chinese,” the prime minister told the lower house. Abbott’s motion was an attempt to pressure the Labor party over its yet-to-be-finalised stance on Chafta, amid a push by unions for the opposition HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" to fight provisions relating to foreign workers and easing of skills assessments. But Shorten, the Labor leader, proposed an amendment to the motion calling on the government to work with the parliament to legislate safeguards “which maximise job opportunities for Australian workers; protect overseas workers from exploitation and maintain Australian wages and conditions; and promote safety on Australian work sites by ensuring the skills and qualifications of temporary trades workers are of the highest standard”. Because the government holds a clear majority in the House of Representatives, Shorten’s amendment was defeated and Abbott’s unchanged motion was passed. In an energetic and defiant speech, Shorten insisted that the opposition’s concerns could be addressed in the yet-to-be-tabled enabling legislation without Canberra having to reopen negotiations with Beijing. “Let me be clear. Mr Abbott, we’re not asking you to go back to Beijing; we will come to your office, if that helps,” Shorten said. “Labor’s position is crystal clear and I repeat it again. Mandatory labour market testing for projects over $150m, an assurance that Australian skills and safety will be maintained and that Australian wages will not be undercut.” Labour market testing is a requirement that companies try to find local workers before seeking to hire people from overseas. Shorten’s comments indicate the opposition is focused on the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" memorandum of understanding that the government reached for Chinese-backed infrastructure development projects worth at least $150m. The document – which does not form part of the formal treaty but was negotiated at the same time – says no labour-market testing is required to enter into one of these overarching “investment facilitation arrangements”. But the memo leaves the door open for the immigration department to force the direct employers of overseas workers to do so. The government has argued employers will be required, as a matter of policy, to apply labour-market testing but Labor has suggested the assurances are inadequate and should be put beyond doubt in legislation. Abbott argued the implementation of Chafta would not require any legislation to change the Fair Work Act or immigration laws. The only bills required, he said, were to change tariff laws “so there’s no changes to the protections for workers”.
But the government’s national interest analysis document says that “in order to implement the obligations in Chafta in Australia” the issuing of a determination under the Migration Act “is required in relation to labour market testing”. The trade minister, Andrew Robb, said the claims advanced by unions were “a con” and the government would consider negotiation with Labor “when you come up with something of substance”.
“No one except those opposite and the CFMEU supports any of the propositions that you say are weaknesses of this agreement – not one person,” Robb said. Robb said scuttling the deal would inflict “monumental” damage on Australia’s relationship with China. The treasurer, Joe Hockey, said China was undergoing an economic transition and had “massive policy priorities” so it would not return to the negotiating table. Abbott lauded the deal as “by far the best agreement that China has done with any significant developed economy” and reminded the parliament that it had been “10 years in making” with negotiations involving both sides of politics. He underlined the benefits, saying more than 95% of Australia’s exports to China would enter without any tariffs. But Labor speakers launched a full-throttle attack on Abbott’s approach, insisting the prime minister was spoiling for a fight. Labor also argued Abbott was “no John Howard” – a reference to Howard’s HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" approach to amending legislation to secure the US free trade agreement in 2004.
Shorten said Abbott’s motion was “the ultimate hollow resolution of the ultimate hollow man”, noting that it pre-empted a report by the joint standing committee on treaties due next month. The related legislation was yet to presented to parliament. “You are the opposition leader in exile. You were never so happy as when you were sitting here, I think,” Shorten told Abbott, referring to the opposition leader’s chair.
“You should sit down and talk about our serious legitimate concerns. If you’ve got time to play games like this stunt you’ve got more than enough time to negotiate with the opposition … You are a good man at being stubborn, but you confuse it with strength … Grow up, Mr Abbott, and do your day job.” The deputy Labor leader and foreign affairs spokeswoman, Tanya Plibersek, said Abbott was focused on “weak, empty rhetoric” and “would rather pick a fight than get a result”. Plibersek said there were “weaknesses in this agreement” and she held concerns over the investor-state dispute settlement mechanism that allowed companies to take action against the government. “We have said for many years that this agreement would be critical to Australia’s future but we want an agreement that delivers for China and Australia,” she said.
Chafta is HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" at the centre of an intense political dispute as a number of unions, including the CFMEU and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Electrical Trades Union, campaign against the agreement and side deals on the basis of provisions relating to foreign workers and trade skills assessment. The government has characterised those campaigns as misleading and xenophobic and accused Labor of “economic sabotage”. In a sign the union campaigning is resonating in the community, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Business Council of Australia announced on Monday it was launching advertisements “in support of the most important bilateral trade deal Australia has ever done”. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" The National Farmers’ Federation, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Minerals Council of Australia and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry (ACCI) have previously launched a joint campaign supporting the deal. The chief executive of ACCI, Kate Carnell, said the text of the deal “warrants proper scrutiny” but “a drawn-out debate makes it tougher for Australian businesses to carry out their China export plans with confidence”. “The Labor party must not cower in the face of a union campaign of misinformation,” she said on Tuesday. “The federal Labor party should listen to the senior Labor figures who have backed Chafta, including state leaders, former ministers and even a former prime minister.” 
 
END


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.