We’ll push for fair deals at world trade talks, says Amina
Trade Talks in Nairobi Can Deliver a Transformed World 
US calls time on Doha trade negotiations
Doha has failed: we need a new type of global trade deal; OPINION
Convergence ‘elusive’ on safeguard measures at WTO
Kenya beefs up security ahead of WTO ministerial conference
US urges vigilance as Kenya hosts WTO conference
India Aims to Pour Out Its Sugar on the world
What Really Sank Brazil; The media blame oil prices. The true culprit is years of antigrowth policies.
China, U.S. relationship key in climate agreement
Paris climate deal: the world's greatest diplomatic success
 
We’ll push for fair deals at world trade talks, says Amina
By AGGREY MUTAMBO
Daily Nation, Nairobi
Kenyan farmers — may they be coffee, tea, or sugar growers — stand to gain little from the World Trade Organisation meeting which starts in Nairobi on Monday.
The 10th ministerial conference of the WTO is being attended by 3,000 delegates and Kenya is hoping that it will tackle issues to do with barriers to international trade, regulations on sensitive technology and agricultural subsidies paid by rich countries to their farmers.
A brief by the Kenyan delegation headed by Foreign Affairs Principal Secretary Karanja Kibicho shows that Kenya will seek “reduction of distortions in international agricultural trade, non-agricultural market access (Nama) and trade in services”.
“The WTO has a litany of sensitive issues to tackle, ranging from rules for agricultural products to the position of developing and least developed countries,” the brief states, arguing that despite Africa having half of its population as small-holder farmers, it still imports 83 per cent of food.
In Kenya, agriculture directly employs seven out of 10 people and the brief states that accessing markets for their produce is key to national development strategy.
LOST CAUSE
But fair trade campaigners are not convinced.
First, campaigning against subsidies in Europe, America and Japan is a lost cause.
Subsidies are issues of domestic politics and few politicians have the stomach for a fight with their farmers.
Activists are also not certain that Kenya’s rather woolly agenda strongly represents the interests of tens of millions of impoverished farmers and even if it did whether the rich countries are interested in solving other people’s problems.
For example, in the case of coffee, which involved the outright theft of Kenyan farmers’ value by multinational farmers in cahoots with local elites, there is no specific effort to address countries which unfairly benefit from the sweat of coffee growers.
WTO is big on intellectual property, but Kenya is unlikely to make any specific efforts to demand royalties from reputable companies which profit from the brand value of Kenyan coffee free of charge.
HIGH TARIFFS FOR PROCESSED GOODS
But it is products such as tea which expose the hypocrisy of rich countries claiming they want to help poor countries but escalate tariffs for processed products.
Making it easy for poor countries to add value to agricultural products would have ensured that farmers are paid more and jobs are created.
By last evening, 100 heads of delegations had already touched down.
The meeting, christened MC10,  brings together commerce and trade ministers or their representatives from the 162 member countries of the WTO.
Activists and trading blocs such as Comesa or the East African Community will also be represented in the meeting.
“During the conference, developing countries are expected to argue for the review of agricultural subsidies, offered by developed nations to their farmers, which create an unfair trade environment for farmers in poorer nations,” says the Kenyan brief.
The Kenyan delegation argues that it is these subsidies that killed the Kenyan cotton sector.
But negotiations on these issues known as the Doha Round of Talks seem to have stalled as developing and developed countries pull away.
“Whatever we do, we have to have the interests of the businessmen. How are the businessmen going to benefit from this agreement? If they are not going to benefit from it we don’t support the agreement,” Mr Nelson Ndirangu, the Director of Economic Affairs and International Trade at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs told the Nation on Sunday.
He went on: “If we are talking about selling tilapia to Europe for example, we will be fighting for sanitary measures that will allow you to sell easily to Europe.
“When we are discussing those standards, we don’t want to arrive at standards which are unattainable. They have to be standards that our people can meet because first and foremost is the business interests of our people.”

Not everyone is convinced that local farmers will be saved by the conference.
“The fact remains that the global trading system favours the rich countries. And where there have been opportunities for the countries in the south to take advantage of the trading system, we simply have not been able to do so,” argues Kenya’s former ambassador to the US Elkanah Odembo.
He continues: “The G7, without exception, will continue to subsidise their farmers, and agricultural systems. They will continue to do so because it makes local political and economic sense. Global trading systems cannot compete with local realities in the G7 countries.”
During the run-up to the conference, Kenya had reached out to the group to relax the subsidies in the interest of levelling the playing field in international trade. Mr Odembo, who served in Washington during the Mwai Kibaki regime, argued the subsidies determine political survival for leaders in the West.
Yesterday, activists under the umbrella of Social Movement Working Group against WTO charged that Kenya and Africa as a whole should pull out of the WTO because they have been getting a raw deal.
“Seeking to push issues like Trade Facilitation will not address the skewed nature of the WTO agreements as they will only serve to facilitate the multinationals to continue dominating the fragile Kenyan market at the expense of local entrepreneurs,” the activists said in a statement last evening.
The Working Group, which includes Kenyan and international NGOs, charge that the issues Kenya is  proposing are more market-driven and not driven by the urge to protect local farmers and consumers.
Foreign Affairs CS Amina Mohamed, who will chair the conference, admitted the flaws in the WTO but argued the conference offers a chance to better it.
“We have taken a lot of time on these issues and hopefully we will not take the time that is longer than it is prescribed. We expect a good outcome. We expect it to be a realistic outcome and we expect it to be an implementable outcome.
“It is time to modernise the WTO. It is time the WTO became the centre of multilateral negotiations. We haven’t had proper time to do business within the WTO,” she told a press conference at the KICC.

Trade Talks in Nairobi Can Deliver a Transformed World 
by Amina Mohamed
14 December 2015
All Africa
Dec 13, 2015 (allAfrica.com/All Africa Global Media via COMTEX) -- After a long and winding journey that started when the World Trade Organization first chose Nairobi as the venue for its 10th Ministerial Conference, known by the acronym MC10, the time has come for us to actualize the dream of hosting the world in Africa. The meeting kicks off on Tuesday in Nairobi, where we expect to receive thousands of visitors.
It has been a year of hard work and tough negotiations. It has been a year of give-and-take as more than 160 member countries weighed in on diverse trade issues, asking what will work best for different members and for the world.
It hasn't been easy; there is still a lot of ground to be covered in the coming week. But I am glad that we have kept an unequivocal focus on making sure that trade plays a powerful role as an instrument of growth in the world. That work will be taken to the next level in Nairobi, where we hope for a binding agreement on diverse issues that will impact world trade for many years to come.
While the conference is taking place in Nairobi, it is important to underline that this is not just about Kenya. It is about Africa. Nairobi will be flying the flag for the whole continent at this, the first meeting of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO in Africa at this level.
Having the meeting here underlines that Africa has come of age. The tremendous growth the continent has registered in the last decade has shown that we are truly ready for business. In Nairobi, delegates will witness for themselves the story of Africa rising. (We hope they will also find time to enjoy the beauty and the warmth that this continent offers.)
On substantive matters, we have faith in the work that has been done throughout the year and hope that delegates will have the courage to agree and deliver on diverse issues that will have major ramifications for global trade.
Africa has big hopes on issues that touch on areas of agriculture and development. For instance, we hope for good results on measures of export compensation for agriculture as well as measures that boost the capacity of the least developed countries to trade.
In September this year, the world met in New York and adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, hailed as an integrated and transformative vision for a new and better world. United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon called the goals set there an "agenda for people, to end poverty in all its forms."
Those goals see trade as a fundamental element of the transformation they aim to bring about. In this, the year of their launch, we hope that the vibrancy and the youth that permeate all facets of life in Africa can offer new impetus to the delegates at MC10 in Nairobi to deliver a transformative declaration for the world.
By doing so, they will underscore the important role of trade and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO in building a firm foundation for employment and wealth creation for all people. These are important components of the massive reduction of poverty envisioned in the sustainable development goals.
On behalf of Kenya and all of Africa, it will be a tremendous honour to welcome the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO delegates home to mother Africa. We hope they will enjoy their stay and will deliver the results we need and expect.
Ambassador Amina Mohamed is Kenya's Cabinet Secretary for Foreign Affairs and International Trade.
All Africa Global Media
US calls time on Doha trade negotiations
Shawn Donnan, World Trade Editor
13 December 2015
Financial Times (FT.Com)
The US has for the first time publicly called for HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" the Doha Round of global trade negotiations to be abandoned, arguing that after almost a decade and a half of fruitless discussions, developing and developed nations alike needed to recognise they were going nowhere and that it was time to try new approaches.
Writing in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Financial Times ahead of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" World Trade Organisation’s biennial ministerial meeting in Nairobi this week, Mike Froman, the US trade representative, said that 14 years after it was launched the Doha Round “simply has not delivered”.
“We need to write a new chapter for the [HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO] that reflects today’s economic realities,” Mr Froman said. “It is time for the world to free itself of the strictures of Doha.”
The US call sets the stage for an acrimonious showdown in Nairobi this week over the future of the Doha Round and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO itself that is likely to overshadow a push for a smaller agreement on a narrow range of agriculture and development issues.
It also highlights what has become an uncomfortable paradox in the world of trade negotiations. While negotiators at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO have in recent years stepped up their efforts to revive the Doha Round, the belief of most people in the global business community is that it died a painful and final death in 2008 amid a stalemate over agriculture between developed and developing nations.
The US and others have also turned their focus in recent years to new regional negotiations such as the recently concluded Trans-Pacific Partnership, which included the US, Japan and 10 other economies.
Still, many in the developing world continue to cling to the Doha negotiations.
Countries such as Brazil, China and India and many of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO’s African members insist the round needs to continue, because the Doha Development Agenda, as it is formally known, includes issues of vital importance to poorer countries, such as efforts to rein in agricultural subsidies in rich economies like the US and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU.
“It has been a long time. I know people are tired. But it is still very important to conclude the round from an African perspective,” Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, the president of Liberia, which is poised to become a member of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO in Nairobi, told the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Financial Times.
In the lead up to this week’s gathering, other big advanced economies such the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU and Japan have sided with the US in its push for a new approach to negotiations after the Nairobi meeting and a shift to more focused discussions on specific sectors rather than a monolithic global agreement.
Although those advanced economies and other supporters such as Australia and New Zealand, represent a majority of the global economy and world trade, they remain a minority in the 160-member HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO, in which decisions are made by consensus.
Not all advanced economies are as radical in their approach as the US. “It is almost paranoia. [The US] really want to, in a way, erase Doha from the hard disk of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO,” said one senior European trade official.
But for the US the push for change also reflects what it sees as rising competition with China, which overtook the US as the world’s largest trading nation in 2014.
Beyond the frustration of President Barack Obama and others with the stasis in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO, many in Washington also see the Doha rules of engagement as outdated, particularly with regard to China. Beijing, US officials argue, now has the biggest farm subsidy program in the world. And yet under Doha it is considered a developing economy and so would not have to cut any subsidies in the event of a deal even as the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU and US would be forced into slashing their programmes.
In his FT article, Mr Froman argues that the world has become very different since the Doha Round was launched.
“Getting it unstuck begins with acknowledging that Doha was designed in a different era, for a different era, and much has changed since,” Mr Froman says.
The Financial Times Limited (AAIW/EIW)
Doha has failed: we need a new type of global trade deal; OPINION
By Michael Froman
14 December 2015
Financial Times
This week trade ministers from around the world will gather to engage once again in the Doha Round of talks which, for all the initial hopes it represented, simply has not delivered. If global trade is to drive development and prosperity as strongly this century as it did in the last, we need to write a new chapter for the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation that reflects today's economic realities. It is time for the world to free itself of the strictures of Doha.
While these talks have drifted, other efforts have raced ahead. Leading a group of 12 nations, the US recently concluded the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which raises standards and tackles emerging issues across nearly 40 per cent of the global economy. Meanwhile, the US and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU are moving forward with the world's largest bilateral agreement. Trade initiatives outside the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO have become the norm, with hundreds of agreements signed by scores of countries since Doha was launched.
Experience, however, suggests that the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO can deliver with pragmatic approaches. Ratification of the Trade Facilitation Agreement , which would benefit developing countries even more than rich ones by streamlining the flow of goods across borders, is within reach. An expansion of the Information Technology Agreement promises to eliminate hundreds of tariffs on $1tn of technology products, from MRI machines to semiconductors. Also encouraging is progress on an agreement that would liberalise trade in environmental goods.
So, two-way deals are working. Regional pacts are working. Groups of countries have struck sectoral deals. Only multilateralism - the attempt to reach a comprehensive global deal - is stuck. Getting it unstuck begins with acknowledging that Doha was designed in a different era, for a different era, and much has changed since.
When Doha was launched in 2001, the focus was on US and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU agricultural subsidies, which have since been cut. Now, some emerging markets are the biggest providers of agricultural subsidies but would be exempt under Doha from cuts. If you are a poor farmer facing a global market distortion, it does not matter where the subsidies causing it came from. Artificial distinctions between developed and emerging economies make no economic sense.
Today, Doha negotiations remain deadlocked. After 14 years, including the past two years of intensified engagement, there is no light at the end of the tunnel. Cecilia Malmström, EU trade commissioner, and many others have been clear about the need to chart a more productive path.
That route forward is a new form of pragmatic multilateralism. Moving beyond Doha does not mean leaving its unfinished business behind. Rather, it means bringing new approaches to the table. Doha issues are too important to leave to the Doha architecture that has failed for so long.
Freeing ourselves from the strictures of Doha would also allow us to explore emerging trade issues. Many developing countries have encouraged new discussions on issues like ecommerce and the needs of small businesses.
One way or the other, this week's HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO ministerial conference in Nairobi will mark the end of an era. The US is still working to secure a package of measured but meaningful results, but what cannot be achieved in Nairobi will not be achieved by trying again with the same failed approach. Pretending otherwise would intensify the search for solutions outside the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO, raising questions about its relevance in trade negotiations.
With global growth slowing and uneven and many traditional economic tools constrained, trade policy has an outsize role to play in spurring inclusive growth. Multilateralism still promises the greatest economic gains in theory. To realise those gains in practice, we need the courage to look, think, and act beyond Doha.
The writer is the United States trade representative
The Financial Times Limited 
Convergence ‘elusive’ on safeguard measures at WTO
Amiti Sen
14 December 2015
Business Line (The Hindu)
Preparatory meeting for Nairobi Ministerial talks fails to generate results Attempts for a breakthrough on a special safeguard mechanism to protect poor farmers against an indiscriminate rise in imports spearheaded by India and other developing countries of the G-33 alliance have failed to yield results.
Agriculture negotiations Chairman Vangelis Vitalis of New Zealand reported no convergence on the issue of special safeguard mechanism (SSMs) as well as public stockholding — both important to India — at the last informal meeting in Geneva on December 11, an official involved in the negotiations told BusinessLine .
Further negotiations will now take place in Nairobi at the December 15-18 WTO Ministerial Conference, but the fight before developing countries seems to be tough with opposing members refusing to relent.
Strong opposition
“In order to reach a consensus, the G-33 had further refined its proposal on SSMs some time back suggesting that safeguards need not apply on all farm items but only on products designated with SSM symbols in the schedules of developing countries. This proposal is similar to the existing safeguard mechanism used by many developed countries and should have logically been accepted,” the official said
Unfortunately for the G-33, its logic does not seem to be working with those opposing the SSM proposal. The proposal was rejected outright by agriculture exporting countries Brazil and Argentina, while others such as the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU and Norway stated that there is very little time to discuss it.
In Nairobi, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members will attempt to take a decision on how to proceed with the ongoing Doha Development Round that has not delivered many tangible results over the past 14 years, while reaching an agreement on a small package of issues.
There is, however, no clarity yet on what that package would contain.
Protection for farmers
India and 44 other countries, that form the G-33, have demanded that they be extended a SSM that would allow them to raise tariffs on farm goods to protect small and vulnerable farmers against sharp rise in imports or steep fall in global prices.
Since many developed members such as Australia, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU, Norway, Iceland and Japan already have access to such protection under the special safeguards rule, the developing countries argue that their poor farmers, too, need to be protected against abnormalities.
Another important issue
Finding a ‘permanent solution’ to the problem of ensuring subsidies given under public stockholding do not get penalised at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO — another important issue for India — may also be difficult at Nairobi, as Vitalis stated.
The Chair gave a slightly more positive assessment on export competition under which members are trying to put in place timelines for scrapping of export subsidies.
Kasturi & Sons Ltd
Kenya beefs up security ahead of WTO ministerial conference
Ding Xiaoxi
13 December 2015
Xinhua News Agency
NAIROBI, Dec. 13 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xinhua) -- Kenyan authorities announced that elaborate security measures have been put in place to ensure that the four-day HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) Ministerial Conference, which will kick off in Nairobi on Tuesday, is incident-free.
Nairobi Police Commandant Japheth Koome said security has been enhanced in Nairobi and its environs, noting that some roads will be closed to ensure that the meeting is not disrupted by militants from Somalia or criminals from Kenya.
Koome said the security officers are committed to ensuring the security of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO conference and all security officers are under firm instruction to remain vigilant at all times.
"We will get reinforcement from other counties and we shall be working together with other forces such prisons, intelligence, Kenya police, CID (Criminal Investigation Department), among others," he told journalists in Nairobi.
This will be the first ever Ministerial Conference of the WTO to be held in Africa since the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO entered into force in 1995. An estimated 5,000 delegates are expected to attend the conference, half of whom will be foreigners.
Koome said traffic police will be in place to direct motorists. The roads that may be affected by the disruptions are those near Kenyatta International Conference Centre and hotels where the delegates are staying.
He also said more police patrols and checks have been enhanced.
The police commander has called on motorists to cooperate with police officers and said that those with businesses located along the affected roads would be allowed entry after a thorough search, adding that no vehicular traffic will be permitted.
As some delegates may venture to other places, Koome said security will also be extended to the national parks and social places.
He said the security agencies have been mobilized and briefed to ensure that there is maximum security during and after the conference since some delegates may decide to visit tourist sites.
President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Uhuru Kenyatta is expected to officially open the meeting that seeks to liberalize world trade, while developing nations seek better terms for their goods meant for export markets in the developed worlds.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO officially commended in 1995, taking over from the now defunct General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
As of Nov. 13, the global trade body had at least 162 members while two more countries, Liberia and Afghanistan, are expected to join the body.
Xinhua News Agency
US urges vigilance as Kenya hosts WTO conference
13 December 2015
BBC Monitoring Africa
Text of report by Kevin J. Kelley entitled "HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" US State Department urges vigilance as Nairobi hosts WTO conference" published by Kenyan privately-owned newspaper Daily Nation website on 13 December
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" US State Department Friday [11 December] issued a special travel alert regarding the World Trade Organization Ministerial Conference scheduled to take place in Nairobi from 15 to 18 December.
"As with all large public events, there is the opportunity for criminal elements to target participants and other visitors," the alert warns.
"Large-scale public events, such as the WTO conference, can be a target for terrorists. US citizens should maintain a high level of security awareness."
Kenyan officials are unlikely to respond positively to the latest US suggestion of the need for caution to foreigners travelling to the country.
Tourism Cabinet Secretary Najib Balala has said he anticipates that the WTO event will inject about 2.6bn shillings into the economy.
The State Department's alert will probably not dissuade most US citizens who are planning to come to Nairobi for the WTO conference.
But it does serve as another expression of high-level concern about the safety of visitors to Kenya.
The State Department also urged Americans intending to take part in WTO events to "factor updated information into personal travel plans and activities."
As has been the case with previous WTO meetings, "protests, rallies, and demonstrations could occur with little notice," the latest alert states.
"US citizens should exercise vigilance when in public places or using public transportation," the State Department advises.
"Be aware of your immediate surroundings and avoid large crowds and crowded places."
The travel alert further notes that road closures, hotel room shortages and restricted movement in Nairobi's Central Business District [CBD] are anticipated at the time of the conference.
"The already congested CBD will see up to 5,000 official WTO delegates," the alert says.
"Be prepared for additional security screening and unexpected disruptions, particularly in central Nairobi," the notice further urges.
Source: Daily Nation website, Nairobi, in English 13 Dec 15
The British Broadcasting Corporation


India Aims to Pour Out Its Sugar on the world
By Vibhuti Agarwal
14 December 2015
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
NEW DELHI -- India is planning to unload a mountain of sugar on the world, and traders say the controversial move could knock the wind out of a global sugar market that is already grappling with a glut.
Five years of bumper crops have led to a giant sugar stockpile in India. The country's sugar refineries have been sitting on the sugar, waiting to slowly sell it in the Indian market, where they get a higher price thanks to import restrictions and government support.
But in a move aimed at appeasing the South Asian nation's politically powerful sugar-cane farmers, New Delhi is demanding that refiners release at least 4 million tons of that sugar onto international markets by September next year.
If that much sweetener hits the world, it could reduce sugar prices by 15%, traders say. Sugar prices hit seven-year lows in August before regaining some ground in recent months.
"The possible additional tons of stocks that India looks like it will now export to the global market will dampen global prices," said Tom McNeill, director at Green Pool, an Australia-based sugar and biofuels consultancy.
The news has already hurt sentiment, but traders say they are waiting to see if the sugar really leaves India and whether the market will be in better shape by then.
Lower prices are good news for consumers and food and beverage companies but bad news for the world's big refiners and exporters like Brazil and Thailand.
"Further supplies from India could mean trouble for other producers," said David Sadler, a sugar analyst with London-based brokerage ADM Investor Services.
India is the world's second-biggest consumer and producer of sugar after Brazil, but it rarely exports much thanks to robust local demand and government controls. Historically, it has usually exported about a million tons a year.
An outflow of 4 million tons from India could flood the global market, representing about 8% of the total 50 million tons of sugar traded last year. India's stockpiles have climbed to 9.6 million tons.
India is pushing mills to sell sugar on the international market and use the proceeds to clear huge debts they owe farmers for sugar cane. New Delhi has offered to give refiners a bonus for every ton of sugar they export. It has also given sugar mills an ultimatum, saying they have to reach the target of 4 million tons of exports by the end of September 2016. The country's Department of Food and Public Distribution suggested mills would be punished if they didn't meet the target but didn't specify how.
Many countries protect their sugar farmers and support sugar prices with subsidies and price controls. Unworried about demand, the farmers are producing more sugar than their countries, or the world, needs.
Global sugar refiners have called for rolling back all sugar subsidies in favor of a free market. The lobbying group Global Sugar Alliance, which represents refiners in most of the world's biggest exporting countries, says it will be using this week's HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization talks in Nairobi to campaign against subsidies.
"The price of sugar globally has gone down every time [the Indian government] made an announcement" about interfering with the sugar market, said Greg Beashel, chief executive officer of Australian marketing body Queensland Sugar Ltd. "These seemingly innocuous statements are causing prices to dip world-wide, and that's a real concern that the market can be manipulated."
Weakening local currencies and government measures in Brazil and Thailand have boosted output and exports in those countries just as China and Indonesia are importing less as their economies slow. Global stocks of the sweetener are estimated to be around 40 million tons, according to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" U.S. Agriculture Department.
The Thai government controls its country's sugar production and distribution by subsidizing its farmers, spending more than $1 billion a year while requiring them to export up to 80% of the production. Brazil spends more than $2.5 billion on supporting sugar production through loan programs.
The Indian government guarantees a minimum price for sugar-cane farmers. However, sugar refiners, which have to buy the cane at the artificially high prices that are well above global averages, are buying less because they have such large stockpiles. The government is hoping that if it can get rid of the sugar excess through exports, the refiners will start buying again.
"The idea is to move the entire surplus out of the Indian system," said Yatin Wadhwana, country head of Sucden India, one of the world's top sugar traders.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service
Dow Jones & Company, Inc. 
What Really Sank Brazil; The media blame oil prices. The true culprit is years of antigrowth policies.
By Mary Anastasia O’Grady
13 December 2015
The Wall Street Journal Online
It's easy to blame plummeting oil prices for the economic crisis in Brazil. It's also wrong. Brazil's wounds are self-inflicted by an antigrowth policy mix dating back to 2008. The results were predictable.
The Brazilian economy contracted a whopping 4.5% in the third quarter from a year earlier. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" International Monetary Fund forecasts that for 2015 Brazil's gross domestic product will shrink by 3% and another 1% in 2016. That follows flatline growth in 2014.
In September, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Standard & Poor's stripped the country of its investment-grade rating. On Wednesday HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Moody's said that it is contemplating a similar downgrade of Brazil's debt. The annual inflation rate at the end of November was 10.5% and CIBC Capital Markets forecasts a fiscal deficit this year of 10.5%.
The international news media blame the Brazilian bust on oil prices brought low by a strong dollar and a slump in global demand. But Brazil is one of the most closed economies in the G-20, and its goods exports as a percentage of GDP in 2014 were only 10.5%. Mexico's were 18.24%, according to CIBC Capital Markets. All Latin American commodity exporters are feeling the oil and commodity downturn but none has been laid low quite like Brazil. Chile and Peru, giant commodity exporters, are still growing. Moreover, lower commodity prices also offset the high cost of doing business in Brazil. In 2014, 40% of Brazilian imports were linked to commodities, including fertilizer, gasoline, aluminum for steelmaking, and sweet crude.
A decade ago there was reason to hope that greater Brazilian prosperity was just around the corner. Such optimism hinged on the economic, fiscal and monetary reforms introduced by President Fernando Henrique Cardoso from 1995-2002.
President Lula da Silva of the Workers' Party (PT) took office in 2003. His personal history as a militant labor-union leader and disciple of Fidel Castro panicked markets. To stop the stampede to the exits he pledged not to mess with central bank autonomy or the stability of the Brazilian real, and not to radically alter economic policy.
Geanluca Lorenzon, the chief operating officer of the Mises Brazil Institute in São Paulo, told me in a telephone interview last week that Mr. da Silva even deepened the government's commitment to fiscal restraint for a time. But in 2008, in his second term, the global financial crisis hit Brazil. And he buckled.
Mr. Lorenzon says Mr. da Silva turned to stimulus spending, while the central bank, supposedly autonomous, began to allow higher inflation as a way of boosting growth.
For a political culture predisposed to abuse government power, breaking the rules established during the Cardoso government—which were designed to constrain that power—triggered a return to bad behavior.
Since the 1960s Brazil has pursued industrialization through high levels of protectionism and subsidies for domestic producers. The failure of that strategy is manifest. But letting uncompetitive businesses fail had political costs that Mr. da Silva and his successor, President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Dilma Rousseff, weren't willing to pay.
Instead they increased protectionism and subsidies, and rapidly expanded credit through the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Brazilian Development Bank (BNDES) and other state-owned banks. They also financed large government deficits with mostly domestic borrowing. The deficits were exacerbated by the tripling of the civil service during the PT governments and unjustified increases in the minimum wage and welfare and retirement benefits.
The Mises Institute Brazil noted in a Nov. 2010 website post that from May 2009 to September 2010, total credit expanded 25%. Not coincidentally, in 2010 Brazil grew 7.5% but not, as is well understood now, because of productivity gains. Looking back on the misallocation of capital, the institute wrote this February that “what really happened is that the Brazilian economy was kept lively by new and increasing doses of state credit."
The BNDES credit was cheap for the politically connected companies that the government wanted to save, but it has cost the nation. Subsidized credit also went to households. Mr. Lorenzon told me that currently the average Brazilian family is carrying an annual debt-service burden equal to 46% of its income. Currently the government's largest real-estate lending program has a default rate of almost 22%.
To salvage its loans to domestic companies Brazil has raised import duties and promoted consumption of made-in-Brazil products. This has damaged innovation and development. Large offshore oil reserves aren't likely to be developed as long as investors are hamstrung by Brazilian content rules requiring their equipment to be made domestically.
Brazil is reaping the fruits of a national industrial policy that cannot produce growth and prosperity. The credit bubble has burst. Consumers, businesses and government won't get back to even without a painful adjustment. Don't pin it on oil prices.
Dow Jones & Company, Inc.
China, U.S. relationship key in climate agreement
Julie Makinen, Chris Megerian
From the Los Angeles Times
13 December 2015
latimes.com
BEIJING — After the December 2009 Copenhagen climate talks descended into chaos, some of the sharpest finger-pointing was directed at China.
Despite being the world's largest emitter of greenhouse gases, Beijing didn't send Premier HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Wen Jiabao to the final discussions, leaving leaders including President Obama and German Chancellor HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Angela Merkel to negotiate with an official who frequently left the room to phone his superiors. The Chinese pushed to remove specific targets on emissions cuts — even those that would only apply to advanced industrialized countries and not itself.
“China wrecked the talks … and insisted on an awful ‘deal' so Western leaders would walk away carrying the blame,” British environmental author Mark Lynas, who was with one of the national delegations, wrote in a fly-on-the-wall account.
What a difference six years makes: Obama and Chinese President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xi Jinping appeared side by side at the start of this year's Paris climate-change talks. And on Saturday, as global leaders congratulated themselves on reaching an agreement, the U.S. was singling out China for praise for its constructive engagement.
This time, “you had a developing country and somebody who had been leading the efforts against us in Copenhagen, that opened up the door,” said Secretary of State John F. Kerry following the vote. “And it was a sea change.”
What explains China's shift? It's not necessarily pangs of guilt nor a newfound sense of global munificence. Instead, after years of downplaying its environmental crisis, Chinese leaders appear to have recognized that cleaning up China's toxic skies and pushing the country toward renewable energy is critical to maintaining the Communist Party's grip on power amid rising public discontent.
Now, instead of regarding any multilateral environmental pact as a hindrance to unbridled economic growth, China sees an opportunity to seize agreements like the Paris deal to showcase itself as a progressive superpower and responsible international stakeholder — while doing things it needs to do at home anyway.
The Obama administration, said Kerry, recognized this coming convergence in 2013 and sought to capitalize on it “to change the paradigm of what happened in Copenhagen.”
Asked after Saturday's vote to cite the most important steps along the way that enabled the deal, Kerry immediately pointed to China's willingness to “build a working partnership” with Washington and jointly announce national emissions-reduction targets in advance.
We saw “they had environmental challenges in China and had [a self-] interest, therefore, and we tried to tap into that.”
The alignment between China's domestic agenda and its willingness to step up in Paris was brought into sharp relief last week as air pollution levels skyrocketed in Beijing. For the first time, city officials issued a “red alert,” closing schools, shutting down work at construction sites and ordering millions of cars off the capital's roads.
Since Xi came to power about three years ago, Chinese leaders have shown increasing political will to impose extraordinary measures to clean the skies, even if it means curtailing economic activity. To be sure, the steps have been uneven and at times downright vain — China has been most willing to shutter factories and curb coal burning when it's hosting high-profile international gatherings in Beijing like the 2014 HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" APEC summit, September's military parade, and international sporting events.
Although the immediate goal is to protect public health, not halt global warming, the strictures generally target the same carbon-generators that cause global warming. At the same time, Chinese authorities are pushing the development of solar, wind, hydropower and nuclear power — and make China's alternative energy sector a global economic force.
China has become the world's biggest investor in renewable energy and plans to launch a nationwide carbon-emission trading market in 2017.
These changes come as China increasingly acknowledges the human and financial toll of pollution. A 2014 joint study by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Bank and China's government estimated that air pollution alone may cost the nation up to $300 billion a year. Another report led by economists and former foreign heads of state noted smog is blamed for more than a million premature deaths annually in China and said that may cost the nation up to 13% of its GDP.
Sam Geall, a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" University of Sussex research fellow, said in a recent report that diplomacy certainly has helped push China along. “But far more important is the growing awareness that climate impacts and air pollution pose major threats to [China's] development,” he said.
“In short, China's new approach rests on the fact that its leaders see combating climate change as being in the national interest,” he added. “And underpinning that perception is not only a vision of how China might position itself in the future but also a real transformation already underway in China's economy.”
On the U.S. side, Obama has also become progressively bold, even as Congress shows resistance, said HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Eric Pooley, senior vice president for strategy and communications at the Environmental Defense Fund. With executive-branch initiatives like the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EPA's Clean Power Plan — which takes effect this month and is designed to cut carbon emissions from power plants — Obama has been looking to make his environmental policies a centerpiece of his legacy.
That momentum is a contrast from 2009, when the president's eco-agenda had just suffered a defeat as the Waxman-Markey cap-and-trade bill failed in Congress, weakening his hand on the world stage.
Six years ago, “both of the biggest nations in the world were not ready to deal,” Pooley said. Now, “the dynamic between the U.S. and China has totally changed. … They used to blame each other for inaction. Now they're encouraging each other toward more ambitious action.”
In some ways, Washington and Beijing have been driven to find common ground on global warming because they have failed to see eye-to-eye on so many other issues, from trade and cyber attacks to human rights and the South China Sea.
“China and the United States need an area where they can cooperate,” said HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Nathaniel Keohane, a former Obama White House staffer and now vice president for international climate at the Environmental Defense Fund. “Climate change is becoming that area.”
Momentum soared in November 2014 when Obama attended the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" APEC summit in Beijing and announced with Xi that the countries would both pursue policies to cut carbon emissions.
Obama pledged the U.S. would emit at least 26% less carbon in 2025 than it did in 2005. Xi vowed his country would “peak” its carbon emissions by 2030, if not sooner, and said solar, wind and other clean energy technology would account for 20% of China's total power production by that year.
Their bilateral agreement “sent a powerful signal to the rest of the world,” said HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Alden Meyer of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Union of Concerned Scientists, a veteran of climate negotiations. “If the world's two biggest emitters aren't serious about dealing with the problem, you can't deal with the problem.” Them working together, he added, “gave people a sense of hope.”
When Xi visited Washington in September, the two leaders followed up with a 17-point joint statement looking ahead to the Paris talks.
During negotiations in France over the past two weeks, U.S. officials were in “very, very regular contact with the Chinese,” said one administration source, speaking on condition of anonymity. Though the two countries have real differences, administration officials said they believed they had mutual candor with the Chinese.
On Friday, as the Paris negotiators raced to hammer out the final language of their text, Xi and Obama once again spoke by phone.
The pact adopted Saturday for the first time commits virtually every nation to reducing the greenhouse gas emissions that cause climate change, and setting progressively more stringent goals every five years. Though each country will determine its own goals, nations will be required to submit to outside monitoring of their progress, and developed nations pledged to help fund new, clean energy sources for developing countries.
“With our historic joint announcement with China last year, we showed it was possible to bridge the old divide between developed and developing nations that had stymied global progress for so long,” Obama said Saturday. “That accomplishment … was the foundation for success in Paris.”
Tribune Publishing Company
Paris climate deal: the world's greatest diplomatic success
Fiona Harvey in Paris
13 December 2015
The Guardian
With all 196 nations having a say, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN climate deal, with all its frustrations and drama, has proven that compromise works for the planet
In the final meeting of the Paris talks on climate change on Saturday night, the debating chamber was full and the atmosphere tense. Ministers from 196 countries sat behind their country nameplates, aides flocking them, with observers packed into the overflowing hall.
Related: HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" World leaders hail Paris climate deal as ‘major leap for mankind’
John Kerry, the US secretary of state, talked animatedly with his officials, while China’s foreign minister Xie Zhenhua wore a troubled look. They had been waiting in this hall for nearly two hours. The French hosts had trooped in to take their seats on the stage, ready to applaud on schedule at 5.30pm – but it was now after 7pm, and the platform was deserted.
After two weeks of fraught negotiations, was something going badly wrong?
Then at 7.16pm, the French foreign minister, Laurent Fabius, returned abruptly to the stage, flanked by high-ranking HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN officials. The last-minute compromises had been resolved, he said. And suddenly they were all on their feet. Fabius brought down the green-topped gavel, a symbol of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN talks, and announced that a Paris agreement had been signed. The delegates were clapping, cheering and whistling wildly, embracing and weeping. Even the normally reserved economist Lord Stern was whooping.
Outside the hall, a “Mexican wave” of standing ovations rippled across the conference centre as news reached participants gathered around screens outside for the translation into their own language. The 50,000 people who attended the summit had been waiting for this moment, through marathon negotiating sessions and sleepless nights.
The contrast with the last global attempt to resolve climate change, at Copenhagen in 2009, which collapsed into chaos and recriminations, could not have been greater. In a city recently hit by terrorist attacks that left 130 dead and scores more critically injured, collective will had prevailed.
Paris produced an agreement hailed as “historic, durable and ambitious”. Developed and developing countries alike are required to limit their emissions to relatively safe levels, of 2C with an aspiration of 1.5C, with regular reviews to ensure these commitments can be increased in line with scientific advice. Finance will be provided to poor nations to help them cut emissions and cope with the effects of extreme weather. Countries affected by climate-related disasters will gain urgent aid.
Like any international compromise, it is not perfect: the caps on emissions are still too loose, likely to lead to warming of 2.7 to 3C above pre-industrial levels, breaching the 2C threshold that scientists say is the limit of safety, beyond which the effects – droughts, floods, heatwaves and sea level rises – are likely to become catastrophic and irreversible. Poor countries are also concerned that the money provided to them will not be nearly enough to protect them. Not all of the agreement is legally binding, so future governments of the signatory countries could yet renege on their commitments.
The deal alone won’t dig us out of the hole that we’re in, but it makes the sides less steep.
Kumi Naidoo, executive director of Greenpeace International
These flaws may shadow the future of climate change action, but on Saturday night they took second place. As the news spread through the world, the reaction from civil society groups, governments and businesses, was overwhelmingly positive.
Kumi Naidoo, executive director of Greenpeace International, summed up the mood: “It sometimes seems that the countries of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN can unite on nothing, but nearly 200 countries have come together and agreed a deal. Today, the human race has joined in a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" common cause. The Paris agreement is only one step on a long road and there are parts of it that frustrate, that disappoint me, but it is progress. The deal alone won’t dig us out of the hole that we’re in, but it makes the sides less steep.”
Even as delegates celebrated at the conference’s end, there was a palpable sense of relief from the exhausted French hosts. At many points in this fortnight of marathon negotiating sessions, it looked as if a deal might be beyond reach. That it ended in success was a tribute in part to their diligence and efficiency and the efforts of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN.
“France has brought openness and experience in diplomacy, and mutual respect to these talks,” said Stern, one of the world’s leading climate economists. “They have taken great care to make everyone listened to, that they were consulted. There was a great sense of openness, of professional diplomacy, and skill.”
Saturday night was the culmination not only of a fortnight of talks, but of more than 23 years of international attempts under the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN to forge collective action on this global problem. Since 1992, all of the world’s governments had been pledging to take measures that would avoid dangerous warming. Those efforts were marked by discord and failure, the refusal of the biggest emitters to take part, ineffective agreements and ignored treaties.
For these reasons, the Paris talks were widely seen as make-or-break for the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN process. If they failed, collective global efforts would be at an end and the world would be left without a just and robust means of tackling climate change.
The threat was catastrophic and the stakes could scarcely be higher. Without urgent action, warming was predicted to reach unprecedented levels, of as much as 5C above current temperatures – a level that would see large swathes of the globe rendered virtually uninhabitable. What is more, infrastructure built today – coal-fired power plants, transport networks, buildings – that entail high carbon emissions will still be operating decades into the future, giving the world a narrow window in which to change the direction of our economies.
“This was the last chance,” said Miguel Arias Canete, Europe’s climate chief. “And we took it.”
The terrorist attacks on Paris raised questions about whether the talks would go ahead at all but HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" François Hollande, the French president, insisted that they must and, in a show of unity, more than 150 heads of state landed in the French capital for the opening day. Barack Obama hailed the conference as “an act of defiance” in the face of terrorism.
Immediately after the attacks, the first concern was for security. A planned march through central Paris by protesters was cancelled, though a version of it did go ahead as the talks opened and was marred by clashes with police and a small number of protesters, and arrests. Security for the conference was stepped up, with police and army patrolling the immediate area and transport routes nearby shut down for two days.
This was the biggest ever gathering of world leaders, whose presence was needed to empower their negotiators to move out of positions entrenched for more than 20 years. When they arrived, a series of key meetings were held, with Obama seeing HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xi Jinping of China, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Narendra Modi of India and representatives from the least developed countries. Hollande concentrated on forging links with the developing world. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Angela Merkel, in a private meeting with HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Vladimir Putin, secured his pledge that Russia would not stand in the way of a deal.
Behind the conference centre gates, French delegates were marshalling their diplomatic forces. They had carefully arranged the conference centre so that their part of the compound – behind barriers staffed by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN guards and secret service officers, unlike the rest of the delegations which were open to access – was directly above the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN’s offices.
Related: HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" Christiana Figueres: the woman tasked with saving the world from global warming
Fabius, from his office, could be with Christiana Figueres, the UN climate change chief, for a face-to-face chat within seconds. His fellow minister, Ségolène Royal, was just along the corridor, flanked with the offices of ambassadors and high-ranking officials. Within the buzzing control room, screens relayed pictures of what was happening in each of the conference rooms scattered around the compound and 24 hour news from French and international channels.
About 60 French officials were there. In preparation for the all-night sessions that began almost immediately the conference started, a room with 20 cubicled beds was waiting for exhausted officials to refresh themselves with a few snatched moments of sleep.
Procedurally, the French took great care. They instituted a series of talks known as “confessionals”. These were intended as confidential places where delegates could, in the words of one French official, “speak from the heart” to listening French diplomats, with no holds barred and an assurance of privacy.
There were also the absurdly named “informal informals”, in which a small group of delegates from various countries were charged with tackling a small piece of disputed text often as little as a paragraph at a time. Their task was to try to remove the infamous “square brackets” denoting areas of disagreement on the text and they met in small huddles around the conference centre, squatting on the floor in corridors or standing around a smart phone.
After these measures were still not producing enough progress, Fabius turned to “indabas” – by Zulu tradition, these are groups of elders convened to try to discuss disputes in communities. They were first tried out at the Durban climate talks in South Africa, in 2011, and under France’s plan they consisted of groups of up to 80 delegates at a time gathered to thrash out the remaining disagreements.
While the French could draft in experienced diplomats on every side, some of the smallest countries had difficulty in keeping up with the meetings – many happened in parallel and they did not have the personnel to attend them all.
One way of getting around that was the formation of a “coalition of high ambition”, which was announced with three days to Friday’s deadline. Forged by small island states – a key figure was Tony de Brum of the Marshall Islands – and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU, it was joined by many of the least developed countries, adding up to more than 100 nations. They could then negotiate together, with an agreed common interest. Before the end, this coalition had been joined by the US, Canada and Australia. It was hailed by Europe’s climate and energy commissioner Miguel Cañete as a key factor in the end agreement.
And yet with three days of the conference to go, it looked as if all of these efforts might yet come to nothing. On the second Wednesday of the talks, the French produced a second iteration of the core text, reducing the number of brackets from more than 300 to fewer than 40. They were hopeful that this could be almost the end – and it needed to be in order to have the legal “scrubbers” and linguistic experts assess the text and ensure it was in line with international law and accurate in all languages.
But it soon became apparent that things were not going to plan. As countries examined the draft agreement, ministers started raising concerns. On Wednesday afternoon, leading delegations trooped one by one into Fabius’ personal office: Edna Molewa of South Africa, Xie Zhenhua of China, John Kerry of the US, Julie Bishop of Australia.
For South Africa, issues over “loss and damage” emerged – for developed countries, this meant the question of whether developing countries should be entitled to special aid in the event of climate-related disasters; for the developing, it meant compensation and liability, which the US would never agree to. For China, a key sticking point was differentiation – the concept that developing countries have less responsibility for climate change. For the US, some parts of the deal could not be legally binding in order to pass Congress.
Fabius sought to allay their concerns and find a compromise. At 8pm, he convened a new plenary session, at which all countries were able to speak. It carried on through the night.
At this point, it was clear that further efforts were needed. There followed a rapid round of telephone diplomacy. Obama spoke personally to the Chinese leader. Hollande picked up the phone to as many of his counterparts across the world as he could manage.
Finally, after two more days of fraught negotiation, a consensus emerged. None of the major countries wanted to be seen as wrecking a deal that had come so close. All could agree that they wanted an agreement and all made compromises. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU backed down on having the intended emissions cuts, agreed at a national level, to be legally binding; the US accepted language on “loss and damage”; China and India agreed that an aspiration of holding warming to 1.5C could be included.
For the diplomats involved, the efforts were exhausting. The talks took a personal toll. In the months before the conference, Laurence Tubiana, appointed as special ambassador on climate change, played a key role in liaising with developing and developed countries. Then disaster struck. A week before the COP was scheduled to begin, she suffered a sudden sharp pain. It was acute appendicitis, necessitating emergency surgery. Within days, however, she had resumed her key role. When the deal was signed, she was on the podium, receiving hugs from Ban Ki-moon, Figueres, Fabius and Hollande, a recognition of the sacrifices she had made.
All of these efforts came to a head in the final crucial days. On Saturday morning, a new draft text was prepared. Fabius assembled the delegates and told them to have lunch while they waited for it to be translated. That afternoon, they examined the text and nearly all agreed that, with minor reservations, they could accept it. The final meeting was scheduled for 5.30pm. As for the last-minute hitch that kept delegates waiting in the hall for two hours? A matter of minor aspects of wording, including the translation of a few terms and the placement of a comma. It was rectified, apologies given, and the jubilation could begin.
It is easy to forget what an extraordinary event these HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN talks were. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UNFCCC is one of the last remaining forums in the world where every country, however small, is represented on the same basis and has equal say with the biggest economies. Most modern diplomacy carries on in small, self-selected groups dominated by richer countries – the G7, the G20, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD, Opec – but all 196 states have a seat and a say at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UNFCCC. Agreement can only be accepted by consensus.
If this makes for an unwieldy and frustrating process, it is also a fair one. The poorest countries of the world, so often left out of international consideration, are those which have done least to create climate change, but will suffer the most from it. Only at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN are they heard.
Guardian Newspapers Limited
