HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "Director de OMC informa en Paraguay sobre negociaciones para agenda de Doha para el desarrollo
·         HYPERLINK \l "TITULAR DE OMC PRESENTÓ ÚLTIMO ACUERDO MULTILATERAL; Nueva “herramienta, clave” para el Paraguay
·         HYPERLINK \l "Azerbaijan resumes negotiations on full membership in WTO
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO Least-Developed Countries Request Waiver Of IP Rights On Pharma Products
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO Tobacco Labeling Dispute Intensifies Amid Proposals by United Kingdom, Ireland
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO OKs Panel In New Boeing Case; U.S. Pledges To Comply With CVD Ruling
·         HYPERLINK \l "China drops leading tech brands for state purchases
·         HYPERLINK \l "EU and US groups sound alarm on China cyber security rules
·         HYPERLINK \l "Australia to introduce country-of-origin labelling after hepatitis A outbreak
·         HYPERLINK \l "Friction over India's beef trade heats up after attacks
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S. lawmakers battle over currency in trade deals
·         HYPERLINK \l "S. Korea, China initial bilateral free trade pact
·         HYPERLINK \l "Africa's tripartite free trade area set for launch in May
·         HYPERLINK \l "GOIC Discusses WTO Rules and Regulations, Their Impact on Gulf Industrial Sector
·         HYPERLINK \l "World Bank denies report on Malawi's global poverty position
 
 
Director de OMC informa en Paraguay sobre negociaciones para agenda de Doha para el desarrollo
Valor Futuro
25 February 2015
 
Asunción--Feb 25--EFE--El director general de la Organización Mundial de Comercio (OMC), Roberto Azevedo, abordó hoy con las autoridades paraguayas las negociaciones que se desarrollan en Ginebra para establecer un programa de trabajo post Bali y concluir la Agenda de Doha para el Desarrollo.
    Azevedo se entrevistó con el canciller paraguayo, Eladio Loizaga, a quien mantuvo al tanto de esas conversaciones y con quien departió sobre la formalización del Comité Nacional de Facilitación del Comercio, una iniciativa del Ejecutivo de Paraguay compuesta por instituciones de los sectores públicos y privado.
    Loizaga expuso también a Azevedo que Paraguay trabaja en el desarrollo de un Programa de Trabajo para los Países en Desarrollo Sin Litoral en la OMC, de acuerdo con el mandato del Programa de Acción de Viena, según informó un comunicado de Cancillería.
    Azevedo llegó a Paraguay procedente de Chile, dentro de una gira destinada a impulsar la eliminación de las barreras al comercio en el mundo. 
 
 
TITULAR DE OMC PRESENTÓ ÚLTIMO ACUERDO MULTILATERAL; Nueva “herramienta, clave” para el Paraguay
Julio Alberto Fleitas A. 
26 February 2015
ABC - Paraguay
 
El nuevo paquete de medidas de la Organización Mundial del Comercio (OMC), acordado en el 2013, será una herramienta clave que mejorará la inserción en el comercio regional y global de países como el Paraguay, aseguró ayer en entrevista con nuestro diario, el director general de la organización, el brasileño Roberto Azevedo.

–¿Qué fuerza de ejecución o cumplimiento puede tener este paquete de acuerdos de las OMC?

–El primer paso es ponerlo en vigencia, si bien las negociaciones están cerradas, se requiere de la ratificación de dos tercios de los miembros de la organización.

–¿Y ya se alcanzaron esos dos tercios?

–No, recién empezamos a recibir (las ratificaciones), porque la mayor parte de los miembros tiene que pasar el acuerdo por sus respectivos parlamentos, y muchas veces son trámites que demoran, no es una cosa rápida, pero ya recibimos de algunos que no necesitan ir al Congreso, como por ejemplo los Estados Unidos, Singapur, Hong Kong. Yo creo que el proceso se acelerará entre mediados de este año hasta diciembre, cuando la mayor parte ya habrán pasado por sus parlamentos. Yo recibí indicaciones de que el Congreso nacional paraguayo lo va a ratificar pronto y lo ideal es que pudiera entrar en vigencia antes de la próxima reunión de la Conferencia Ministerial de la OMC en Nairobi (África), en diciembre de este año.

–¿Qué pasará una vez que entra en vigencia el acuerdo?

–Una vez que entre en vigencia el acuerdo, al contrario de otras tentativas que tuvimos en la OMC, este tendrá valor o fuerza de ley como todos los demás acuerdos de la organización, pasando a integrar el conjunto de textos legales de la Organización Mundial del Comercio. Así que tiene valor integral, pasa a estar sujeto al mecanismo de solución de diferencias y a todos los mecanismos de “Enforcement” (medidas coercitivas) previstos, y a disposición de cualquier país miembro.

–¿Cómo un acuerdo como este puede resolver o evitar los conflictos que solemos tener en Mercosur, donde Argentina y Brasil no cumplen los acuerdos del bloque?

–Las relaciones entre países vecinos, o en bloques comerciales, son las más difíciles, porque la conexión es mucho más densa que con socios lejanos o que siguen los trámites normales del comercio. Por ejemplo, Canadá, Estados Unidos y México se siguen “peleando” en la OMC. Los países del Mercosur han tenido disputas en la organización, a nivel de mecanismos de solución de diferencias, así que eso es normal. Muchas veces inclusive hay vacíos en la reglamentación regional, relativas a medidas antidumping, compensatorias, de salvaguardias, de valoración aduanera, normas técnicas, etc., pero sí en las reglas multilaterales. Entonces, hay una cantidad de situaciones en que los países prefieren accionar los mecanismos de solución de diferencias en la OMC que en un bloque regional.

–¿Este acuerdo viene a ser entonces una herramienta más para que, ocurrido un conflicto, el miembro afectado pueda recurrir a la organización?

–Sí, por supuesto. Sí es un tema que está reglamentado en este acuerdo, sí un país puede ir directamente a este mecanismo.

–¿Pero será eficaz para que Argentina, por ejemplo, deje de tomar medidas internas unilaterales que serían violatorias al Tratado de Asunción y a las normas de la OMC?

–La única manera de saber que una medida adoptada por cualquier país es o no violatoria a las disciplinas de la OMC es si eso llega a las instancias de solución de diferencias, donde un grupo de expertos o un órgano de apelación va a determinar si las mismas son o no consistentes con las disciplinas multilaterales. Eso lleva su tiempo, pero nuestras estadísticas revelan que más del 90% de los fallos de la organización son cumplidos.

–En cuanto a las mercaderías en tránsito, ¿de qué manera este acuerdo puede ayudar a que Paraguay, como país mediterráneo, no sea molestado por sus vecinos?

–Depende de la medida específica, de cuáles son las obligaciones que fueron asumidas en el acuerdo y ver si lo que está sucediendo es una violación de los compromisos asumidos. De eso es difícil hablar en abstracto, hay que ver el caso concreto.

 
Azerbaijan resumes negotiations on full membership in WTO 
 
Baku, Fineko/abc.az. Azerbaijan resumes complex negotiations on full membership in the World Trade Organization (WTO).

According to Mahmud Mammadguliyev, Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs and the main Azerbaijani negotiator, the meeting of the working groups on accession of Azerbaijan to WTO will be held next week in Geneva.

“At the same time we will hold multilateral negotiations on agricultural support. Several countries, such as U.S., EU, Norway also plan to hold bilateral negotiations with us”, - Mammadguliyev said.

Azerbaijan has had a status of observer in WTO since 1997 and started negotiations on full membership in 1999.
 
 
WTO Least-Developed Countries Request Waiver Of IP Rights On Pharma Products
Intellectual Property Watch
Posted By Catherine Saez On 25/02/2015
 
This week at the World Trade Organization intellectual property committee meeting, least-developed countries submitted a request to extend a waiver allowing them not to enforce intellectual property rights on pharmaceutical products. The countries have extended the waiver before, but this time they are seeking to make it indefinite, until they are no longer considered LDCs.
 
Least-developed countries are disproportionately exposed to the health risks associated with poverty, and “patent protection contributes to high costs, placing many critical treatments outside the reach of LDCs,” said a communication [1] [pdf] by the group, proposing to extend the current waiver to intellectual property rights enforcement past the deadline of 2016.
 
In June 2013, a general waiver exempting LDCs from the obligation to enforce IP rights was extended to 2021 [2] (IPW, WTO/TRIPS, 2 August 2013 [3]). This extension covers all products, including pharmaceutical products, and has been running in parallel with the special waiver on pharmaceutical products granted to LDCs until 2016.
 
At the 24-25 February Council for the WTO Agreement on Trade-Related Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS), the LDC group submitted a request to extend the 2016 deadline and in particular to prolong the transitional period for as long as the WTO member remains an LDC. This element was part of the request for the general extension in 2013 but was resisted by a number of countries (IPW, WTO/TRIPS, 12 June 2013 [4]).
 
LDCs, building upon TRIPS Article 66.1 (Least-Developed Country Members) providing that the Council for TRIPS “shall, upon duly motivated request by a least developed country Member, accord extensions of this period,” further request that:
 
LDCs be exempted from obligations under TRIPS Article 70.8 (Protection of Existing Subject Matter), relating to patent protection for pharmaceutical and agricultural chemical products, and Article 70.9, relating to exclusive marketing rights, as long as the WTO member remains an LDC. The proposed extension is not intended to apply to agricultural chemical products, a source said.
 
According to a WTO official at a press briefing today, Article 70.8, otherwise dubbed the “mailbox provision” allows an inventor to file a patent application even if there is no patent protection in a given country. It means that even if countries do not have to protect patents, they still have to provide means for patent protection, which would be activated when that country starts protecting IP rights.
 
Taking the floor in the TRIPS Council on behalf of LDCs, Bangladesh said in its statement [5] [pdf] that, “In 2011, some 9.7 million of the 34 million people living with HIV worldwide, lived in LDCs. Of the people living with HIV in LDCs, 4.6 million were eligible for antiretroviral (ARV) treatment in accordance with the 2010 World Health Organization HIV treatment guidelines, however only 2.5 million were receiving it.”
 
“LDCs also bear increasing health burdens from non-communicable disease. For example, cancer incidence is expected to rise to 82 percent in 2030 in low-income countries compared to 58 percent in upper-middle and 40 percent in high-income countries,” the delegate said.
 
The delegate quoted UNAIDS saying, “There is concern that without extension of the transition period, access to antiretroviral therapy and other key medicines in LDCs will face real challenges.” He also quoted UNAIDS saying, “There is a real danger that if the LDCs do not get a further extension, the progress that has been made to improve access to HIV-related medicines in these countries will be reversed.”
 
Nepal, China, Brazil and India supported the LDC proposal, as well as the European Union, which said it could not comment yet, but gave general support to the idea, according to the WTO. No country voiced reservation, it said.
 
The WTO official said no substantive discussions were carried out during this session, but the subject should be developed at the next TRIPS Council meeting, scheduled for 9-10 June.
 
Civil Society Reacts to LDC Request
 
A set of responses by nongovernmental organisations was provided to Intellectual Property Watch.
 
Sangeeta Shashikant of the Third World Network said, “a specific extension of transition period with regard to pharmaceutical products for as long as a country remains a LDC is critical to facilitate access to affordable medicines in LDCs that already face numerous development and health challenges.”
 
“WTO Members have no right to deny or condition the requested extension as Article 66.1 of the TRIPS Agreement expressly states that the TRIPS Council ‘shall’ accord extensions upon a duly motivated request by LDCs. Such a request has been submitted to the TRIPS Council by Bangladesh on behalf of the LDCs,” she said.
 
Brook Baker of Health GAP (Global Access Project) said, “Least developed countries need absolute clarity about their right to deny patents on pharmaceuticals, to deny protections for pharmaceutical related data, and to be relieved of any obligations to collect pharmaceutical patent applications and to grant exclusive marketing rights.”
 
“To maximize health outcomes, LDCs should be free from TRIPS obligations for pharmaceuticals as long as they maintain LDC status, which is, in itself, a signal of their many capacity constraints,” he said.
 
“In the past the US, the EU and even the WTO have tried to deter LDCs from seeking their maximum transition periods as guaranteed by Article 66.1 of the TRIPS Agreement. They have also attempted to impose unwarranted conditions. Any such efforts in response to the LDCs’ new request would be a grave infringement of the right to health and ironclad flexibilities within the TRIPS Agreement,” he added.
 
Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF, Doctors without Borders) Policy and Analysis Director Rohit Malpani said MSF “welcomes the request by Bangladesh, on behalf of least-developed countries, to extend the pharmaceutical transition period until LDCs are no longer classified as such.”
 
“MSF works in many LDC countries and relies on low-cost affordable generic medicines to provide affordable access to treatment,” he said. “Any flexibility which can safeguard access to low cost generic medicines and vaccines is welcomed by MSF.”
 
Primah Kwagala of the Center for Health, Human rights and Development in Uganda said “Uganda is in the process of building a strong technological base, and yet to put in place institutional, a legal and policy environment to enable it to move towards TRIPS implementation, freedom from patents on pharmaceutical products will enable Uganda and several LDCs to improve the health prospects of their citizens.”
 
 
WTO Tobacco Labeling Dispute Intensifies Amid Proposals by United Kingdom, Ireland
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, February 26, 2015
 
Feb. 25 — World Trade Organization members continued to spar over the issue of plain packaging of tobacco products during a pair of Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) Council meetings held Feb. 24–25 in Geneva.
 
The Dominican Republic said that it was concerned that the United Kingdom and Ireland are considering proposals to mandate colors for tobacco packaging and to permit only specified text, such as the brand and the product type (22 WTO, 2/3/15).
 
“One of the fundamental principles of the WTO is that members should regulate in the least-restrictive way,” said Luis Manuel Piantini, the Dominican Republic's ambassador to the WTO. “Plain packaging clearly deviates from this principle, as there are several alternative tobacco-control measures available that are truly effective.”
 
“Instead of simply banning all trademarks and geographical indications from tobacco packaging and sticks, the U.K. and Ireland could also consider a much more rational approach and assess each trademark and geographical indication individually and only regulate problematic features, if any,” Piantini said.
 
The issue will likely be raised at the next meeting of the WTO's Technical Barriers to Trade Committee and at the next TRIPS Council meeting on June 9–10.
 
U.K., Ireland Proposals
 
In January, the U.K.'s public health ministry said that the government would introduce plain packaging tobacco regulations in March with the goal of enacting them by May 2016 in order to coincide with the European Union's Tobacco Products Directive.
 
In February, Ireland's government resumed its consideration of the Public Health (Standardised Packaging of Tobacco) Bill.
 
At the TRIPS meeting, Norway said that its government would soon begin consultations on introducing plain packaging rules. New Zealand and France have also considered implementing such rules as a means to reduce smoking.
 
The Dominican Republic, Nicaragua, Cuba, Indonesia, Honduras and Zimbabwe urged members to await the WTO's decision in an ongoing legal challenge against Australia's 2011 Tobacco Plain Packaging Act before introducing their own plain packaging measures.
 
Ongoing Legal Case
 
The Dominican Republic and four other WTO members—Ukraine, Honduras, Indonesia and Cuba—are battling the Australian rules in three different WTO panels and are concerned that more countries will seek to restrict how tobacco manufacturers label cigarette packaging.
 
The countries argue that such laws impose unfair restrictions on the use of trademarks, geographical indications and other markings in violation of the TRIPS Agreement, the agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
 
The WTO's Dispute Settlement Body is not expected to issue its final decision on the complaint against Australia's tobacco labeling rules until the first half of 2016.
 
This week Australia said that it supported the U.K.'s and Ireland's tobacco labeling efforts and rejected calls for other members to wait for a WTO decision before introducing their own plain packaging laws.
 
The U.S. is not directly involved in the complaint but has reserved its right to participate as a third party.
 
Pharmaceutical IP Proposal
 
TRIPS Council members considered a proposal, offered by Bangladesh on behalf of the WTO's Least Developed Countries (LDCs), to indefinitely extend a waiver of the LDCs' obligations to enforce pharmaceutical intellectual property (IP) rights under the TRIPS Agreement.
 
Bangladesh noted that LDCs are “disproportionately exposed to the health risks associated with poverty” and sought “maximum policy space to enable them to confront their health burdens with effective and affordable strategies,” according to the proposal.
 
“Access to affordable pharmaceutical products is a prerequisite, to deal with the numerous public health challenges facing LDCs,” Bangladesh said in its intervention.
 
LDCs were previously granted an exemption to TRIPS rules regarding pharmaceutical enforcement until Jan. 1, 2016. In 2013, WTO members issued a subsequent waiver to extend an LDC enforcement exemption until 2021.
 
Most of the countries participating in the meetings said that they supported the idea of extending the deadline but disagreed about how that would be accomplished. The issue will likely be discussed again at the June 9–10 TRIPS meeting.
 
At the end of the meeting, TRIPS Council Chairman Mothusi Palai of Botswana relinquished his position to Abdolazeez Al-Otaibi of Saudi Arabia.
 
 
WTO OKs Panel In New Boeing Case; U.S. Pledges To Comply With CVD Ruling
World Trade Online
Posted: February 25, 2015 
 
The World Trade Organization's Dispute Settlement Body (DSB) has established a panel to rule on the European Union's claims that a new round of tax breaks provided by Washington state to Boeing amount to prohibited local content subsidies under the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures (ASCM) -- the latest salvo by Brussels in the longstanding fight over subsidies both sides provided to their respective makers of large civil aircraft.
 
The DSB did so at a Feb. 23 meeting at which the United States and Argentina for the first time agreed to comply with separate adverse Appellate Body rulings against them faulting U.S. countervailing duty (CVD) practices and Argentine import policies, respectively.
 
The latest aircraft dispute, in which the EU requested a panel on Feb. 12, was able to move directly to the establishment of a panel because of rules in the ASCM that provide for an expedited timeline for disputes where prohibited subsidies are alleged.
 
Specifically, ASCM Article 4.4 states that if the parties cannot resolve the dispute within 30 days of the consultation request, any party to the consultations may refer the matter to the DSB for “immediate establishment of a panel,” unless the DSB decides by consensus not to establish a panel.
 
By contrast, other WTO disputes are governed by the Dispute Settlement Understanding (DSU), under which parties to a dispute can block a first request for the establishment of a panel but not the second. In addition, a party to the dispute has to wait at least 60 days from the date of the consultation request before requesting a panel.
 
In its statement at the DSB meeting, the United States charged that the Washington state tax breaks identified in the EU consultation request are fully consistent with WTO rules. “The United States is therefore prepared to engage in these proceedings, and to explain to the Panel that the EU has no legal basis for its claims,” it said.
 
The U.S. insinuated that the EU's decision to launch a new chapter in the aircraft dispute would negatively impact all WTO members by further straining the already overburdened dispute settlement arm of the WTO.
 
“We would also question whether the initiation of a new aircraft dispute at this time is the best use of already strained WTO resources. This should be an issue of concern for all Members,” the U.S. said.
 
The U.S. also drove home the point that the EU's latest request is a completely new dispute that is not related to an earlier WTO case, known as DS353, in which the U.S. was faulted for providing illegal subsidies to Boeing, including through reductions in the Washington state business and occupation (B&O) tax from 2006 to 2024. The EU's latest dispute centers on a Washington state law passed in 2013 that extends these and other tax breaks from 2024 to 2040.
 
“There is no basis to accept the EU’s construction that this new, freestanding dispute is merely a new procedural step or somehow a continuation of the current disputes,” the U.S. said.
 
A WTO compliance panel is currently examining whether the U.S. complied with the Appellate Body ruling in DS353, and is expected to issue its ruling by the end of 2015.
 
In its statement, the U.S. suggested that the compliance panel in DS353 had already examined the EU's claims about the 2013 Washington state law extending the tax breaks, but found that they had to be addressed in a separate dispute.
 
"The compliance panel in [DS353] already considered those arguments, and rejected them. It found that the arguments the EU seeks to make are new and different from the claims in the compliance proceeding," the U.S. said.
 
Both the U.S. and Argentina said at the DSB meeting that they would seek to reach an agreement with the complaining parties on a reasonable period of time for them to implement the respective WTO rulings against them.
 
The WTO case over U.S. CVD practices, known as DS437, was brought by China. Taken together, the Appellate Body and panel ruling faulted four aspects of U.S. CVD methodology as violating the ASCM on an “as applied” basis in specific CVD cases on imports from China.
 
Among them was the Appellate Body's finding that the way the U.S. uses benchmark prices to calculate whether there is a benefit in certain CVD investigations violated the ASCM.
 
Sources have said they expect the U.S. to comply with the four adverse findings in DS437 by initiating a so-called "Section 129" proceeding, in which Commerce would review the CVD determinations and perhaps alter the margins in order to take into account the WTO findings, sources said.
 
The dispute against Argentine import policies, DS438, was brought by the U.S., EU and Japan. In that case, the WTO Appellate Body faulted two Argentine import policies as violating the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. The first policy required that imports receive pre-approval before shipment, while the other was a set of five informal trade-related requirements that Argentina imposed as a condition for imports.
 
 
China drops leading tech brands for state purchases 
 
* State procurement approval withdrawn from major tech brands
* Dropped brands include Cisco, Apple, McAfee, Citrix
* Shift from foreign brands biggest in security technology
* Some say it is in response to U.S. NSA surveillance
* Others put the shift down to protectionism

By Paul Carsten

BEIJING, Feb 25 (Reuters) - China has dropped some of the world's leading technology brands from its approved state purchase lists, while approving thousands more locally made products, in what some say is a response to revelations of widespread Western cybersurveillance.

Others put the shift down to a protectionist impulse to shield China's domestic technology industry from competition.

Chief casualty is U.S. network equipment maker Cisco Systems Inc, which in 2012 counted 60 products on the Central Government Procurement Center's (CGPC) list, but by late 2014 had none, a Reuters analysis of official data shows.

Smartphone and PC maker Apple Inc has also been dropped over the period, along with Intel Corp's security software firm McAfee and network and server software firm Citrix Systems.

The number of products on the list, which covers regular spending by central ministries, jumped by more than 2,000 in two years to just under 5,000, but the increase is almost entirely due to local makers.

The number of approved foreign tech brands fell by a third, while less than half of those with security-related products survived the cull.

An official at the procurement agency said there were many reasons why local makers might be preferred, including sheer weight of numbers and the fact that domestic security technology firms offered more product guarantees than overseas rivals.

China's change of tack coincided with leaks by former U.S. National Security Agency (NSA) contractor Edward Snowden in mid-2013 that exposed several global surveillance programmes, many of them run by the NSA with the cooperation of telecom companies and European governments.

"The Snowden incident, it's become a real concern, especially for top leaders," said Tu Xinquan, Associate Director of the China Institute of WTO Studies at the University of International Business and Economics in Beijing. "In some sense the American government has some responsibility for that; (China's) concerns have some legitimacy."

Cybersecurity has been a significant irritant in U.S.-China ties, with both sides accusing the other of abuses.

A spokesperson for the U.S. State Department, when asked to comment on the Chinese state purchasing moves, said the United States was "very concerned that many aspects of China's recent regulatory actions - touted as means to bolster cybersecurity -are neither effective cybersecurity measures nor consistent with the principles of free and open trade."

U.S. tech groups wrote last month to the Chinese administration complaining about some of its new cybersecurity regulations, some of which force technology vendors to Chinese banks to hand over secret source code and adopt Chinese encryption algorithms.

The CGPC list, which details products by brand and type, is approved by China's Ministry of Finance, the CGPC official said. The list does not detail what quantity of a product has been purchased, and does not bind local government or state-owned enterprises, nor the military, which runs its own system of procurement approval.

The Ministry of Finance declined immediate comment.

"We have previously acknowledged that geopolitical concerns have impacted our business in certain emerging markets," said a Cisco spokesman.

An Intel spokesman said the company had frequent conversations at various levels of the U.S. and Chinese governments, but did not provide further details.

Apple declined to comment, and Citrix was not immediately available to comment.

SECURITY PRETEXT?

Industry insiders also see in the changing profile of the CGPC list a wider strategic goal to help Chinese tech firms get a bigger slice of China's information and communications technology market, which is tipped to grow 11.4 percent to $465.6 billion in 2015, according to tech research firm IDC.

"There's no doubt that the SOE segment of the market has been favouring the local indigenous content," said an executive at a Western technology firm who declined to be identified.

The executive said the post-Snowden security concerns were a pretext. The real objective was to nurture China's domestic tech industry and subsequently support its expansion overseas.

China also wants to move to a more consumption-based economy, which would be helped by Chinese authorities and companies buying local technology, the executive said.

Policy measures supporting the broader strategy include making foreign companies form domestic partnerships, participate in technology transfers and hand over intellectual property in the name of information security.

Wang Zhihai, president and CEO of Beijing Wondersoft, which provides information security products to government, state banks and private companies, said the market in China was fair, especially compared with the United States, where China's Huawei Technologies, the world's largest networking and telecoms equipment maker, was unable to do business due to U.S. security concerns.

Local companies were also bound by the same cybersecurity laws that U.S. companies were objecting to, he added.

The danger for China, say experts, is that it could leave itself dependent on domestic technology, which remains inferior to foreign market leaders and more vulnerable to cyber attack.

Some of those benefiting from policies encouraging domestic procurement accept that Chinese companies trail foreign competitors in the security sphere.

"In China, information security compared to international levels is still very far behind; the entire understanding of it is behind," said Wondersoft's Wang.

But Wang, like China, is taking the long view.

"In 10 or more years, that's when we should be there." (Additional reporting by Beijing Newsroom, Noel Randewich in SAN FRANCISCO and David Brunnstrom in WASHINGTON; Editing by Will Waterman) 
 
 
EU and US groups sound alarm on China cyber security rules
Christian Oliver in Brussels and Tom Mitchell in Beijing 
Financial Times
February 26, 2015 7:38 am
 
European and US companies have asked their governments for urgent help in stopping the implementation of new Chinese cyber security regulations, which are expected to force local and foreign banks to use information technology equipment deemed “secure and controllable” by Beijing.

In a letter to the European Commission dated February 25 and seen by the Financial Times, six business organisations led by Business Europe and The City UK said the “worrisome” Chinese regulations “could close the door for many foreign IT companies to the Chinese banking IT market”.
 
The business groups warned that if fully implemented, the policies “will not only undermine the ability of European companies to participate in the IT market in China and to serve banks in general . . . but also hurt the development and integration of the Chinese banking sector in the global market”.

Last September, the China Banking Regulatory Commission and Ministry of Industry and Information Technology issued new “guiding opinions” on “secure and controllable” information and communication technologies, which would affect banks’ procurement of equipment including ATMs, point of sales terminals, smart-card readers and cash counters.

The regulations would require such equipment to undergo security testing, use Chinese intellectual property and also force developers to share source codes and other sensitive data with Beijing.

Multinational companies fear that the new rules, which have not been published in full, could begin to take effect as early as March 15 and could eventually be extended to other industries. “Do they want to carve out business opportunities for Chinese companies that can’t compete with IBM, Oracle and SAP,” one European executive asked. “Is this the first step? Are insurance companies next?”

The CBRC declined to comment on Thursday. The MIIT was not available for comment.

Many executives and analysts see the new rules as part of a larger and ongoing response to last year’s revelations by Edward Snowden, the former National Security Agency contractor, about US espionage activities. But others believe there could be a deeper agenda to boost Chinese companies.

“There have always been attempts to promote local companies under the guise of national security. This is not unique to China,” said Duncan Clark at BDA, a consultancy.
 
As online threats race up national security agendas and governments look at ways of protecting their national infrastructures a cyber arms race is causing concern to the developed world
 
Chinese and foreign banks have until 2019 to ensure that at least 75 per cent of their information technology infrastructure in China is compliant with the new regulations, giving the EU and US time to try to dilute their impact. The EU business lobbies asked European commissioners to raise the issue during the course of ongoing trade negotiations, including a Sino-EU bilateral investment treaty and the global Information Technology Agreement.

The European protest follows a similar appeal by more than a dozen US business lobbies this month to four US cabinet secretaries. The US letter requested the Obama administration’s “immediate action” against the new rules.

“If fully implemented, these policies threaten the ability of US companies to participate in the $465bn ICT market in China,” the letter said. “Our companies’ losses in turn will translate into decreased R&D investments in the US, harming US jobs and innovations.”
 
 
Australia to introduce country-of-origin labelling after hepatitis A outbreak 
By Colin Packham 
 
SYDNEY, Feb 26 (Reuters) - Australian Prime Minister Tony Abbott backed plans on Thursday to introduce country-of-origin labelling in the wake of a hepatitis A outbreak, potentially risking contravention of World Trade Organization (WTO) rules.

With 18 confirmed cases of hepatitis A linked to consumption of berries sold by Patties Foods Ltd, Abbott said he had asked members of his Cabinet to draft legislation by the end of March to provide greater transparency to consumers.

It marked a reversal of his previous position that such legislation would raise the cost of food.

Australia was among plaintiffs against the United States after it introduced its own stronger country-of-origin labelling laws for beef products last year.

The WTO ruled against the United States in October, arguing that country-of-origin labelling provided an incentive to favour domestic livestock.

Gerard McManus, a spokesman for Australia's agricultural minister, said Abbott had told the minister to ensure the proposed legislation did not fall foul of WTO legislation.

Abbott had previously been reluctant to support country-of-origin labelling, insisting it would make food more expensive.

However, he said on Thursday efforts would be made to ensure the impact would be as small as possible.

"We don't want to add needlessly to the burdens of business but we do want to ensure that consumers get the information that they need and the public is protected. So we will do it in the most business-friendly way," Abbott told reporters in Canberra.

The hepatitis A outbreak has been linked to poor hygiene and water supplies in a Chinese packaging plant.

Under current laws, the term "made from Australian and imported ingredients" is common, providing no details on the exact origins of all the ingredients in a product or where it was packaged.

Producers have increasingly sought to show their Australian credentials after a 2013 Roy Morgan poll showed more than 60 percent of Australians sometimes bought products because they were made in Australia even when they were more expensive than imported rivals.

Australia's largest food processor and packaging company SPC Ardmona, owned by Coca-Cola Amatil, began declaring on its labels that all tinned products were Australian grown and canned after it was forced to seek financial assistance. (Editing by Paul Tait) 
 
 
Friction over India's beef trade heats up after attacks
By Meenakshi Sharma

MUMBAI, Feb 25 (Reuters) - Hindu nationalists in India have stepped up attacks on the country's beef industry, seizing trucks with cattle bound for abattoirs and blockading meat processing plants in a bid to halt the trade in the world's second-biggest exporter.

The industry is predominantly run by Muslim traders and some groups in the majority Hindu population vehemently oppose it due to the revered status of cows. Beef traders fear that elements in the party of Prime Minister Narendra Modi may be condoning the latest flare-up in protests.

There has been a surge of raids this month. An official at a beef transport group in Maharashtra state said around 10 vehicles travelling to Mumbai had been stopped, the animals taken forcefully and drivers beaten by members of Hindu nationalist groups despite carrying valid documents.

"We are doing everything legally, but these people harass us and disrupt our work for no reason," said Mohammad Shahid Sheikh, president of the beef transporters' group in Deonar, the site of India's biggest abattoir on the outskirts of Mumbai.

Despite the sensitivities over the trade, India has become the world's top beef exporter behind Brazil. Traders said the current attacks had not caused major disruption, but if they were to become nationwide could threaten the lucrative business.

A majority of India's beef comes from buffaloes, which are not worshipped, but members of Hindu nationalist groups involved in protests such as Vishwa Hindu Parishad (VHP) consider themselves protectors of both cows and buffaloes.

Some of these groups have close links with the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) of Prime Minister Modi, who himself criticised the previous government for promoting a "pink revolution to butcher cattle and export meat".

The attacks on beef traders are another example of Modi's struggles to contain extremist elements of the BJP's support base, whose strident behaviour is dragging on the government's economic reform agenda.

Modi last week vowed to protect all religious groups after attacks on Christian institutions in New Delhi, which were partly blamed for the BJP's drubbing in a state election.

The BJP's national general secretary, Ram Madhav, declined to comment on the party's stance on the beef trade and the protests, while Modi's press officer did not respond to calls and a text message seeking comment.

Satpal Malik, a vice president of the farmers wing of the BJP, said: "We did say we would discourage beef exports and even the prime minister was against it, but I can't comment on what we think of the issue now."

CRACKDOWN?

Officials in Maharashtra - scene of some of the most violent protests seen to date - have pledged to arrest anyone found impeding access to slaughterhouses or disrupting cattle movement.

A circular had been sent to all the police units to enforce this and was due to be implemented immediately, said a senior police officer from Maharashtra, declining to be named.

Mohammad Ali Qureshi, president of the Bombay Suburban Beef Dealers Association, said that while beef processing has resumed at many facilities, he would back calls for a nationwide protest if fresh trouble breaks out.

"We will monitor the situation for a month and if the promises are not kept we will launch a nation-wide protest," he said, in between sipping tea as butchers went about their job in Deonar.

But those opposed to the trade vowed to keep staging protests. Killing cows is legal in just two of India's 29 states, though reports of illegal slaughter surface regularly.

"We don't care if the butchers shut shop or announce a strike," said Laxmi Narayan Chandak, head of the Maharashtra unit of VHP's cow protection committee, which says it has been seizing cows held illegally for slaughter for years.

"The previous government supported the butchers to secure votes of the minority community but they have no support in the new government."

India's beef shipments in the last year to October rose to 1.95 million tonnes, 5 percent more than for the whole of 2013, according to the U.S. Department of Agriculture.

A senior official at a leading Indian beef exporter said that exports had been rising because of robust demand from China and other big consumers.

"But if supplies are disrupted for a longer period then definitely it would hit our productivity."
(Additional reporting by Rupam Jain Nair and Krishna N. Das; Writing by Krishna N. Das; Editing by Gavin Maguire and Ed Davies)
 
 
U.S. lawmakers battle over currency in trade deals 
By Jason Lange and Krista Hughes 
 
WASHINGTON, Feb 25 (Reuters) - U.S. lawmakers are drafting battle plans to punish foreign rivals accused of currency manipulation but a growing chorus of critics argue the battle is already won and warn the push may derail a massive trade pact.

A bipartisan bill introduced this month and proposals from other lawmakers seek to stop trading partners such as China and Japan from manipulating exchange rates to make their goods cheaper for overseas buyers.

The trigger for the new currency offensive is a nearly completed Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) trade pact. It encompasses 12 Pacific Rim trading partners including Japan, whose stimulus program has helped lop off a third of the yen's value since late 2011, worrying U.S. automakers like Ford Motor Co.

And China is seen by many Americans as a great stealer of jobs, following years in which Beijing weakened its currency to undercut American manufacturers.

Insistence on a currency chapter in the deal is widely seen as a "poison pill" which could derail the entire pact and reflects many lawmakers' distrust of more open trade.

"You always need a bogeyman, someone to blame your troubles on," said Jeffrey Frankel, a Harvard professor who was a top economist in the Clinton White House.

A series of respected economists and former top officials have voiced concern that currency restrictions will derail the trade pact, although some are also lined up on the other side.

"Almost certainly, the effort would be a classic deal breaker," former Treasury official Ted Truman wrote in a blog post last week.

Federal Reserve Chair Janet Yellen spoke out against the currency proposals on Tuesday, telling senators such rules could "hobble" monetary policy.

Evidence these days is scant that either Japan or China, America's top trading partners in Asia, are engaged in currency manipulation following decades of U.S. pressure to lay off. Even backers of currency rules concede Japan is not manipulating its currency now, although they warn it could again in future.

Japan's yen is weakening thanks in part to the same policies pursued by the U.S. Federal Reserve and it maintains that it has not intervened in currency markets since 2011.

Tokyo signed on for a 2013 Group of Seven agreement, pushed by Washington, in which it agreed to use monetary policy only to boost domestic growth.

The U.S. Treasury has been increasing pressure on South Korea, another potential TPP partner, to let the won appreciate, but does not consider Seoul a currency manipulator.

China, according to the U.S. Treasury, has stuck by a deal struck in 2014 that it would not intervene and the yuan has appreciated 57 percent in real trade-weighted terms since 2004, more than almost any other currency tracked by the Bank for International Settlements.

While Beijing could choose to reverse course and the central bank still controls the exchange rate by setting an official trading band, economists say slowing economic growth, interest rate cuts and capital outflows mean market forces, rather than purchases of dollars, are weakening the yuan.

China now appears to be intervening to prop the currency up, as evidenced by the slight decline in its near $4 trillion in dollar reserves during the fourth quarter.

"We have to get used to the new reality," said David Dollar, who was the U.S. Treasury's top emissary to China between 2009 and 2013, a time when America was actively pressing Beijing to stop weakening the yuan. (Reporting by Jason Lange and Krista Hughes; Editing by Lisa Shumaker) 
 
 
S. Korea, China initial bilateral free trade pact 
By Byun Duk-kkun
 
SEJONG, Feb. 25 (Yonhap) -- South Korea and China initialed their free trade agreement (FTA) Wednesday, taking a step closer to implementing what South Korean officials hail as the most significant trade deal for the country. 
 
The initialing came about three months after the two countries concluded their FTA negotiations that began in May 2012.
 
The agreement, currently written only in English, will be translated into the two parties' native languages before it is officially signed.
 
"The two countries' governments have agreed to work for official signing of the Korea-China FTA within the first half of 2015," the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy said in a press release.
 
The free trade pact requires approval from the countries' respective legislatures for implementation.
 
"The government will do its utmost to have the agreement ratified by the National Assembly without any disruption so that our companies can start benefiting from the Korea-China FTA at an early date," the ministry said.
 
Some new and positive elements have been added to the agreement since the conclusion of negotiations on Nov. 10, Woo Tae-hee, South Korea's deputy trade minister, said at a press briefing.
 
Firstly, 310 products from the inter-Korean joint industrial complex in Kaesong, North Korea, will immediately benefit from a reduction or elimination of China's import tariffs, he said.
 
Such an agreement compares with only 100 products in South Korea's FTAs with Peru and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
 
The two countries have also added a new standstill clause in their bilateral agreement that will prevent either side from raising or adopting new customs duties on any products or services, according to Woo.
 
"We cannot say every element in the agreement is more favorable to us as negotiations always involve more than one party," he said. "But I believe we have in our hands a well-balanced agreement that reflects the interests of both parties in negotiations."
 
   Through additional dialogue, South Korea has gained better market access and established a better business environment in China for financial and communications service providers, the trade ministry said.
 
Under the FTA initialed and exchanged with China's Ministry of Commerce in Beijing, the two countries have agreed to provide preferential treatment to each other's financial firms and to set up a new committee to jointly deal with any business problems for the firms.
 
They also guarantee nondiscriminatory access to communication networks by companies entering each other's market, the ministry said.
 
South Korea's deputy trade minister Woo Tae-hee briefs reporters on Feb. 25, 2015 in Sejong on the details of a free trade agreement (FTA) with China. The FTA was initialed by the two parties on the same day. (Yonhap) 
 
The FTA is expected to become the most significant trade pact for South Korea as China is already its largest trading partner.
 
China, the world's largest single importer of South Korean goods, accounted for more than one-fourth of South Korea's overall exports in 2014, according to the trade ministry.
 
Under the Korea-China FTA, South Korea will completely eliminate its tariffs on 79 percent of all products, or 9,690 items, imported from China within 10 years following its implementation.
 
China will reciprocate the move on 71 percent of the products, or 5,846 items, from South Korea over the cited period.
 
Within 20 years after the FTA goes into effect, South Korea will eliminate its tariffs on 92 percent of all goods from China, with China eliminating its own import duties on 91 percent of products from South Korea.
 
The Seoul government has maintained the proposed FTA with the world's second-largest economy will cause little or no damage to local farmers as 596 out of 2,240 agricultural and fisheries products currently imported from China will be permanently excluded from market liberalization while 16 others, including rice, were not subjects of negotiations from the beginning.
 
The government, however, acknowledged Wednesday that 44 items from China, including tobacco and onions, will not be protected under special agricultural safeguards (SSGs), which allow temporary import restrictions for special market circumstances, such as a sudden increase in imports.
 
"No SSG has ever been implemented for any of the items that have been excluded from the safeguard mechanism in the Korea-China FTA, and there is very little possibility that any of them will require such a measure in the future," an agriculture ministry official told reporters.
 
Following its implementation, the Korea-China FTA is expected to help boost the countries' annual bilateral trade to over US$300 billion, a 39.5 percent hike from $215.1 billion in 2012.
 
Also, South Korea's trade territory, represented by the combined gross domestic product (GDP) of countries with which South Korea has a free trade pact, will grow to 73 percent of global GDP from the current 61 percent.
 
 
Africa's tripartite free trade area set for launch in May
Feb 24,2015
 
NAIROBI, Feb. 24 (Xinhua) -- Negotiations have been finalized in preparation for the launch of Africa's largest free trade area in May, officials said on Tuesday.
 
The Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) Assistant Secretary Kipyego Cheluget told a media briefing in Nairobi that the free trade zone will result from merger of the East African Community (EAC), Southern Africa Development Community (SADC) and COMESA.
 
"All the 26 member states in the three trading blocs have expressed great political will to allow the free movement of goods and services by end of May," Cheluget said during the opening ceremony of the Afrik4r-Comesa 1st peer review meeting.
 
The FTA would cover 26 countries ranging from Egypt to South Africa with a combined population of 625 million people and an aggregate GDP of 1 trillion U.S. dollars.
 
These figures represent half of the African Union's membership and 58 percent of the continent's economic activity, according to COMESA.
 
Cheluget said after the launch, all the members states will be required to ratify the agreement before the FTA takes effect.
 
The COMESA Assistant Secretary General said the tripartite will form a building bloc to the continent wide free trade agreement.
 
Since July 2014, the African Development Bank has also been supporting the Tripartite Capacity Building Programme (TCBP).
 
He added that the main objective of the programme is to provide technical assistance to the three regional economic blocs and the tripartite countries with the view of increasing intra-Tripartite trade.
 
"The programme will also support the tripartite negotiations process, the development of trade facilitation instruments as well as an industrial cluster action plan for the Tripartite Free Trade Area (TFTA)," he said.
 
The launching of the TFTA is the first phase of implementing a developmental regional integration strategy that places high priority on infrastructure development, industrialization and free movement of business persons.
 
In order for the Tripartite FTA to realize inclusive and equitable growth, officials agree on the need for expeditious formulation and implementation of a regional industrial programme.
 
Cheluget said the Tripartite FTA offers significant opportunities for business and investment within the Tripartite and will act as a magnet for attracting foreign direct investment into the tripartite region.
 
The business community, in particular, will benefit from an improved and harmonized trade regime which reduces the cost of doing business as a result of elimination of overlapping trade regimes due to multiple memberships, Cheluget added.
 
The FTA was originally endorsed at the Tripartite Summit of Heads of State and Government in Johannesburg in June 2011.
 
That endorsement came three years after another tripartite summit in Uganda, where the Heads of State and Government of the respective regional economic communities (REC) on a "programme of harmonisation of trading arrangements amongst the three regional economic communities."
 
The tripartite will create a single market of approximately 600 million people and account for about 58 percent of the Africa's Gross Domestic Product.
 
Cheluget added that once operational, the trading bloc will help to increase intra-Africa trade.
 
"We want to ensure that trade within the continent reaches to the level of that of other continents," he said.
 
The enlarged FTA will include Libya, Djibouti, Eritrea, Sudan, Egypt, Ethiopia, Kenya, Uganda, Burundi, Rwanda, Tanzania, Malawi, Zambia, Zimbabwe, Angola, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mauritius, Madagascar, Comoros, Seychelles, Mozambique, Botswana, Lesotho, Namibia, South Africa and Swaziland.
 
 
GOIC Discusses WTO Rules and Regulations, Their Impact on Gulf Industrial Sector
Distributed by Contify.com
25 February 2015
Islamic Finance News
 
Feb. 25 -- The Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting ( GOIC ) will hold a training course entitled "WTO rules and their impact on the industrial sector in the GCC Countries" at the Organization's headquarters in Doha, Qatar from the 25th till the 28th of May, 2015.

GOIC organises this course as part of its endeavours to build capacities of workers in the industrial sector in GCC countries. Participants will get to know the rules and regulations of the World Trade Organization (WTO) and their repercussions on the sectors of industries and services in GCC countries. It will also be a suitable opportunity for representatives of the private sector and officials from institutions in charge of standards in the area of understanding and using WTO rules and mechanisms to exchange opinions and expertise.

This course targets representatives of the private sector and of institutions in charge of specifications and standards, in addition to parties interested in WTO rules.

The training includes various topics such as: introducing WTO rules that affect the industrial sector the most during all phases related to production, marketing, importing and exporting, going through detailed rules of WTO agreements and aspects related to understanding and using the available rules and mechanisms by government institutions and organizations in charge of standards and specifications and the private sector for the benefit of the industrial sector and the services sector.

Furthermore, the course stresses available capabilities in the context of the WTO, notably in terms of developing the industrial sector and adopting exporting strategies. Participants get to know available mechanisms to protect branches of industrial production in GCC countries, and they become familiar with methods allowing them to access information on the markets and the capacity to access new markets.

The training will be delivered by Dr. Anwar Al-Quraan, Director of Industrial Studies and Policies Department at GOIC who holds a PhD in econometrics and economic development from the University of Texas, a Master's Degree in quantitative economics from Indiana University Bloomington and a Master's Degree in economy from the University of Texas in the United States of America. Dr. Al-Quraan has a wide expertise in the areas of economic development, economic policies and planning, macro-economy, econometric analysis, trade policies, economic growth and technical editing of economic texts and reports.

The Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting ( GOIC ) continuously seeks to boost individual and organizational capacities within the industrial sector of GCC countries and Yemen through its training courses. You can easily register to attend any workshop by visiting the Organization's website (www.goic.org.qa [http://www.goic.org.qa]) or via Facebook or Twitter.

 
World Bank denies report on Malawi's global poverty position 
 
LILONGWE, Feb. 25 (Xinhua) -- The World Bank Tuesday denied having published a report which ranked Malawi as the poorest country in the world in 2015 as media reported recently.

The media articles alleged statistics quoted from a latest World Bank report pegged Malawi at the top of poverty scale in the world and the news sparked a heated debate among local and international commentators.

But the Bank said in a statement it was not responsible for the quoted statistics and described the report as erroneous.

"The press articles refer to a report allegedly published by the World Bank which has ranked Malawi as the poorest country in the world in 2015; the World Bank has not published such a report, " said the statement.

The statement said the statistics being published erroneously labeled the figures as GDP per capita (Purchasing Power Parity) when in fact they were GDP per capita (Current USD), adding that in quoting the data, press reports often confused GDP per capita in current USD with GDP per capita in Purchasing Power Parity terms.

World Bank releases World Development Indicators (WDI), which among other data sources include statistics on Gross Domestic Production (GDP) per capita for all countries and, according to the statement; the latest WDI available is for 2014 presenting 2013 data.

The Bank added that the intention of WDI was not to rank but to provide a compilation of relevant, high quality, and internationally comparable statistics about global development and the fight against poverty.

"The purpose of publishing GDP per capita is not to measure poverty but levels of income per capita," explains the Bank in its release. "Comparisons of living standards across countries are best made using both monetary and non-monetary parameters such as Human Development Indicators and Multidimensional Poverty Index."

The Bank added that in PPP terms, although Malawi had a low GDP per capita in 2013, it was comparatively not the lowest in the world.

Meanwhile, the government of Malawi Wednesday described the ' false' report on Malawi as "very frustrating" and appealed to the media in the country and beyond the borders to adopt the principle of balancing and verifying in their reporting. END
 


  ________________________________  
Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.