Greek crisis overshadows G7 talks aimed at growth
U.S., South African officials to meet on poultry dispute
Global Trade Growth to accelerate towards 8% per year by 2017-20:HSBC
TTIP : première étape franchie au Parlement 
US rejects demand for SSM to protect poor farmers
VASEP calls for tax relief on seafood imports 
Beef producers hopeful after ruling on COOL


Greek crisis overshadows G7 talks aimed at growth

Tapei Times 
30 May 2015

Policymakers listened to economists describe ways to shake off the worldwide downturn, but concern over a Greek debt repayment deadline prevailed

The head of the IMF warned that Greece could fall out of the eurozone as it struggled to sort out its debt stand-off, which is adding to concern about the patchiness of global economic recovery.

The finance ministers of most of the world's biggest economies met in Germany against the backdrop of Greece's unresolved crisis, rising oil prices and volatility in financial markets.

The Japanese minister of finance expressed concerns about a "rough" fall in the value of the yen to its lowest level against the US dollar in more than 12 years, reflecting the contrasting outlooks for some of the world's big economies.

Greece was not officially on the agenda of the G7 meeting on Thursday in a former palace in the eastern Germany city of Dresden.

Policymakers listened to leading economists spell out ways they could finally shake off the effects of the global financial crisis that struck nearly eight years ago.

However, with a payment deadline looming next week, the Greek crisis was high on the minds of policymakers.

IMF managing director Christine Lagarde, a key player in the negotiations alongside the EU, warned that the talks could yet fail, forcing Greece into a debt default and an exit from the eurozone.

Lagarde was quoted as saying by the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung newspaper that a Greek exit from the eurozone was a possibility.

She said such a step would "not be a walk in the park," but would "probably not" mean the end of the euro.

Officials say a Greek default would not be as damaging to financial markets as it would have been a few years ago because most of the debt is now held by eurozone governments. However, it would raise big questions about the risk of other countries also leaving the single currency if they run into trouble in future.

Washington has warned against complacency, saying few expected the scale of the crisis triggered by the bankruptcy of investment bank Lehman Brothers in 2008.

G7 sources said officials from the member countries — Germany, the US, Japan, Britain, France, Italy and Canada — were speaking "all the time" about Greece on the sidelines of the Dresden meeting.

Greece said on Wednesday that it was starting to draft a deal with creditors that would pave the way for fresh aid, but European officials denied that kind of progress had been made.

A top EU official said on Thursday that talks had to continue day and night, with a Friday deadline approaching for Greece to pay back 300 million euros (US$329 million) to the IMF.

"Talks ... have progressed more in the last three weeks than in the last three months, but we are not there yet and we have little time to find the necessary agreement." EU Commissioner for Economic and Financial Affairs, Taxation and Customs Pierre Moscovici said.

Meeting under the heading "Towards a Dynamic Global Economy," the G7 finance ministers and central bank heads discussed economic reforms to increase their competitiveness.
 
U.S., South African officials to meet on poultry dispute

POLITICO PRO
Adam Behsudi
5/29/15 2:05 PM EDT

 Top trade officials from the U.S. and South Africa will meet next week in an attempt to "facilitate deliberations" on a long-standing poultry dispute industry groups are now trying to resolve.

"Both governments remain committed to work with their respective poultry industry to find an amicable solution," South Africa's Department of Trade and Industry said in a statement.

South African Trade Minister Rob Davies and U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman will meet, June 5, on the sidelines of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development meeting taking place in Paris next week.

Industry groups from the two countries HYPERLINK "https://www.politicopro.com/trade/whiteboard/?wbid=51784" have been pushed at least once before by their respective governments to break an impasse in the talks.

U.S. producers backed by poultry-state lawmakers are negotiating with the South African industry for the removal of steep antidumping tariffs on U.S. chicken imports. The issue threatened South Africa's participation in a tariff preference program under the African Growth and Opportunity Act.

The Senate passed a renewal of the AGOA program earlier this month but a new provision in the bill will subject South Africa to a compliance review 30 days after the law goes into effect. One of the eligibility requirements for AGOA is making continual progress toward eliminating barriers to U.S. trade and investment.

Davies last week criticized the program's renewal for not improving the level of access for African products to the U.S. market. But he said South Africa is working hard to remain an AGOA beneficiary given the 30-day review.

"The reality is that with the many new conditions and changing dynamics of US trade policy, the value of AGOA is diminishing while its costs are rising," he said in a speech to the South African parliament.

Global Trade Growth to accelerate towards 8% per year by 2017-20:HSBC

Business Times Singapore

May 29, 20158:59 AM

HSBC expects global trade growth - which has disappointed recently with growth in the value of goods exported averaging only around 1.5 per cent a year in 2012-14 - to accelerate towards 8 per cent a year by 2017-20 as the global economy strengthens.

But this pace of growth would still fall short of the pre-crisis period, when growth in the value of global exports averaged around 9 per cent a year.

"The forecast strengthening of world export growth reflects our expectation of continued robust growth in the US, cyclical upturns in the eurozone and Japan, and some improvement in emerging markets,'' HSBC said in its global overview released on Friday.

"Over the medium term, we believe the emerging markets will regain their role as the main drivers of growth in world exports, as their strong economic fundamentals imply good medium term prospects for growth in traded goods."
The bank warned that significant risks remain that world trade growth will continue to undershoot baseline forecasts, especially given the structural factors at play. These include the restructuring of global supply chains and the lack of progress in trade liberalisation.
 
However, potential catalysts to growth in global trade include various negotiations like the one to expand the WTO's Information Technology Agreement (ITA). The ITA guarantees zero-tariff and duty-free trade in around 250 electronics products, but the second phase of the agreement would add a further 200 products, covering global trade flows worth around US$1.4 trillion.
 
Others are the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP), a proposed free trade agreement between the EU and the US that could raise transatlantic GDP by up to US$210 billion a year, as well as the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), a proposed regional free trade agreement covering 12 countries in the Asia-Pacific region. The latter could boost world income by US$295 billion a year over the next decade.
TTIP : première étape franchie au Parlement 
Les Echos
Richard Hiault 
By RICHARD HIAULT
29 May 2015
 
« Ce vote a injecté une dose de caféine dans les négociations » sur le Partenariat transatlantique (TTIP). C'est en ces termes que la porte-parole du groupe des conservateurs et des réformistes du Parlement européen, Emma McClarkin, a salué, jeudi, l'adoption par les 41 députés de la commission en charge du Commerce international du texte définissant précisément ce que doivent respecter prioritairement les négociateurs européens lors de leurs discussions avec leurs homologues américains. Au total, 28 des 41 députés ont soutenu le texte élaboré par le président de la commission Bernd Lange (SPD). Prochaine étape, le Parlement européen se prononcera dans son ensemble le 10 juin sur ce vaste partenariat actuellement négocié entre l'UE et les Etats-Unis. 
 
Un « message clair » 
 
Opposés au projet, les Verts n'ont pas manqué de fustiger ce résultat. Ils reprochent notamment le ralliement des députés socialistes à l'un des dispositifs controversés envisagés par le TTIP : créer des tribunaux d'arbitrage privés (ISDS) chargés de régler les conflits entre une multinationale et un Etat. « Pour que le rapport Lange passe l'étape de la commission du Commerce international et atteigne la plénière, il aura fallu le reniement du groupe socialiste sur ce qu'il considérait jusqu'à maintenant inacceptable entre deux continents démocratiques munis de systèmes juridiques indépendants et performants : les fameux tribunaux privés arbitraux - ou ISDS », a regretté Yannick Jadot (Verts), vice-président de la commission. Les ONG n'ont pas manqué elles aussi de s'insurger tandis que Markus J. Beyrer, directeur général de Business Europe, s'est félicité de cette avancée. « Nous sommes ravis de voir que les droits des investisseurs sont reconnus. Cependant, nous devons nous assurer que des instruments efficients soient mis en place pour les faire respecter », a-t-il indiqué. 
 
Dans les faits, le texte adopté n'évoque pas explicitement l'ISDS mais s'appuie sur la proposition faite par la commissaire au Commerce, Cécilia Malmström, le mois dernier (« Les Echos » du 7 mai). Elle évoquait des tribunaux d'arbitrage plus semblables à une justice classique, avec des juges nommés et compétents, des codes de conduite et des procédures d'appel, calquées en partie sur celles de l'organe de règlement des différends de l'OMC. Soit un ISDS remanié. C'est pourquoi David Martin, le porte-parole sur le commerce des parlementaires sociaux-démocrates, s'est réjoui qu'un « message clair » ait été envoyé selon lequel un ISDS classique n'est pas nécessaire au sein du TTIP. 
 
US rejects demand for SSM to protect poor farmers 
HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/Search/Link/Author/,DanaInfo=.awxyCpn1lurx4Lp21+D.%20Ravi%20Kanth" D. Ravi Kanth 
Mint
29 May 2015
 
Move could derail the conclusion of the Doha Development Agenda negotiations by the end of this year 
Geneva: The US on Thursday rejected a demand for a special safeguard mechanism (SSM) that aims to protect resource-poor farmers in developing countries from unforeseen surges of agricultural imports, a move that could derail the conclusion of the Doha Development Agenda (DDA) negotiations by the end of this year.
 
Indonesia, India, China, the Philippines and Turkey, Barbados on behalf of the ACP (Africa, Caribbean, and Pacific) coalition, and Lesotho, coordinating the African group of countries, maintained that the SSM is crucial for concluding the DDA negotiations. 
 
World Trade Organization (WTO) director general HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/Search/Link/Keyword/,DanaInfo=.awxyCpn1lurx4Lp21+Roberto%20Azevedo" Roberto Azevedo convened a meeting of select trade envoys to discuss the SSM and whether there is a common ground on creating such a mechanism in the final Doha agriculture package.
 
But the US stated that the demand for SSM will not fly because of the attempts to lower the level of ambition in the market access for agricultural products, said people familiar with discussions at the meeting who spoke on condition of anonymity.
 
The US also suggested that SSM can only be discussed as part of market access negotiations, implying that there is no need for SSM when the level of market access in the Doha negotiations is being recalibrated. 
Except one country, all other members are ready to negotiate SSM, said Indian envoy HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/Search/Link/Keyword/,DanaInfo=.awxyCpn1lurx4Lp21+Anjali%20Prasad" Anjali Prasad, according to people familiar with the development.
 
As attempts to draw up the post-Bali work programme by end-July are gathering pace, the hardline US stance raised fresh doubts whether the DDA negotiations can be concluded with the developmental outcomes as promised in the mandate. 
 
Since the launch of the DDA negotiations in 2001, a large majority of developing countries in Asia, Africa, and the Americas consistently demanded SSM on grounds that it is vital for resource-poor farmers to counter the unforeseen surges in imports of agriculture products. 
 
In the failed 2008 ministerial meeting, India's then commerce minister HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/Search/Link/Keyword/,DanaInfo=.awxyCpn1lurx4Lp21+Kamal%20Nath" Kamal Nath maintained that without a credible SSM, India will never sacrifice the interests of its poor farmers.
 
On behalf of the 47-member G-33 coalition, Indonesia led the charge for a "simple, operable, and effective safeguard mechanism" to ensure that farmers in developing countries are not undermined by volatile supplies from countries that provide billions of dollars of trade-distorting domestic subsidies. 
 
SSM, the G-33 argued, is meant "to respond to import surges and price declines that threatens small, subsistence farmers who overwhelmingly reside in the rural areas, and food security." SSM calls for imposing special safeguard measures when imports cross agreed benchmarks either in volume or in prices. 
 
During the meeting, Indonesia's trade envoy HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/Search/Link/Keyword/,DanaInfo=.awxyCpn1lurx4Lp21+Iman%20Pambagyo" Iman Pambagyo made a strong case for SSM on several grounds. The Indonesian envoy said it is wrong to link SSM with market access, saying that regardless of the level of ambition, farmers in developing countries need a mechanism to face harmful surges of imports of agricultural products. 
 
Pambagyo said the mechanism will only be triggered based on most current market realities involving sudden drop in prices or a precipitous increase in volumes of imports over a period of three-year rolling average.
The G-33 has proposed a volume trigger of 110%, 115%, 135%, and above for imposing special safeguard duties. It has argued that "the 3-decade-old fixed reference price of 1986-88 is undoubtedly outdated and flawed economic basis for triggering the price mechanism in today's realities".
 
The Indonesian envoy suggested that SSM will only be applied for a limited range of products with sunset provisions that would terminate the measure after a specified time period. 
India's trade envoy Prasad suggested that SSM is a critical developmental benchmark for developing countries in the Doha Round.
 
While the US strongly opposed SSM, it is currently availing what is called the special safeguard (SSG), which was specifically carved out by the industrialized countries in the previous Uruguay Round of negotiations. 
The US applied SSG duties, since 2010, on 29 tariff lines while the European Union applied on 15 tariff lines and Japan on 16 tariff lines.
 
Norway, which is a strong user of SSG, has suggested that developing countries opt for a modified-SSG instead of SSM, according to farm trade negotiators.
 
The G-33 coalition said SSG is "hardly accessible and ineffective in addressing import surges or price depressions due to its complicated and outdated design and assumptions". SSM "was and is always intended to be a more simple, accessible and effective instrument than the SSG", according to Indonesia.
 
Except the US, other industrialized nations such as Australia and New Zealand, and the European Union expressed concern about the need for SSM, but suggested they are willing to discuss options from the G-33 group.
 
VASEP calls for tax relief on seafood imports 
Vietnam News Summary 
29 May 2015 

High taxes on imported seafood materials are damaging seafood exports. 
 
Taxes on imported seafood materials should be removed to support the country's seafood exports, Mr. Nguyen Hoai Nam, Deputy Secretary of the Vietnam Association of Seafood Exporters and Producers (VASEP), told a conference on May 28 in Ha Noi on policies to support domestic sectors in the wake of free trade agreements (FTA) coming into being. 
 
"Over 70 per cent of imported seafood materials are processed then exported," Mr. Nam said. Under Vietnam's WTO commitments the tax rate on imported seafood materials is high, he added, pointing out that imported seafood materials such as shrimp (from 10 to 14 per cent) and tuna (from 18 to 24 per cent) are taxed quite heavily. 
 
The high price of imported materials results in high prices for Vietnam's exports, weakening the competitive capacity of the country's seafood enterprises. "Certain policies on taxes are major obstacles for domestic enterprises," he said. In some cases the effect of support policies is the opposite of that intended. 
 
Ms. Nguyen Thi Thu Trang, Director of the WTO Center at the Vietnam Chamber of Commerce and Industry (VCCI), told the gathering that the more FTAs that have been signed the fewer support policies there have been for domestic enterprises from the State. 
 
"Enterprises want support policies, but the government is limited by its commitments in FTAs," said Ms. Nguyen Hang Nga from the Vietnam Competition Authority under the Ministry of Industry and Trade. 
She agreed that if domestic enterprises really needed support policies then they should be forthcoming from the government. When balancing the benefit to domestic enterprises against the risk of being sued if measures were introduced to support domestic enterprises, Ms. Nga believes domestic enterprises should come first. 
 
Beef producers hopeful after ruling on COOL 
By BY ALEXIS STOCKFORD
Winkler Times 
28 May 2015
 
Local beef producers hope that U.S. country of origin labelling (COOL) is on the way out now that the World Trade Organization (WTO) has maintained that it violates American trade agreements. 
 
Last week, the WTO denied a U.S. appeal to overturn last year's ruling in favour of Canada and Mexico. It is the fourth ruling in favour of Canada and Mexico since they first challenged COOL in 2009 and was the final appeal available to the U.S. in the dispute. 
 
"I don't understand how Canada and Mexico can win four times and nothing be done about it," Andre Steppler of Steppler Farms Ltd. said. 
 
Under COOL legislation, meat can only be considered a product of the U.S.A. if the animal was born, raised and slaughtered on American soil. Canada and Mexico successfully argued to the WTO that COOL puts their live cattle exports at a disadvantage and creates an unnecessary quagmire of red tape where each animal must be tracked individually. 
 
"There's a discount of cull cows and any Canadian born beef heading south because of the complications of COOL on the processing side," said Gordon Orchard, who raises cattle west of Miami. "It'll be a good thing if it's all harmonized and we're back into a North American market because American beef can come this way with no trade restrictions and it's kind of unfair that Canadian cattle going south have to face trade restrictions." 
 
Gordon added that he feels proposed tariffs against American trade goods have "sobered up" the American government. 
 
After the WTO ruling last week, Canadian Agriculture and Agri-food Minister Gerry Ritz and International Trade Minister Ed Fast warned that Canada would seek retaliatory trade action if COOL was not repealed. The expansive list of tariff targeted items includes California wine, breakfast cereal, cheese, beef and pork and is awaiting WTO authorization. 
 
Soon after, the U.S. House Agriculture Committee approved a bill to repeal COOL. "In light of the WTO's decision and the certainty that we face significant retaliation by Canada and Mexico, we cannot afford to delay action," House Agriculture Chairman Michael Conaway said in a release. 
 
"It's more positive than it's been for about the last five years on COOL," Orchard said. "The American government is finally recognizing that they're part of a WTO agreement and they've got to comply with the rules just like we do." 
 
Manitoba Beef Producers president Heinz Reimer is, likewise, optimistic, although he admitted that with the ball in the Americans' court, it's too soon for a full on celebration. 
 
According to Reimer, COOL has been particularly detrimental to producers in Manitoba since they are farther away from Canadian processing plants. U.S. markets are closer, he said, and would be easier to ship to. 
Steppler agreed, saying that his only options for shipping are Southern Ontario or Alberta. Even when he ships locally, he said, he often gets docked on his prices in order to pay for the slaughterhouse to transport meat out of province. 
 
"They know that's the only other option, so they can give us 10 cents less a pound," he said. "So yeah, if we can have another route down to the States and have it competitive, then that puts pressure on everybody else to actually pay for what they have to be paying for." 
Reimer estimates that COOL has cost the Canadian beef industry $600 million a year. 
 



Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.