 
Headlines:
China third-quarter GDP growth beats expectations at 6.9%
WTO crucial despite challenges, especially for small nations like Singapore, say policymakers
Tariffs to be focus of 11th round of talks on EU-US trade deal
China Statistics Bureau Spokesman: TPP Trade Deal to Exert Pressure on China's Exports
Most fisheries tariffs to end under TPP pact / Nori among just 10 items to keep duties
US Dept. of Commerce faces 'challenge' in meeting WTO deadline 
South Korea should not shake alliance with U.S. by favouring China too much
BIG TOBACCO STILL FIGHTS TO THE DEATH
 
Headlines:
China third-quarter GDP growth beats expectations at 6.9%
Gabriel Wildau in Shanghai and Tom Mitchell in Beijing
Financial Times
19 Oct 2015
©Bloomberg
The Chinese economy grew faster than expected in the third quarter, as resilient growth in the emerging services sector helped compensate for weakness in manufacturing and property.
China’s statistics bureau said on Monday that gross domestic product rose 6.9 per cent in the third quarter in inflation-adjusted terms, down from 7 per cent in the first two quarters and 7.3 per cent for full-year 2014. It was the slowest quarterly growth rate since the first quarter of 2009 but higher than expectations of 6.7 per cent in a Bloomberg poll.
Monday’s figure suggests that China is broadly on course to meet the full-year growth target of “around 7 per cent” that Premier Li Keqiang announced in March. The spokesman for The National Bureau of Statistics said last month that he believed growth as low as 6.5 per cent would be within the target range.
“Today’s number probably represents a floor for how bad it can get in terms of GDP growth in China. On the back of more policy easing and some cyclical recovery, we should see a rebound in the fourth quarter,” said Julia Wang, greater China economist at HSBC.
Yet struggles continue for China’s factory sector, a key source of demand for energy and commodities such as steel and base metals. Industrial output in September grew at 5.7 per cent, the slowest pace since 2008.
While manufacturing and property have slowed for more than a year, financial services provided a temporary boost to growth earlier in 2015 as brokerages raked in commissions from the stock market boom. That led to expectations that growth would correct downward in the third quarter after the Chinese stock market fell by a third from late June.
Yet real GDP growth from services held steady the first three quarters at 8.4 per cent, unchanged from the first half. 
Economists agree that a long-term slowdown in Chinese growth is inevitable due to structural factors such as a shrinking labour force and the end of “catch-up growth” as China completes the transition from a rural to industrial economy. But a cyclical slowdown in manufacturing, oversupply of housing and weak foreign demand for Chinese exports is adding to the pain.
The government has announced plans to boost spending on infrastructure projects to make up for the fall in property and manufacturing-linked investment.
Economists also expect the central bank to cut benchmark interest rates again before the end of 2015, as well as make another reduction in banks’ required reserve ratio. That would follow five rate cuts since November and three RRR cuts in 2015.
Though still weak, the real estate sector is now recovering modestly, with property sales growing 7.5 per cent in the year to September in floor area terms, up from 7.2 per cent growth in the first eight months. Property sales had contracted for 17 consecutive months through June on a year-to-date basis. But developers are still holding off on new construction until the market digests the inventory of unsold flats. Property investment slipping to 2.6 per cent in the first nine months, the lowest growth since 2009. “Continued warm-up of the property market should also help drive the economy back on track,” Li-Gang Liu, chief greater China economist at Australia and New Zealand Bank, wrote on Monday.
WTO crucial despite challenges, especially for small nations like Singapore, say policymakers
Chia Yan Min
19 October 2015
The Straits Times
SINGAPORE - Multilateral institutions such as the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) have been buffeted by challenges, but still play a crucial role especially for a small trading nation like Singapore, speakers at a trade policy dialogue said on Monday (Oct 19).
The dialogue, held over two days at the Hotel Rendezvous, is being attended by trade policy experts, academics and business leaders from the region.
It was organised ahead of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's 10th Ministerial Conference, which will be held in Nairobi, Kenya from Dec 15 to 18.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO has had to grapple with challenges such as the rise of regional trade agreements, the slowdown in global trade, and members stuck in gridlock over fundamental issues, said speakers at the dialogue's opening ceremony.
Ms Ng Bee Kim, Director General (Trade) at the Ministry of Trade and Industry, said new trrends in trade, such as the rise of e-commerce, as well as increasingly diverse HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO membership, have added extra layers of complexity to multilateral negotiations.
The current round of trade negotiations at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO which began in 2001 - called the Doha Development Agenda - has also been stuck in a gridlock on various issues such as agricultural subsidies and market access, said Mr Yi Xiaozhun, Deputy Director-General of the WTO.
Still, both noted that the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO has played a crucial role in global governance and promoting freer trade since its inception in 1995, and it is essential - especially for a small trading nation like Singapore - for negotiators to continue making progress on these multilateral discussions.
Singapore Press Holdings Limited
Tariffs to be focus of 11th round of talks on EU-US trade deal
19 October 2015
dpa International Service in English
Miami (dpa) - The United States and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union will seek to make progress on tariffs during the 11th round of negotiations on the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) starting Monday in Miami.
The tariff negotiations were "a very important step," said EU Trade Commissioner Cecilia Malmstrom said last week. The upcoming talks were also expected to discuss harmonizing regulations and new rules for public procurement.
Brussels and Washington have been negotiating the trade deal, which would create the world's largest free trade area with 800 million people, since 2013. Despite running over the initial schedule, Malmstrom said talks were making progress.
"We have invested so much political and economic capital in this, so neither [of us] want to see it fail," Malmstrom said in an interview with dpa and two other international media outlets.
The two sides wanted to strike a preliminary deal by the end of this year to avoid being impacted by the 2016 US presidential election.
Malmstrom said much now depends on Washington, which will have to determine if "they can conclude it and then leave the ratification for the next administration, or if they feel that this particular element is too sensitive to push through in an electoral year."
She said negotiators "need to get it right." That could mean the deal would be concluded under US President Barack Obama and then "we will have to pause and see what happens with the next administration," she said.
Proponents of TTIP say that it will significantly boost economic growth and jobs. Backers also say it would act as a counterweight to China's growing economic power, but critics worry that it would water down consumer protection provisions and allow corporations to block regulations they oppose.
The deal has met resistance particularly in Europe. Almost half of Germans feel the deal is "a bad thing," according to a survey published Friday by TNS Emnid. Only 34 per cent thought it was "a good thing."
An anti-TTIP march in Berlin earlier this month drew 250,000 people, according to organizers.
TTIP has not faced strong opposition in the US, where the spotlight has been on the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP).
Earlier this month 12 Pacific Rim countries reached the TPP trade pact, which will lift most duties on trade and investment, set new business standards and protect intellectual property rights. Negotiations on that deal lasted for five years.
The 11th round of the talks are scheduled to last through Friday.
dpa Deutsche Presse-Agentur GmbH
China Statistics Bureau Spokesman: TPP Trade Deal to Exert Pressure on China's Exports
19 October 2015
Dow Jones Institutional News
BEIJING--The Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal might have some impact on China, but in the short term its influence will not be very great, said Sheng Laiyun, a spokesman for the National Statistics Bureau, in a news conference Monday.
The Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement -- its 12 participating countries account for 40% of the world's GDP -- would exert some pressure on China's exports, Mr. Sheng said. But he added that this would also be a great opportunity for China to restructure its economy and upgrade its industries. China has taken some measures to counteract it, including pushing for bilateral free trade agreements, initiatives related to what is dubbed a modern version of the Silk Road, and free trade zones, Mr. Sheng noted.
Mr. Sheng also said China's economy will maintain stable growth in the fourth quarter and next year, despite the 6.9% growth in the third quarter, which fell short of the government's 7% annual target. It is normal to see fluctuations in the economy, but the general trend of China's stable growth would not change, he said.
Dow Jones & Company, Inc.
Most fisheries tariffs to end under TPP pact / Nori among just 10 items to keep duties
18 October 2015
The Japan News
Tariffs on almost all fisheries products imported to Japan will eventually be removed after the Trans-Pacific Partnership free trade deal comes into effect following the recent broad agreement by its 12 member countries.
Fisheries products imported to Japan include items largely from TPP member states. Consumers are therefore expected to enjoy a drop in prices following the tariff eliminations.
The Fisheries Agency on Friday held an explanatory meeting for prefectural government officials in charge of fisheries administration. According to the agency, tariffs will be removed on all but 10 of the about 350 fisheries items that were on the TPP negotiating table. The tariffs will remain in place for seaweed products, including kombu, wakame and nori.
For instance, the 7 percent tariff on fresh sea urchin will be removed when the TPP takes effect, while the tariff on frozen sea urchin will be abolished in its sixth year.
According to the agency, annual domestic production of sea urchin totals about 8,000 tons, while about 10,000 tons are imported.
The TPP member states of Chile, Canada and the United States are among the top five countries in terms of the product's import volume.
Regarding imported seaweed, Chinese and South Korean products currently account for a large percentage, while imports from TPP member countries account for very little.
However, the agency decided to keep tariffs on seaweed products to protect the domestic industry because some countries that are not currently members of the TPP, including South Korea, may consider participating in the partnership in the future.
At Friday's meeting, the agency announced that the central government will continue subsidizing the fisheries industry after the TPP takes effect.
The Yomiuri Shimbun
US Dept. of Commerce faces 'challenge' in meeting WTO deadline 
This article was first published by AMM, 
Metal Bulletin Daily
English, 
Steel experts doubt that the US Department of Commerce can meet the April 1 deadline to revise countervailing duties on a slew of Chinese imports as ordered by the World Trade Organization (WTO).
Steel experts doubt that the US Department of Commerce can meet the April 1 deadline to revise countervailing duties on a slew of Chinese imports as ordered by the World Trade Organization (WTO)
“I think it will be a challenge for the Commerce Department to meet this expedited timeline in light of its current case load and limited resources,” Steel Manufacturers Association president Philip Bell told Metal Bulletin sister publication AMM via email from the World Steel Association conference in Chicago. “I am sure the team at Commerce will try their best.”
A WTO arbitrator ruled that the US Commerce Department had 14-and-a-half months to adjust duties levied against 15 products, including those on steel pressure pipe, line pipe, seamless pipe, drill pipe, oil country tubular goods, steel cylinders, wire strand and aluminum extrusions.
China requested a ten-month determination period, while the USA asked for 19 months. Even though the department argued that dividing scarce resources to address these 15 investigations warranted more time, the WTO ultimately disagreed, though it admitted that the department’s 12-year record-high case load did “elicit sympathy”.
As the department prioritizes these investigations following the announcement of the April deadline, worries worsen over how current cases will proceed.
“I have concerns that this may inhibit the thorough analysis of both the previous Chinese duties and the current pending cases,” Bell said. “Everyone wants trade cases to be approached with analytical rigor and a complete examination of the facts. That requires time.”
As time becomes a dwindling resource, domestic steelmakers lose confidence in the anti-dumping and countervailing duties petitioning process.
“Year after year, domestic steel producers patiently await determinations that often have befuddling results,” Bell said. “I am concerned that this could exacerbate the resource constraints that currently exist at Commerce. I certainly hope not, but we will have to see.”
Metal Bulletin Limited 
South Korea should not shake alliance with U.S. by favouring China too much
19 October 2015
The Japan News
It is vital that the United States and South Korea maintain their solid alliance, for the deterrence of North Korea's military provocations and the regional stability of Asia. South Korea should not weaken these ties by getting too close to China.
U.S. President Barack Obama held talks with his South Korean counterpart Park Geun-hye in Washington and they adopted a joint statement focusing on their cooperation to get Pyongyang to abandon its nuclear and missile programs.
The statement warns that additional sanctions will be imposed on Pyongyang should the country push through with launching a ballistic missile or conducting a nuclear test in violation of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" U.N. Security Council resolutions.
Since this summer, North Korea has heightened military tensions between South and North Korea, while also hinting at the possibility of its conducting nuclear tests.
It is significant that Obama confirmed the need to strengthen the U.S.-South Korea alliance during a joint press conference, saying, "The commitment of the United States to the defense and security of the Republic of Korea will never waver."
Yet it cannot be denied that the "close alliance" between the United States and South Korea has been in large part choreographed, because the heightened distrust within the United States regarding South Korea's inclination toward China needed to be denied.
Park decided on South Korea's participation in the China-led HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, and attended the military parade China held to mark the anniversary of its "victory over Japan" in World War II.
'Natural partner'
"I believe that we [South Korea and the United States] make natural partners," Park said at the press conference regarding the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade negotiations, in which member countries such as Japan and the United States recently reached a broad agreement. This statement indicated Seoul's intention to join the TPP, and was probably aimed at mitigating U.S. concern.
Obama said at the press conference that if China fails to abide by international rules, "We expect the Republic of Korea to speak out on that," driving home the point.
Obama's remark was apparently made in consideration of China's self-serving maritime advances in the East and South China seas. But Park made no reference to this.
It remains unclear whether South Korea will modify its diplomatic stance toward China.
The amount of bilateral trade between China and South Korea exceeds the sum of its trade with the United States and Japan. We can understand Seoul attaching importance to China in the economic field, but shifting its priorities from Washington to Beijing in the realm of security could destabilize the region.
During a speech made earlier in Washington, Park said she intends to hold her first full-fledged talks with Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Shinzo Abe on the occasion of the trilateral summit among Japan, China and South Korea in early November.
Since she took office, Park made it a condition that she would hold summit talks with Japan if progress was made on the issue of so-called comfort women.
Park appears to have agreed at last to Washington's repeated urging to improve the bilateral relations between Japan and South Korea.
However, Park emphasized, "The summit can have substantial meaning if we see some progress on the issue of comfort women."
Unless Park changes her diplomatic posture of giving too much weight to issues related to historical perception, it will be difficult for Japan and South Korea to effectively deal with the mountain of pending issues. It will be impossible to realize the close trilateral cooperation among Japan, the United States and South Korea that Washington hopes to see.
The Yomiuri Shimbun
BIG TOBACCO STILL FIGHTS TO THE DEATH
18 October 2015
The Star-Ledger
Linda Stamato / guest columnist
The Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal might thwart the industry's legal - and lethal - assault on foreign nations.
It looks like Big Tobacco has a big problem on its hands in the form of the recently concluded trade agreement between the 11 nations of the Pacific Rim and the United States. Why? The Trans-Pacific Partnership, or TPP - the full text of which has yet to be released - appears to treat tobacco as the unique, noxious weed that it is.
Accordingly, Big T and its products are not expected to receive the benefit of the protections accorded other exports. And, because it's likely to be denied access to an overhauled international dispute settlement panel, it may have to cease bullying sovereign nations that try to reduce smoking within their borders.
It's only right.
As public officials gathered at the White House in January 2014 to mark the 50th year after the surgeon general's "The Health Consequences of Smoking" - and to note the significant fall-off in smoking in the U.S. - Big Tobacco was moving into fertile smoking territory in Africa and Asia.
The surgeon general's report, and the educational and other outreach efforts that came after, convinced some people at least that smoking was dangerous. The Journal of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" American Medical Association - in its Jan. 7, 2014, issue on tobacco and tobacco control - included a study showing the report may have saved 8 million lives.
I'm probably one of them.
The latest surgeon general's report, however, estimates that smoking continues to accrue significant health costs - between $289 billion and $333 billion a year for medical care and lost productivity in the United States. Nonetheless, the tobacco industry presses on; it spends up to $23 million a day - yes, a day - to keep smokers smoking and to attract new ones. The industry seems willing to undertake any cost and abuse any agreement in order to keep selling the poisonous product.
And so, to protect its expanding investment abroad, Big T has taken to bullying sovereign nations that have the temerity to try to protect the health of their citizens. As nations try to regulate cigarettes by requiring warning labels, for example, Big Tobacco has been using trade and investment agreements to challenge and intimidate them.
In fact, the industry's legal tactics are undermining the world's largest global public health treaty, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Health Organization's Framework Convention on Tobacco Control, which aims to reduce smoking by encouraging limits on advertising, packaging and sale of tobacco products. More than 170 countries have signed it since it took effect in 2005.
In Africa, at least four countries faced blatant intimidation from the industry: Namibia, Gabon, Togo and Uganda. Their laws, the industry asserts, run afoul of international treaties.
The industry is using - well, in fact - abusing the treaty route. Trade agreements and investment treaties govern how governments treat foreigners that invest in their countries; they are meant to make it easier to do business internationally and intended to promote prosperity by reducing trade barriers and protect investors from expropriation by foreign governments; they are not intended to serve as a means by which corporations can undermine legitimate public health regulations.
Accordingly, as the U.S. negotiated the trade agreement with the Pacific Rim countries, key players were watching to be sure that the emerging agreement included language to protect nations from legal challenges by tobacco companies, to stop the bullying of sovereign governments. There were those, too, of course, who opposed any language to that effect, including theHYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" U.S. Chamber of Commerce - Big T's BFF, advocate and big-time lobbyist.
Well, Big T may have lost this round, but we haven't heard the last from this crowd by any means. There will be intense pressure for changes in the TPP agreement or to kill it altogether. The lobbying assault on Congress is already under way. Once President Barack Obama - who himself has struggled with the habit - signs the agreement, however, Congress can only ratify or reject it. No changes allowed.
The administration simply has to hold firm. Tobacco is an industry that aggressively markets and promotes lethal and addictive products and continues to recruit youth and young adults regardless of the research results on the effects of tobacco products. More than three-quarters of the world's smokers now live in the developing world. Without effective interventions, many millions will die annually from tobacco use.
Big Tobacco will not go away. This is an industry that has declared war on those trying to protect the public's health. Every progressive step we can take against it, here and abroad, needs to be taken. The health of citizens everywhere demands it.
Linda Stamato, a regular contributor to The Star-Ledger, is co-director of and a faculty fellow in the Center for Negotiation and Conflict Resolution at the Edward J. Bloustein School for Planning and Public Policy at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Rutgers University.
Advance Publications, Inc.
END
 
Josep Bosch, Information Officer
Information and External Relations Division
+41227395681
 
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.