WTO talks: New deal at stake over Doha round stalemate  
QNB: TPP Would Significantly Revitalise Global Trade by 2017  
TRIPs council okays extension of pharma transition period 
WTO agrees to extend drug patent exemption for LDCs 
Government to clarify tobacco case 
Textile exports: actual potential and contemporary facts 
La Chine entend lutter contre la vente en ligne de contrefaçon
Les industries sidérurgiques européenne et américaine dénoncent les surcapacités chinoises 
China revisa efectos de TPP  
 
 
WTO talks: New deal at stake over Doha round stalemate 
8 November 2015, The East African

Key WTO members have broken ranks over whether the upcoming ministerial conference should be based on texts drafted 14 years ago in Doha, or broadened to include the impact of climate change, infrastructure, security and national economies on trade.
With five weeks to go before the ministerial meeting scheduled for December 15 to 18 in Nairobi, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States (ACP) are bracing for a fresh battle with developed countries that want the Doha round dumped.
Debate over the status of the agreement could stall progress towards a deal on the unresolved issues, especially on agricultural subsidies, which are a top African agenda for the meeting.
The Doha round was built around developed countries reviewing farm subsidies especially in the cotton industry and easing rules for services to among other things improve access to medicines for the world’s poorest countries.
Ahead of the Nairobi meeting, however, developed countries, especially the US, China, Japan and Korea, have shown reluctance to adjust domestic policies in favour of poorer countries.
Instead, they want a new dialogue launched to address energy, security, climate change, currency and their links with trade. Emerging countries like the BRICS, insist the Doha texts should be at the heart of any new trade deal.
In contrast, the US argues against basing further talks on the texts, and wants countries to update the data, mostly on farm subsidies, to inform negotiations on trade policies and any concessions.
“The challenge here is that major trading powers like the US and EU may be more focused on preferential trade deals being negotiated outside the WTO system — meaning they are less than fully engaged in pushing for a rapid outcome on the WTO trade agreement,” a source familiar with the matter said.
While the US and EU are currently negotiating a trans-Atlantic free trade deal, another set of countries including the US and Japan are trying to negotiate a trans-Pacific accord. Other negotiations are also proceeding in parallel with the Doha talks at the WTO.
“African countries are disappointed with lower ambition and commitment, but are caught in the middle and the big question is whether the Nairobi Package will be deliverable and whether it will be workable,” the source said.
The key technical and political issues African countries will be pushing at the WTO summit include domestic support for agriculture, market access for agriculture and industrial goods and services as well as the impact of financial crises and geopolitics.
“African ministers want to obtain binding commitments from especially the high-subsidy countries, such as the US, Japan, China and the Republic of Korea, to reduce the agricultural subsidies that enable developed countries to export cheap food to developing countries, to the detriment of farmers on the continent,” said Joshua Mugodo, director of economic affairs at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Kenya’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Trade.
Despite a commitment under WTO to reduce certain agricultural subsidies by 20 per cent, overall subsidy levels in the industrialised countries of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development have continued to rise. Payments to farmers now reach some $1 billion a day, equivalent to the total daily income of the world’s poorest 1 billion people.
To compel the rich countries to reduce their subsidies, India argues that the Nairobi discussions should be based on the conclusions of the Doha agreement.
Africa also wants “simplified and transparent rules of origin at 25 per cent of ad valorem content would qualify for preference while proposals from China are 40 per cent, and Thailand 50 per cent. They also want a legal binding for Bali Package issues beyond the Trade Facilitation Agreement — TFA; and policy flexibility in agriculture, industrial goods and service.
On food Aid, African countries want a balance between adequate supplies of bona fide food aid and ensuring the elimination of commercial displacement through disciplines on in-kind food aid, monetisation and re-exports.
 
QNB: TPP Would Significantly Revitalise Global Trade by 2017 
8 November 2015, Middle East North Africa Financial Network (MENAFN)
 
After five years of negotiations, an agreement was reached on the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), the largest trade deal in two decades. The TPP is a regional trade agreement among 12 countries that account for 26% of world trade and 37% of global GDP.
It aims to eliminate tariffs and non-tariff barriers to trade in goods and services between the member countries and also contains rules covering new technologies, the digital economy, services, and intellectual property rights (for example, drug patents) as well as setting standards for the environment and labour laws.
The TPP has the potential to support global trade growth by reducing protectionism, revitalising global supply chains and setting the stage for further regional agreements. However, the benefits will take time to realise. The TPP still needs to be approved by national parliaments, which is unlikely to take place until 2017 at the earliest, with significant risks of failure or delays. Additionally, many of the changes required by the TPP will only be implemented gradually over the next ten years, particularly in areas that face high tariffs, QNB said in its weekly financial analysis.
Therefore, although the TPP could significantly revitalise global trade, it will take time to realise its full potential. World trade has been sluggish in 2012-15, growing by an average of 3.2% a year compared with 6.2% in the previous 20 years.
This is a concern as trade has huge benefits for the global economy. It supports a more efficient allocation of resources between countries that have diverse comparative advantages and encourages the spread of technology and know-how. The slowdown in world trade is being driven by a combination of weaker demand, changing global supply chains as the US and China onshore more manufacturing, and rising protectionism.
Protectionism has increased since the global financial crisis. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) has warned of "creeping protectionism" as governments have implemented new trade restrictions.
Additionally, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO has had little success recently in advancing a new global trade agreement to remove tariffs and other barriers to trade. The current round of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO talks, the Doha Round, has been ongoing since 2001, but is stalling as developing and developed nations have failed to resolve conflicts.
With little progress being made on a comprehensive global trade agreement within the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO, a series of regional and bilateral trade agreements, such as the TPP, are currently being negotiated outside the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO which could help reverse the protectionist slant by reducing barriers to trade.
The TPP should also encourage more offshoring of production, revitalising global supply chains, benefitting global consumers through lower prices and making member countries' producers more competitive. For example, clothes manufactured in Vietnam and exported to Australia receive their inputs from Malaysia (buttons) and Singapore (fabric) both TPP members. Tariffs are currently applicable on all the inputs (~5% of the cost) as well as the final exported product (~5%).
Therefore, the removal of tariffs through TPP could reduce the cost of the product in Australia, a member country, by around 10% and in non-TPP members by 5%. So, Vietnam sells more clothes, Malaysia and Singapore sell more buttons and fabric, and Australian consumers get a cheaper product.
As a result, exports from TPP countries would increase and GDP would gain from higher exports. The greatest gains would be in emerging market countries, such as Vietnam, as the removal of relatively high tariffs would make their manufacturing exports significantly more competitive in large markets like the US and Japan. Meanwhile, the benefits for an advanced economy such as the US would be less dramatic as tariffs are already low and the economies of the other TPP members are small in comparison to the US.
In addition to boosting trade and income, the TPP also provides a template for other regional trade deals, such as the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) between the US and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union (42% of world trade and 59% of global GDP). It is also likely that the TPP will add new members over time, extending the benefits from the treaty.
 
TRIPs council okays extension of pharma transition period 
8 November 2015, Dhaka Tribune
 
The Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs) council meeting on Friday approved extension of the transition period for pharmaceutical products for least developed countries till 2032.
“It is hoped that the upcoming General Council at the WTO would also accord necessary approval on this,” said a press note issued by the Foreign Ministry.
It is the longest ever negotiated exemption for LDCs after the establishment of WTO under any agreement.
“In addition, this time, Bangladesh secured additional protection for LDCs including waiver from TRIPS Article 70.8 as well as the previous waiver from TRIPS Article 70.9. This is considered by all in Geneva to be a double victory for the LDCs,” the press note said.
This decision is considered to be highly favourable for the LDCs in general and Bangladesh in particular, as Bangladesh would be benefiting the most out of this decision.
As a result of long negotiation with the United States, LDCs under the leadership of Bangladesh Ambassador to Geneva M Shameem Ahsan as coordinator in WTO secured the extension of the transition period.
Before this decision, December 2015 was the deadline for Bangladesh and other LDCs to enjoy the transition period, after which these countries would have to buy the regular medicines at a much higher price.
 
WTO agrees to extend drug patent exemption for LDCs 
8 November 2015, BDnews24.com

The new decision comes ahead of the existing privilege expiring onJan 1next year.
With the approaching deadline, LDC members of the WTO requested a further extension of the provision so long as those countries remained least developed nations.
A TRIPS (Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights) Council meeting in Genevaon Fridayagreed, and decided to allow 'maximum flexibility' in their approach to patenting pharmaceutical products until 'at least January 2033'.
The decision also keeps open the option for further extensions beyond that date. It was hailed 'unanimously', WTO says in announcingFriday'smeeting outcomes.
Industries say the exemption helps countries like Bangladesh to make expensive brands available in their markets in cheaper prices as they do not need to bother about patents.
Bangladesh's Tk 12 billion drug market is dominated by local manufacturers and many of them export their produce, using the LDC privilege.
Bangladesh Ambassador Shameem Ahsan, coordinator of the LDC group in the WTO, described the decision as 'historic'.
He said it would 'assure the LDCs the necessary legal certainty to procure or to produce generic medicines for those who need it most but do not have any access'.
Partners in Population and Development's (PPD) Executive Director Joe Thomas welcomed the decision.
He told <a href="HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" http://bdnews24.com/" />bdnews24.com it would have 'significant implications' for PPD member countries.
PPD, headquartered in Dhaka, promotes collaboration among poor developing nations. More than half of the world population lives in its 26 member states, many of them in extreme poverty.
Health care cost drives millions of them from poverty to extreme poverty.
'Access to generic medicines is essential for the long-term stability of health systems in many PPD member countries,' Thomas said.
'Neither patients nor governments can afford expensive brand-name drugs in many LDCs, which are home to over 10 million of the world's HIV/AIDS patients'.
He said the request for the patent waiver was 'fair and just'.
He said this would 'essentially' contribute to reducing inequality within and between countries, the 10th of the new Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
SDG Goal 3 of ensuring good health and promoting well-being for all of all ages includes the target of providing 'access to affordable essential medicines and vaccines'.
WTO Director-General Roberto AzevÃªdo also hailed the decision.
'This decision by the TRIPS Council represents a clear and unambiguous signal that WTO members are committed to addressing the needs of the organisation's poorest members,' he said.
'With the concerns of least developed countries at the centre stage next month of our Nairobi Ministerial Conference, now is the time for WTO to build upon this momentum in other areas of our work,' the Director-General said.
This extension, the second specifically applied to pharmaceutical products for LDCs, is in line with directions set by WTO ministers in the 2001 Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health.
Following that Declaration, WTO general council in 2002 approved the existing extension to Jan 1, 2016.
 
Government to clarify tobacco case 
8 November 2015, Bangkok Post

Deputy Prime Minister Wissanu Krea-ngam has instructed the relevant authorities to clarify the World Trade Organisationâ's ruling in 2010 to see if it affects the government's lawsuit against HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Philip Morris (Thailand).
The tobacco company has been accused of making false declarations about the value of cigarettes it imported from the Philippines between 2003 and 2007 to avoid paying the full amount in taxes and depriving the government of an estimated 68 billion baht.
In September 2013, former attorney-general Julasingh Vasantasingh agreed to indict 12 HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Philip Morris executives, including four foreigners. However, the government is reviewing the move as the company has challenged the planned lawsuit, citing a ruling by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO in 2010 that states Thailand unfairly treated cigarette importers from the Philippines between August 2006 and September 2007.
The ruling said Thailand rejected the import price declared by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Philip Morris for cigarettes it manufactured in the Philippines. Mr Wissanu said the government needs to determine three facts before it decides if the planned indictment against the tobacco company can go ahead.
First, the government must establish if the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO ruling against Thailand over the custom practice and the ongoing false declaration case against HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Philip Morris are one and the same. Thai authorities believe both cases are different, but the company says otherwise, he said.
Next, the government needs to know if the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO ruling is finalised or if it is open to appeal. Lastly, the government is concerned about implications particularly on bilateral and international trade if it presses ahead with the planned indictment, he said. The Commerce Ministry has been asked for its advice on the matter.
Mr Wissanu said when these three issues are clarified, the government will make a decision based on what is best for national interest.
"I’ve asked the authorities to study our trade with the Philippines, what we import from and what we export to ... and what will happen if the lawsuit goes ahead. I was told it isn’t just about the Philippines, but about the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO and all members.
"So I’ve asked them to give me hard facts so that we can make a well-informed decision, and no one can blame us if we go ahead and comply with our laws,” he said.
 
Textile exports: actual potential and contemporary facts 
8 November 2015, Pakistan Observer

Textile exports declined more than 16 percent in March 2015. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Pakistan Yarn Merchants Association (PYMA) has demanded immediate measures to boost exports. According to the details, exports of cotton decreased by 29.36 percent in value terms and 12.99 percent in quantity. While, the cotton cloth exports also declined by 14.45 percent in value and 37.57 percent in quantity, exports of bed wear dropped by 16.94 percent in value and 15.15 percent in quantity, towels exports went down by 19.03 percent in value and 23.51 percent in quantity, exports of garments slid by 5.20 percent in value and 12.57 percent in quantity.
The only item showed increase was knitwear sector with 28.53 percent increase but 7.41 percent decline in value. In spite of that HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union had granted GSP concession to Pakistani textiles under which Pakistan could export its textile products duty free to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU markets. Pakistan's exports to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU) have increased 29pc during January to September 2014, after receiving the Generalized Scheme of Preferences (GSP) Plus from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU. But the real potential of the facility could not be materialized due to a severe energy crisis since April 2014. There was surge in exports to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU during the first three months followed by a constant decline. Pakistani exporters could not avail this opportunity to benefit from this concession because of several problems such as electricity and gas shortages that reduced the productivity of units.
The units were unable to meet the demands of foreign buyers. The Association said that the distribution companies coupe this short fall through appropriate planning by taking stock of actual demand area wise, industry wise and market wise. On the other hand, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" All Pakistan Textile Mills Association (Aptma) has appreciated the government decision of imposing regulatory duty (RD) of 10 percent on yarn and fabric as wise and justified decision. This decision would save the textile industry of Pakistan where 40 percent capacity of spinning, weaving and processing mills had been closed down. This can be proved by the financial results for the first quarter of 2015-16 of textile companies in spinning; weaving and composite units that had shown around Rs40 million loss on an average. About 27 basic textile mills losses compelled them to close their units.
Earlier Aptma demanded imposition of 15pc regulatory duty on the import of subsidized fine count cotton yarn, particularly from India. The Indian textile industry manufacturers get a subsidy of Rs26.72 per kg in the form of lower interest rate, value added tax benefit, duty exemption on electricity bills, reduced transportation cost of cotton and yarn and power cost besides central subsidies. The total value comes to around Rs120 million per annum for a mill of 25,000 spindles. The annual import of fine count cotton yarn from India reached 30,000 ton in 2014 against 6,500 ton in 2012. Import data of the first six months of the current FY indicated that 3,000 ton per month is coming into Pakistan from India. Of which about 90pc of imports come from India, which is extending due to rebate to its manufacturers.
India is capturing Pakistani domestic market by dumping fine count cotton yarn. Pakistan's 30 mills have a production capacity of 6,000 ton per month while India is dumping subsidized 3,000 ton on an average. The energy crisis resulted an increase in the cost of textile industry that made far more expensive at around 16 cents/ kilowatt per hour (kWh) compared to the textile industry in the region, which costs at 7 to 9 cents/kWh. The basic textile exports of yarn and fabric have already slumped 11pc and 36pc respectively, since April, due to the two former reasons. Aptma warned the government that textile exports might reduce to $2 billion, if the sector is not given the promised supply of energy especially in Punjab. Moreover, a huge amount in sales tax refunds is outstanding for about one and a half years, which has caused severe liquidity problem for textile industries. It was hoped that the government would also give them level playing field by withdrawing Gas Infrastructure Development Cess (GIDC) and power surcharge.
Historically, the textile industry of Pakistan started its journey since 1957 and organized it independently. About 100pc of the country's textile exports and more than 50pc of the clothing exports sent by the members mills of Aptma. The textile industry is the backbone of the economy. It contributes 8.5pc to GDP and employs over 40pc of the manufacturing sector workforce. Besides, the spinning industry being the sole consumer of cotton worth $5 billion, sustains the largest cash crop of Pakistan. World Trade Agreement of Pakistan has been integrated with global trade that operates on the principle of free and open international trade. This is also applied on Pakistani textiles and clothing sectors that was integrated into the upcoming $800 billion international textiles and clothing trade. The international textiles and clothing market is intensely competitive and operates on very low margins. Any sector has to be competitive enough to survive in the quota free world of international trade. With the requirements of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO regime and to be able to compete therein, the spinning industry made $3.5 billion investments since the quota regime of ATC was the free market mechanism away with in favors of open and free international trade.
The spinning industry operates in a free competitive environment especially with regards to the use and availability of raw materials. It procures 11.5 million bales domestically and 3 million bales from the international market on international terms. International procurement became necessary due to insufficient cotton crop since the last ten years. It is therefore perfectly legitimate for it to market and sell its products in the international market on the same principles. The free market regime enabled a significant resource transfer to the farm sector on account of cotton sale proceeds at international prices. As a result an additional Rs200 billion has been transferred to the agricultural sector. Textile exports have also increased in proportion and likely to maintain the momentum by increasing up to $4 billion this year.
Competitive availability of quality raw materials, cotton as well as manmade fibers is very important for the textile industry. Appropriate technology for production of genetically modified, high yielding and pest resistant cotton should be adopted to meet the persistent shortage of cotton and the growing gap between consumption and production. Aptma is funding cotton research by contributing Rs250 million as cess on cotton and this contribution is being increased by 250pc. There is need for cotton research management to be re-structured to involve farmers and the industry in a meaningful way. The development of the textile industry is restricted by the low use of Manmade Fibers in the fiber mix. The MMF and cotton use ratio in Pakistan is 20:80 as against the worldwide 60:40 use. Correction of the fiber-mix ratio will bring about qualitative improvement to the product range as well as broaden the range itself. It is imperative that all duties on import of MMF should be abolished, and new investment encouraged so that MMF shortage can be overcome.
Regional competitors, from 2005 onwards, induced investment to develop sizable capacity and as a result the textile exports of the principal competitor increased from $12 billion to $30 billion. The Technology Up gradation Fund Scheme (TUFS) provided for a remission of interest rate up to 50pc for investment. Better market access is important for the export oriented textile industry. About Rs517 billion of the textile industry funds remained stuck up and has been non-productive asset awaiting refund as 85pc of the textile industry's produce is exported. It is unfair that for collection of Rs25 billion tax on domestic consumption, the industry burdened of Rs517 billion. Previously imposition of 15 percent sales tax on industry proved a failure and the government zero rated the export oriented industry after realizing that refunds were far in excess of collection of the sales tax.
China's current progress in textiles and the continuing shift of its focus on downstream sectors gives an opportunity to Pakistan to fill up the area in spinning and weaving being vacated by China. This is an opportunity that should not be missed. Aptma said that the rise in GIDC rate to Rs300 per MMBTU is not justified and demanded the government to immediately review the decision. The textile industry is already facing many challenges and this increase in GIDC will add to its costs and bring the industry under more burden. The government should review its decision of imposition of one percent import duty and five percent sales tax on the import of raw cotton.
Aptma has urged the federal government to review its decision to increase gas tariff in the best interest of the domestic industry. The increase in gas tariff from April 1, 2015 by 64 percent per MMBTU unjustified. The raise in tariff would cripple the entire textile value chain, which was using gas for power generation and processing. Further, the unprecedented increase in power tariff government should find solution to be acceptable to all the stakeholders. Otherwise it would have an adverse impact on the industrial sector which is already facing multifarious problems including high cost of doing business. The industry demanded the government to bring down the prices of oil and petroleum products including furnace oil as the price of oil in the international has decreased by 60 to 65pc per barrel. In short to benefit from GSP Plus government should come forward immediately to remove all hurdles hindering exports of textile items.
 
La Chine entend lutter contre la vente en ligne de contrefaçon
8 novembre 2015, Reuters - Les actualités en français

Pékin entend "éradiquer" d'ici trois ans la vente en ligne de produits de contrefaçon en renforçant les contrôles des transactions sur internet et de l'identité des acheteurs, a annoncé samedi le gouvernement chinois.
Depuis son adhésion en 2001 à l'Organisation mondiale du commerce (OMC), qui implique un respect des droits de propriété intellectuelle, Pékin tente de réduire la production de produits contrefaits, qui vont des iPhones d'Apple aux sacs Louis Vuitton.
Mais dans un communiqué mis en ligne samedi sur son site officiel, le gouvernement dit vouloir passer à la vitesse supérieure en imposant notamment aux acheteurs d'utiliser leur véritable nom, et non un pseudonyme, et en mettant en place des étiquettes électroniques pour traquer les fraudeurs.
La législation interrégionale va également être renforcée avec en particulier un échange d'informations accru entre les régions de Pékin, de Tianjin et du delta du Yangtse.
Plus de 40% des produits vendus en ligne l'an dernier en Chine étaient soit contrefaits, soit de mauvaise qualité, selon l'agence de presse Chine nouvelle.
 
Les industries sidérurgiques européenne et américaine dénoncent les surcapacités chinoises 
8 novembre 2015, Bulletin Quotidien Europe

Face à la concurrence déloyale sur le marché mondial due aux énormes surcapacités d'acier dopées par l'État en Chine, les associations de l'industrie sidérurgique d'Europe, d'Amérique du Nord et d'Amérique latine ont plaidé, jeudi 5 novembre, contre l'octroi du statut d'économie de marché à la Chine, à la fin 2016, comme le réclame Beijing.
« L'industrie sidérurgique mondiale continue de souffrir d'une crise de surcapacité et l'industrie sidérurgique chinoise est le contributeur prédominant à ce problème à l'échelle mondiale », expliquent neuf associations de producteurs d'acier sur les continents européen et américain - HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Eurofer (Europe), SSINA et CPTI (Amérique du Nord), AISI et SMA (États-Unis), ACPA/CSPA (Canada), Canacero (Mexique), Alacero (Amérique latine) et AÇO Brazil (Brésil) - dans un communiqué conjoint.
Selon des estimations de l'HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OCDE, les capacités excédentaires à l'échelle mondiale atteignent 700 millions de tonnes. À elle seule, l'industrie chinoise de l'acier, qui appartient en grandepartie au secteur public et est massivement subventionnée, a une surcapacité estimée entre 336 à 425 millions de tonnes, un chiffre qui devrait encore croître dans les années à venir, soulignent les neuf associations.
En parallèle à une demande d'acier en déclin, cette situation a abouti à des niveaux d'exportation record de l'acier chinois vers le reste du monde en 2014. Les exportations chinoises à l'échelle de la planète pourraient dépasser les 100 millions de tonnes cette année, ajoutent-elles.
« La Chine affirme qu'elle devrait se voir automatiquement accorder un traitement de statut d'économie de marché après le 15ème anniversaire de son adhésion à l'OMC en décembre 2016. Nous sommes en désaccord », insistent les producteurs sidérurgiques européens et américains.
De leur point de vue, le protocole d'adhésion de la Chine à l'OMC ne nécessite pas automatiquement des gouvernements des pays membres de l'organisation qu'ils traitent les importations en provenance de Chine comme si elles venaient d'un pays à économie de marché à partir de décembre 2016.
Certaines dispositions permettent aux pays membres de l'OMC de traiter la Chine comme un pays à système d'économie planifiée, sauf si le gouvernement chinois ou les producteurs chinois peuvent montrer qu'ils opèrent dans les conditions d'une économie de marché, insistent les neuf associations.
« Compte tenu du rôle significatif et continu du gouvernement chinois dans de nombreux secteurs clés de l'économie chinoise, et en particulier dans son secteur sidérurgique qui est contrôlé par l'État, il ne peut être question que la Chine soit une économie de marché aujourd'hui », insistent-elles.
La reconnaissance ou le traitement de la Chine en tant qu'économie de marché à la fin de 2016 coïnciderait avec le pic de ses surcapacités de production d'acier et le niveau record de ses exportations vers les marchés internationaux, y compris les États-Unis, l'UE et l'Amérique latine, préviennent-elles.
Compte tenu de l'impact économique et social de la reconnaissance prématurée de la Chine en tant qu'économie de marché, les neuf associations exhortent les gouvernements du monde entier à entreprendre une évaluation globale du rôle continu de l'État dans l'industrie et l'économie chinoises et à mener une évaluation d'impact sur l'industrie mondiale, si la Chine devait être traitée comme telle avant de mener les réformes nécessaires pour garantir que les forces du marché opèrent pleinement dans son économie.
 
China revisa efectos de TPP 
8 noviembre 2015, People’s Daily Online
 
China está evaluando los efectos del Acuerdo de Asociación Transpacífica (TPP, siglas en inglés), dijo hoy viernes el Ministerio de Comercio.
El texto compleo del TPP se publicó el jueves, un mes después de que 12 naciones de la cuenca del Pacífico firmaran el tratado relativo a la mayor zona de libre comercio del mundo.
China está abierta a cualquier mecanismo siempre que siga las reglas de la HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Organización Mundial del Comercio (OMC) y favorezca la integración económica de la región Asia-Pacífico, dijo el mes pasado el ministro de Comercio, Gao Hucheng.
"China espera que el acuerdo TPP y otros pactos de libre comercio en la región se complementen mutuamente y contribuyan al comercio, la inversión y el crecimiento económico en Asia-Pacífico", declaró el ministro.


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.