Headlines:

ITA talks to resume Saturday with ambassador’s meeting
Belarus hopeful of prompt accession to WTO amid Russia, Kazakhstan entry into organization
Belarus may join WTO in one year - foreign ministry
Deal reached on development financing at UN summit
Grexit averted but euro zone debt problems still a headache
The Greek Solution Solved Nothing

·         El Mercosur se propone acabar con sus barreras internas al comercio;

 

Details:

ITA talks to resume Saturday with ambassador’s meeting

Politico

16 July 2015

World Trade Organization ambassadors negotiating the expansion of the Information Technology Agreement will gather Saturday to determine if meetings this week have been successful at moving the stalled talks forward after a seven-month delay, sources in Geneva said today.

“Intense discussions” until 1 a.m. this morning are a good sign that the effort to update the outdated 1996 agreement, which would cut tariffs on new high-tech products, is starting to  bear fruit, observers said. The more than 50 countries in the talks were aiming to come to an agreement on a final list of products this week and ambassadors were originally planning to meet tonight.

Meetings will not take place at the WTO Friday because many delegations will be marking the end of the Islamic holy month of Ramadan.

The ITA talks, which restarted Tuesday, had been stalled since December after China refused South Korean demands that LCD panels be included on the list of products to receive tariff cuts. Beijing refused those demands shortly after agreeing to a list of items the U.S. wanted in the deal — a move that lifted a separate impasse that froze the talks for more than a year.

Some observers took the decision to postpone the ambassadors’ meeting until Saturday as a sign that the outstanding issues between South Korea and China had not been resolved.

The tech industry is eager for countries to reach final agreement on a list of products. The next phase of the talks would determine how tariffs are phased out. Questions on that process have been the subject of discussion this week as well.

— Adam Behsudi

Belarus hopeful of prompt accession to WTO amid Russia, Kazakhstan entry into organization

16 July 2015

Interfax: Kazakhstan General Newswire

MINSK. July 16 (Interfax) - Belarus is interested in stepping up its accession to the World Trade Organization with due account of Russia and Kazakhstan membership in that entity, Belarusian Deputy Foreign Minister Alexander Guryanov has said.

"It is wrong to keep outside of the WTO one member country of such a union as the EEU," Guryanov told reporters in Minsk on Thursday.

He thinks this may influence relations between Eurasian Economic Union members. The deputy minister reminded reporters that Russia had joined the WTO and negotiations on Kazakhstan's entry into that organization were being finalized.

"There are questions, for instance, about ways of recognizing Kazakhstan's obligations in the EEU framework. We are set to have a serious conversation about this on the level of the Eurasian Economic Commission," the deputy foreign minister continued.

In his words, Belarus "has received a signal from the WTO about its readiness to give more time to the Belarus issue." "Hopefully, activity of the commission on Belarusian accession to the WTO will be stepped up," Guryanov said.

He also presumed that technical matters could be resolved within a year. "If everything goes right and politicians do not interfere, then technical works can be completed within a year," the representative of the Belarusian Foreign Ministry said.

Belarus has been holding negotiations on its accession to the WTO since 1993. The negotiations were suspended in 2009 and resumed in 2013.

Russia became a WTO member in 2012, and Kazakhstan would become a full-fledged member of the WTO in December 2015.

Interfax Information Services, B.V.

Belarus may join WTO in one year - foreign ministry

16 July 2015

ITAR-TASS World Service

MINSK, July 16. /TASS/. Belarus hopes that the Eurasian Economic Union (EAEU) member countries will support Minsk during the process of accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO), Deputy Foreign Minister Alexander Guryanov told TASS on Thursday.

"If everything goes right, and politicians do not interfere, we will be able to complete all technical work in one year, and then much will depend on political movements and reactions of WTO key members," Guryanov said. Minsk "counts on support from EAEU colleagues" in this, he added.

Guryanov noted that all EAEU member states except for Belarus have already joined WTO, reminding that Kazakhstan has recently completed negotiations on accession to the organization and will have to ratify the agreement to officially join the world body. "Two issues are important to us - how Kazakhstan’s commitments to WTO and EAEU will be assessed. We will have to discuss these issues seriously at the session of the Eurasian Economic Commission," Guryanov said.

Preparations for launching the process of Belarus’ accession to WTO are underway, he noted. "We received a signal from WTO secretariat that they want to focus more closely on Belarus. Everyone understands that it is not exactly right to keep one member country of such a large integration association as EAEU, out of WTO," the deputy foreign minister stressed.

Guryanov said that Minsk continues bilateral negotiations with several countries. "We hope that the working group on Belarus’ accession to WTO will be more active," he noted.

Belarus submitted an application to join WTO in 1993. The Belarusian Foreign Ministry noted that the country de facto complies with most WTO norms that are in line with EAEU and CIS (Commonwealth of Independent States) regulations. 

ITAR-TASS Information Telegraph Agency of Russia

Deal reached on development financing at UN summit

16 July 2015

Agence France Presse

Rich nations and developing countries on Thursday reached a deal on financing the next 15 years of global sustainable development, in what was hailed as a succesful outcome of a divisive four-day summit.

The four days of talks in Ethiopia's capital Addis Ababa was the third summit of its kind after talks in Monterrey, Mexico in 2002 and Doha in 2008, with the United Nations setting an ambitious objective of deciding how to finance a wealth of targets ranging from ending poverty to tackling climate change.

According to the UN, the investment gap in key sustainable development sectors for developing nations amounts to $2.5 trillion annually.

"I congratulate the Member States of the United Nations on the adoption of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda," UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon said.

"It is a major step forward in building a world of prosperity and dignity for all. It revitalises the global partnership for development, establishes a strong foundation for implementation of the post-2015 development agenda, and points the way for all stakeholders for smart investments in people and the planet where they are needed, when they are needed and at the scale they are needed."

The agreement paves the way for the world body to push ahead with its 2015-2030 sustainable development goals, which are due to be formally adopted in New York in September.

There are 17 in all, ranging from ending poverty to providing universal access to sustainable energy.

Under the agreement, donor nations confirmed they aim to set aside 0.7 percent of gross national income for development aid.

The accord also encourages private-public sector cooperation as well as support for developing nations in implementing tax regimes and increasing tax revenues.

During the summit, however, developing nations were forced to abandon their push to create a global tax authority.

Poorer countries, as part of the 134-member G77 bloc, had been lobbying hard for an end to multinationals' profit shifting, which the UN's trade and development body UNCTAD says costs poorer countries some $100 billion (92 billion euros) a year.

They wanted a UN-managed intergovernmental body charged with overseeing a new set of global fiscal regulations to be created, replacing the current set-up where such matters are managed by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), the so-called "rich man's club".

Richer countries, led by Britain and the United States, were opposed to the plan.

Agence France-Presse

Grexit averted but euro zone debt problems still a headache

16 July 2015

Reuters News

* Spain, Italy have 1 trillion euros to fund by 2017

* Debt ratios in those countries still widening

* Bankers say investor appetite waning as rate cycle turns

* Investors say lop-sided recovery could prompt more QE

By John Geddie

LONDON, July 16 (Reuters) - At 86 billion euros, Greece's latest bailout package is less than 10 percent of the sum Italy and Spain need to borrow on markets before the end of 2017. The euro zone's debt problems are far from over.

With Athens offered a temporary solution, sovereign debt bankers are turning their focus to the scale of the refinancing needs in some of bloc's other indebted states as the interest rate cycle turns and the crutch of central bank bond-buying is set to be whipped away in just over a year.

No one is predicting investors will shun the likes of Spain and Italy, as they have with Greece. But the risk is that they demand a higher rate of interest at a time when both countries are struggling to get their debts back on a sustainable path.

Some investors even see a situation where borrowing costs and the economic recovery in the bloc becomes so lop-sided that the European Central Bank has to extend its quantitative easing (QE) scheme beyond its scheduled September 2016 expiry.

"Debt-to-GDP reduction and structural reforms may not have happened quickly enough in countries such as Italy while the rest of the euro zone is progressing pretty well," said Neil Murray, head of pan-European fixed income at Aberdeen Asset Management.

"In which case, we will need more QE programmes."

In Italy, where data showed public debt at a new record high of 2.2 trillion euros this week, the government has to refinance 635 billion euros of bonds by the end of 2017, a third of its outstanding debt.

Spain has to roll over 351 billion euros in the same period, also around a third of its debts.

Investor appetite for this debt has up until now been helped by a series of monetary easing measures which sent 10-year borrowing costs to record lows of around 1 percent in March.

But even with QE in full flow, yields have climbed some 100 bps in the last few months -- a trend that is worrying the bankers that arrange bond sales for these sovereigns.

"It's a market where the gross amount of issuance is massively more than it has been in the past and rates are rising," said one banker on condition of anonymity.

"We have been in this virtuous cycle and it is coming to an end."

Via bond swaps and issuance of longer-dated debt, Spain and Italy have used this cheap borrowing to extend the average maturity of their debt and ease future pile-ups.

It has also marginally reduced the government's overall cost of debt servicing, but crucially not enough for it to stabilise its debts.

In order for a country to do that, the sum of growth and inflation rates must equal the debt-servicing cost as a percentage of gross domestic product unless the country can run a budget surplus before interest payments to cover it. Forecasts from the OECD, show that by the end of this year, the debt ratios of both countries will still be rising.

This is important because without the numbing effect of cheap central bank money, investors will start to once again pay closer attention to economic fundamentals and demand a higher risk premium from those that have not been able to get their houses in order.

No other central bank has so far been able to halt QE after just one round, and for strategists such as Standard Life's Andrew Milligan, economic divergence in the bloc will only encourage the ECB to follow suit.

"Very sizable amounts of debt have been allowed to build up," said Milligan.

"Traditionally, those would be solved by default, inflation, currency devaluation or a fast growth environment - all of those look extremely difficult for Europe."  

Thomson Reuters (Markets) LLC

The Greek Solution Solved Nothing

By Alan S. Blinder 

17 July 2015

The Wall Street Journal

The modern Greek tragedy isn't over -- after an interlude, there will be more acts. The deal struck with European leaders on July 13 will, with luck, avert an immediate financial collapse. But three underlying problems remain: Greece must escape from the current depression, reduce its debt burden and restore its competitiveness. All three trace to fateful decisions made in the early days of the euro.

Back when the euro was just an idea, many economists warned that the countries involved weren't suited to using a single currency because they weren't what economists call "an optimum currency area" -- a group of nations with similar business cycles and substantial political unity, labor mobility and cross-country fiscal transfers.

The euro's founders did not dispute this judgment; they played down its importance. The order can be reversed, they insisted: First we'll create the common currency, then we'll create the conditions that make it work.

Germany's Helmut Kohl and France's Francois Mitterand went further, subordinating the economics to a big political idea. What's the theory of optimum currency areas compared with ensuring that Germany and France never go to war again? Hard to argue with that, but it doesn't repeal the laws of economics. The eurozone still isn't an optimum currency area, and that explains much of the Greek problem.

Start with "similar business cycles." The Great Recession was a world-wide event, but it hit Greece especially hard. Countries have three main weapons to fight recessions: fiscal stimulus, monetary stimulus and currency depreciation. Membership in the eurozone forecloses the latter two. Greece's large pre-crisis debt -- so large that it shouldn't have been in the eurozone in the first place -- starkly limits the first. Hence Greek Problem No. 1: a depression worse than the Great Depression in the U.S.

The latest agreement looks likely to make this depression worse. Several previous bailouts held things together with chewing gum and baling wire. But in return for loans, Greece's creditors demanded ruinous fiscal austerity. Successive rounds of austerity spread misery and ushered in the left-wing government that Europe and the IMF find so ornery, but did not reduce Greece's debt-to-GDP ratio.

According to myth, stubborn Greece has done little to fix its budget. In reality, Greece's structural budget balance (that is, correcting for the business cycle) moved from an Olympian 17% of GDP deficit in 2009 to about a 1% of GDP surplus in 2014, according to OECD estimates. That's a swing of 18% of GDP in five years. But the Greek economy shrunk so much that the public debt rose as a share of GDP, to 181% from 135% over those five painful years.

Hence Greek Problem No. 2: unpayable public debt. Some sort of write-down, restructuring or default is inevitable. Sooner and smoother (e.g., a mutually-agreed restructuring) seems better than later and messier (e.g., a unilateral Greek default).

But Greece's creditors are so far unwilling to offer much debt relief because that means that some third parties must pitch in money or relinquish claims on Greece. And that brings up the second departure from an optimum currency area: The eurozone is not a country; its mechanisms for fiscal transfers across borders are underdeveloped and contentious.

Compare the U.S. I live in New Jersey, one of the richest states. We New Jerseyans have been making fiscal transfers to poor states like Mississippi, funneled through the federal government, for decades. But few of us notice it, and we don't vote on it. The transfers happen automatically because New Jersey and Mississippi are in the same country. Germany and Greece are not. Angela Merkel is right to worry that Germans oppose transfers to Greeks. Would Americans vote for transfers to Mexico?

Greek Problem No. 3, restoring competitiveness, may be insoluble. One of the most remarkable developments since the founding of the euro has been the extent to which Germany has outpaced the pack in competitiveness. According to data compiled by the ECB, Germany's unit labor costs have fallen 19.5%, relative to its trading partners, since the end of 1998 -- leaving the rest of the eurozone in the dust.

And here's a surprise. After Germany, which eurozone countries do you think are running second and third in competitiveness? Eureka! It's Cyprus and Greece, where wages have crumbled under the weight of ferocious unemployment. Greek unit labor costs are down 7%. But that still leaves them further behind Germany than when Greece joined the euro.

How do you fix that? Under floating exchange rates, some semblance of parity would be restored by currency depreciation. But that can't happen with a single currency. The answer could be either huge wage hikes in Germany or more devastating wage cuts in Greece -- a terrible solution.

So the Greek problem may never be over as long as Greece remains in the eurozone.

Mr. Blinder, a professor of economics and public affairs at Princeton University and former vice chairman of the Federal Reserve, is the author of "After the Music Stopped: The Financial Crisis, the Response, and the Work Ahead" 

Dow Jones & Company, Inc.

El Mercosur se propone acabar con sus barreras internas al comercio;

17 July 2015

Agencia EFE - Servicio Económico

Eduardo Davis

Brasilia, 16 jul (EFECOM).- El Mercosur decidió hoy en Brasilia que durante los próximos seis meses estudiará fórmulas para poner fin a todas las barreras arancelarias que persisten dentro del bloque, que supone un serio obstáculo al comercio entre los países miembros.

La decisión fue tomada en el marco de la reunión semestral del Consejo Mercado Común (CMC) del Mercosur, preparatoria de la cumbre que mañana congregará en la capital brasileña a los presidentes de Argentina, Brasil, Paraguay, Uruguay y Venezuela.

El CMC, integrado por los ministros de Relaciones Exteriores del bloque, acogió así una propuesta presentada por Paraguay y Uruguay, los dos socios "menores" del Mercosur, que desde hace años se quejan por las trabas comerciales que imponen Argentina y Brasil.

El canciller paraguayo, Eladio Loizaga, cuyo país recibirá mañana de Brasil la presidencia semestral del bloque, explicó a los periodistas que la propuesta apunta a darle un nuevo empuje al intercambio entre los países miembros, en momentos en que el comercio global continúa contraído a consecuencia de la crisis internacional.

Como ejemplo de esas barreras, el canciller paraguayo citó las licencias previas para la exportación, que Argentina aplica desde hace más de un año y que ya han generado diversas quejas entre los otros socios del bloque, pese a que se ajustan a las normas de la HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Organización Mundial de Comercio (OMC).

Según Loizaga, esa demanda de Paraguay y Uruguay "no es en contra de nadie, sino a favor de todos".

También apuntó que una medida de esa naturaleza prepararía el terreno "para el desafío que supone una negociación comercial con la Unión Europea (UE)", un asunto que estará mañana en la agenda de los líderes del Mercosur.

Durante la reunión del CMC, además se decidió renovar por un plazo de diez años el Fondo para la Convergencia Estructural del Mercosur (FOCEM), que ofrece apoyo financiero sobre todo para obras que se desarrollan en Uruguay y Paraguay.

Según explicaron fuentes brasileñas, las contribuciones a ese fondo se mantendrán en los valores anuales de la actualidad, que se sitúan en 100 millones de dólares, de los que Brasil aporta un 70 %, Argentina un 27 %, Uruguay un 2 % y Paraguay el 1 % restante.

Esas decisiones fueron valoradas por el presidente uruguayo, Tabaré Vázquez, el primero de los mandatarios del Mercosur que llegó a Brasilia para asistir a la cumbre.

"Se ha avanzado en las últimas horas y venimos con expectativa optimista", afirmó Vázquez al llegar a la capital brasileña.

Para la cumbre también han confirmado asistencia los mandatarios de Argentina, Cristina Fernández; Paraguay, Horacio Cartes; Uruguay, Tabaré Vázquez, y Venezuela, Nicolás Maduro.

Asimismo, asistirán los presidentes de Bolivia, Evo Morales, y de Guyana, David Granger, los únicos mandatarios de los siete Estados asociados al Mercosur que han anunciado que viajarán a Brasilia.

En el caso de Granger, ya ha adelantado que se propone solicitar al Mercosur que apoye a su país en el conflicto fronterizo que tiene con Venezuela por la zona conocida como Esequibo, que se ha agravado en los últimos días.

Bolivia, por su parte, está actualmente en proceso de adhesión para convertirse en el sexto miembro pleno del bloque, cuyo estado será analizado en el marco de la cumbre.

El protocolo de adhesión del país andino fue firmado en diciembre de 2012, cuando Paraguay estaba suspendido como consecuencia de la destitución del presidente Fernando Lugo en junio de ese mismo año.

Por esa razón, mañana se hará una modificación burocrática al protocolo, de modo que Paraguay lo pueda firmar y remitir también a su Parlamento para el debido trámite, que ya ha sido aprobado en Argentina, Uruguay y Venezuela y aún está pendiente en Brasil. EFECOM

ed/ass/fg

END

 

cid:image001.png@01CC55E4.A4F90770

 

Josep Bosch, Information Officer

Information and External Relations Division

+41227395681

 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.
