Ministry: Subsidies comply with WTO rules
China's Export Zones at Heart of Latest U.S. Complaint to WTO
Canada goes to WTO in China wood pulp row
US among leaders in filing trade cases
Farm belt keeping weather eye on new American labelling rules
Europe warns Russia over Ukraine deal
Lew Presses India on Subsidies, Infrastructure
Ways and Means blog urges caution on currency legislation
Protectionist trade actions don't help the poor - AARES
Talks target emissions cap on airline and shipping industries
Valentine's Day: Behind the flower trade
 
Ministry: Subsidies comply with WTO rules 
Zhong Nan 
13 February 2015
China Daily
 
China's measures to offer subsidies to manufacturers in certain industries is in conformity with World Trade Organization rules and will help the country ship more quality products to the world market, the Ministry of Commerce said on Thursday.

The comment came after the Office of the United States Trade Representative challenged China at the WTO on Wednesday, claiming that the Chinese government offers subsidies for the exports of seven industries through "demonstration bases" that receive free or discounted services from suppliers. .

The US claimed China has paid the suppliers almost $1 billion over three years to provide computer and training services.

Given current global economic conditions, building model manufacturing bases and public service platforms to offer subsidies to cash-starved domestic companies is a practical way for them to seek and gain new market growth points, as well as improving the technical content and environmental protection standards of their products, the ministry said in a statement on Thursday.

The ministry expressed its regret over the matter and said all disputes will be resolved under the WTO rules.

Analysts said the US' chances of winning its complaint at the WTO over alleged Chinese export subsidies to seven domestic industries are mixed.

"This case continues the broader trend of the US and other trading partners challenging the subsidies and other preferential treatment that the Chinese government has provided to domestic enterprises through the WTO. Judging from its track record, the US has a reasonably good chance of winning this case as the WTO has upheld the US complaint in most subsidy-related cases it has filed against China since the country joined the WTO in 2001," Ka Zeng, professor of political science at the University of Arkansas, told China Daily in an e-mail. Zeng has written on China, trade and the US.

Zeng said the subsidies cited by the US resemble in part tax breaks that local, state and the federal governments hand over to American firms.

"While providing domestic companies with a competitive advantage just as tax breaks that US companies receive from federal, state and local governments, what raised the salience of these subsidies to the US is that they are often used as instruments of industrial policy to foster the growth of industries with strong ties with the state," Zeng said.

The seven sectors of the Chinese economy involved with the subsidies cited by the US complaint are textiles, apparel and footwear; advanced materials and metals (including specialty steel, titanium and aluminum products); light industry; specialty chemicals; medical products; hardware and building materials, and agriculture.

Zeng did not think this case will directly affect negotiations for a Trans-Pacific Partnership since China is not a participant in the talks. TPP is a proposed free-trade deal covering the US, Canada and 10 countries in the Asia-Pacific region (not including China) that has been under discussion since 2005.

"However, the initiation of this case may help the Obama administration demonstrate its tough stand in trade negotiations in order to garner support for Congressional approval of the so-called fast-track negotiation authority that is sorely needed for TPP negotiations," she added.

Last year, the WTO sided with the US in at least two trade disputes. In June, the WTO found that China breached WTO rules by imposing extra duties on US cars and sport utility vehicles.

In August, the WTO found that China breached WTO rules by imposing duties and quotas on exports of rare earths, tungsten and molybdenum. Those export restraints promote China's own industry and discriminate against US companies using those materials, it said.
 
 
China's Export Zones at Heart of Latest U.S. Complaint to WTO
By Bloomberg News
 
Feb. 12 — From apples in Shaanxi to umbrellas in Fujian, China supports industries in 179 “demonstration bases” across the nation. That support is now at the heart of the latest U.S. complaint over trade practices.
 
The U.S. initiated a case Feb. 11 at the World Trade Organization accusing China of making companies in seven industries eligible for incentives for computer or training services at the bases, U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman said. Free or discounted services provided to exporters in the zones “undermine fair competition,” he said.
 
China's Ministry of Commerce started the bases, officially known as “foreign trade transformation and upgrading demonstration bases,” in 2011 with the purpose of “accelerating China's foreign trade growth model” and “promoting China as a powerful trading country.”
 
The first batch of 59 bases was announced in August 2011, the second batch of 58 in December 2012, and the third batch of 62 in December 2013.
 
The bases are scattered across the country—from home textiles in Lhasa, Tibet, to a jeans-making base in Guangzhou.
 
In a 2011 plan, the commerce ministry said the bases will become powerful export-driven zones “in five to 10 years” to provide “forceful support” to the country's foreign trade.
 
Exporters in the bases can receive support in terms of personnel training, market information, product innovation, quality improvement, branding, marketing, promotion, trade relief and trade facilitation, according a statement from the ministry.
 
Local governments can add their own subsidies to the bases endorsed by the ministry, or directly create “provincial-level” or “municipal-level” bases. For instance, the provincial government of Guangdong assigned 20 million yuan ($3.2 million) in 2012 to develop such bases, the official Southern Daily reported.
 
In Dongguan, China's export heartland, the municipal government will provide 2 million yuan in subsidies annually to the demonstration base there to aid product design, exhibition and training programs, according to an official document on the government website.
 
 
Canada goes to WTO in China wood pulp row 
12 February 2015
Agence France Presse
 
Canada asked the World Trade Organization on Thursday to arbitrate an ongoing trade row with China over its imposition of punitive tariffs on bleached wood pulp.

Trade Minister Ed Fast said an investigation China had carried out into Canada selling the forestry product at slashed prices was flawed, so the Asian country's reaction to restrict Canadian imports was unwarranted.

"Canada's position is that China's investigation was not conducted in accordance with WTO rules and, as a result, the conclusions were flawed," he said in a statement.

The two sides tried but failed to find a negotiated solution to the dispute.

And so, "Canada is requesting the establishment of a WTO panel on China's imposition of discriminatory anti-dumping measures on Canadian dissolving pulp," said Fast.

Wood pulp, also called dissolving pulp, is typically spun into textile fibers or films.

China imposed duties of up to 23.7 percent on Canadian exports of dissolving pulp entering the Chinese market last April.

Canadian companies exported Can$317 million (US$254 million) worth of dissolving pulp to China last year. In 2013, Canada exported almost half of the 750,000 tonnes it produced.

 
US among leaders in filing trade cases 
Nat Rudarakanchana 
13 February 2015
American Metal Market
 
The United States ranked among the top nations to initiate anti-dumping trade cases from November 2011 to September 2014, according to World Trade Organization (WTO) data compiled by one trade attorney.

LAS VEGAS — The United States ranked among the top nations to initiate anti-dumping trade cases from November 2011 to September 2014, according to World Trade Organization (WTO) data compiled by one trade attorney.

The U.S. initiated 58 anti-dumping trade cases in that time frame, tied for second place with India. Brazil led all countries, with 122 anti-dumping petitions filed during the period, Arent Fox LLP attorney Matthew Nolan said Feb. 2 at the 6th Annual SteelOrbis Rebar and Wire Rod Conference in Las Vegas.

The United States also filed 35 countervailing trade petitions during the period, the most of any nation, while China filed eight and the European Union filed 11 such cases.

Countervailing cases filed by WTO members seem to be on the rise, with more than 35 cases filed in 2014 compared with slightly more than 15 in 2008, Nolan said.

Nolan described the rise in countervailing cases worldwide as a "resurgence," despite a push toward privatization for state-owned businesses in many countries in recent years.

The U.S. Commerce Department-led recategorization of China as a market economy in 2007 might have prompted more countervailing cases, alongside increased concern from U.S. companies about import penetration, Hogan Lovells US LLP attorney Craig Lewis said during a presentation at the event.

The metals sector was involved in more anti-dumping and countervailing cases than any other sector from November 2013 to September 2014, Nolan said.

Metals could account for about half of U.S. trade case filings, more than typical proportions globally, he said.

"Obviously, metals has always been the most popular," according to Nolan, who often represents foreign producers in U.S. trade cases. "About half the cases I always deal with are metals."

Within the past two years, there have been active U.S. trade investigations involving at least nine steel products targeting several different countries, Nolan said. Steel overcapacity, high U.S. production costs, volatile market demand and an attitude of "protectionism" among U.S. producers help drive steel sector trade suits, he claimed.

Nolan also warned that politics is interfering in the trade investigation process more than it has in past years, a trend that he sees as dangerous.

"Politics has now begun to infuse the process more than it used to," he said, citing pressure on Commerce from U.S. senators over the summer in a case against Turkish rebar (amm.com, Aug. 6 [http://www.amm.com/Article/3368807/Lawmakers-voice-concerns-about-Turkish-rebar-imports.html]). "People are using politics to try to find outcomes."
 
 
Farm belt keeping weather eye on new American labelling rules 
DEBORA VAN BRENK, DEB.VANBRENK@SUNMEDIA.CA, QMI AGENCY 
12 February 2015
Sarnia Observer
 
Canada's agriculture minister is threatening tariffs on California wine, just for starters, if the U.S. doesn't repeal restrictive meat-labelling laws costing our farmers billions.

The hammer strikes May 1 if mandatory country-of-origin labelling (mCOOL) legislation isn't changed, Agriculture Minister Gerry Ritz says.

"We import $400 million in California wines (annually)," he said this week during a stop in Southwestern Ontario, one of Canada's richest farm belts and a major livestock producer.

"We've got a great wine industry right here in Ontario, so that's an easy one to target for retaliation. I know that's one (threat) that's brought a lot of the California congressmen and senators online, saying 'Don't do that, please.' And we say, 'Talk to your administration.' "

Monday, the World Trade Organization (WTO) in Geneva will start hearing the U.S. appeal of a WTO decision that says the labelling legislation violates trade agreements among Canada, the U.S. and Mexico.

Ritz led a delegation to Washington last week in advance of that hearing.

"I came back very optimistic that we'll see some very positive changes, sooner rather than later," he told The Free Press.

The U.S. rules require store packaging identify where the animal meat was born, raised and slaughtered. But if a pork chop started as a piglet in Canada, but was raised in the U.S., the slaughterhouse must have separate processing lines to ensure that hog will be separately labelled in the supermarket.

That's onerous, costly and time-consuming -- something few slaughterhouses want or can afford, said Bill Wymenga, a Chatham-area pork farmer and vice-chair of the Canadian Pork Council.

The net effect has been to devalue Canadian meats in the U.S., costing the livestock industry more than $1 billion a year, opponents say.

"It's a very effective non-tariff trade barrier," Wymenga said.

While many U.S. beef lobbyists have applauded the rules, some livestock groups call them shortsighted and potentially devastating if Canada retaliates.

Wymenga was part of the Ritz delegation to Washington and said the reception was more positive than in previous years.

"The mood this time is different. They realize they're probably going to lose this case and there are going to be some repercussions."

Canada is looking for WTO approval to apply $2 billion in tariffs on American goods if the labelling legislation isn't repealed.

Wymenga said those threatened tariffs are "the big stick," particularly in 37 states that need Canada as their No. 1 export market.

Some in the U.S. Congress and Senate want to avoid changes to legislation and favour changes to the regulations instead.

"We let them know in no uncertain terms that's not going to make it," Ritz said.

"Anything that they do has to pass the smell test. It's not what the Americans think they need, it's what we will agree to.

"They've got a firm window of opportunity to get it right or we start to make application for retaliatory measures."

- - -

WHY MCOOL IS UNCOOL TO CANADA

* mCOOL is U.S. mandatory country-of-origin-labels legislation.

* Imposed in 2008 to identify for consumers the origin of fresh vegetables, fruit, fish and meats.

* Canada objects that it violates trade agreements and reduces Canadian livestock exports.

* Updated 2013 legislation applies to meat.

* World Trade Organization (WTO) to hear the case starting Monday.

 
Europe warns Russia over Ukraine deal 
Charles ONIANS with Danny KEMP in Brussels 
13 February 2015
Agence France Presse
 
European powers warned Russia it risked fresh sanctions if a ceasefire deal aimed at ending the 10-month war between Ukraine troops and pro-Moscow rebels was not implemented.

The agreement to end the nearly year-long conflict, which has killed thousands and ratcheted East-West tensions to highs not seen since the Cold War, was reached early Thursday after marathon talks in the Belarussian capital Minsk between the leaders of Russia, Ukraine, France and Germany.

Kiev and the West accuse Russia of stoking the war in ex-Soviet Ukraine by pouring arms and troops to help the pro-Russian rebels fighting Kiev government troops in Ukraine's industrial east. Moscow denies the charges.

Speaking late Thursday after a European Union summit in Brussels, German Chancellor Angela Merkel warned Russia that the bloc, which has already slapped Moscow with sanctions over the crisis, was not ruling out further measures if the truce failed.

"If it works well we would be very happy to go with the agreement. If there are difficulties we wouldn't rule out other sanctions," she said.

French President Francois Hollande, who along with Merkel attended the 17-hour talks in Minsk that also included Russian President Vladimir Putin and Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko, agreed.

If the ceasefire deal was not respected, "we would return to a process... of sanctions that would be in addition to those already in place."

Hollande also said that the conditions were not yet right for France to resume with the delivery of two Mistral warships to Russia, a 1.2-billion-euro sale that Paris was forced to suspend over the Ukraine crisis.

Under the deal reached in Minsk, a ceasefire is to take effect at midnight Kiev time on Sunday (2200 GMT on Saturday) and heavy weapons are to be withdrawn from the frontlines of the conflict, which has killed at least 5,300 people and driven a million people from their homes since erupting in April 2014.

Poroshenko described the 17-hour talks as "very difficult" and said he expected the implementation of the deal would not be easy.

Brussels first imposed targeted sanctions on individuals after Russia's annexation of Crimea in March 2014 but adopted tougher economic measures after the shooting down of Malaysia Airlines flight MH17 over Ukraine in July.

European Council President Donald Tusk said Poroshenko had given EU leaders a "sobering assessment" of the deal, and said the 28-member bloc was ready "to take the necessary steps" to keep up the pressure on Russia.

"Our trust in the goodwill of President Putin is limited, this is why we have to maintain our decision on sanctions," he told a press conference.

The United States, which has said it could supply Ukraine with weapons if the conflict continues, cautiously welcomed the peace accord, but emphasised the work yet to be done in making it stick.

"The true test of today's accord will be in its full and unambiguous implementation," the White House said, including "restoration of Ukrainian control over its border with Russia."

The Ukrainian government accused Russia of deploying another 50 tanks across the border during the talks in Minsk, with fighting expected to continue around disputed railway hub Debaltseve, which rebels claim to have surrounded.

The roadmap was signed by Russian and Ukrainian envoys, separatist leaders and European mediators from the OSCE.

A previous truce signed in Minsk last September quickly collapsed.

Beset by war and corruption, Ukraine's pro-Western government is struggling to enact legal and economic reforms that would help steer the former Soviet republic out of Russia's sphere of influence and into Western institutions.

The Kiev government got a major boost Thursday with the announcement by IMF chief Christine Lagarde of a new financial rescue plan worth $17.5 billion.

In total, Ukraine will receive $40 billion (35 billion euros) in assistance over four years coupled with bilateral loans from other sources, Lagarde said, helping to stabilise Kiev's finances after 10 months of conflict in the east.

The World Bank for its part announced it was prepared to provide up to $2 billion in financial assistance to Ukraine this year.

The new Minsk agreement is broadly similar to the first one, except that the new heavy weapons-free zone will be 50 to 70 kilometres (31-43 miles) wide, depending on the range of the weapon, double the width of the buffer zone agreed in September.

Kiev will also begin retaking control over the approximately 400-kilometre (250 mile) stretch of Russia's border with rebel-held Ukraine, but only after local elections are held.

The border is entirely under Russian and pro-Russian rebel control and is used, according to Kiev, as a conduit for separatist supplies. The Kremlin denies this but has opposed Ukraine being allowed to regain control of the frontier.

While heavy weapons must be withdrawn, troops and rebels can remain where they are, handing rebels de facto control of the roughly 500 square kilometres of territory they've gained in recent weeks.

Separatist-held territories will be granted a degree of autonomy to be established through talks, and the right to decide which language they use.
 
 
Lew Presses India on Subsidies, Infrastructure 
By Anant Vijay Kala And Rajesh Roy 
12 February 2015
Dow Jones Institutional News
 
NEW DELHI--U.S. Treasury Secretary Jacob Lew on Thursday applauded recent Indian moves to boost economic growth, but said the government needs to make deeper cuts to subsidy spending and devote more resources to building roads, railways and other infrastructure.

"Additional reforms are needed," said Mr. Lew, who is on a two-day visit to India. He said an "increase in public investment combined with a more open investment climate" would attract more private money for infrastructure projects.

Mr. Lew spoke to reporters in a joint appearance with Indian Finance Minister Arun Jaitley. The two men said they had discussed ways to boost bilateral trade, which currently stands at about $100 billion, curb money--laundering, and other things.

Since the government of Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi took office last year, it has moved to allow greater foreign investment in railways and the defense industry and to cut back on subsidies.

On Thursday, Mr. Jaitley said the government would press ahead with policies to revamp the economy and drive higher growth.

"We believe that the kind of reforms we have undertaken are certainly going to bring investment, generate jobs, improve the quality of life of people and also help us in alleviating poverty levels," Mr. Jaitley said.

Mr. Jaitley said the Modi administration's push wouldn't be deterred by the governing party's loss in state elections in Delhi this week.

Some economists and political commentators have warned that the defeat of the Bharatiya Janata Party by the left-leaning Aam Aadmi Party, which has pledged to cut electricity and water prices, could encourage the BJP to pursue more populist measures.

 
Ways and Means blog urges caution on currency legislation
POLITICO
2/12/15 1:23 PM EST
 
Republicans on the House Ways and Means Committee said today that they feared passing currency legislation could lead to a tariff war and put the United States at risk of violating World Trade Organization rules. But in a blog post they agreed that currency manipulation is “a legitimate problem that deserves a real response” in a trade promotion authority bill.
Passing currency legislation like that which was introduced this week in the House and the Senate would likely lead to a tariff war that increases trade barriers and costs jobs, put the United States at risk of violating WTO rules, make the nation vulnerable to lawsuits that jeopardize its ability to set monetary policy, threaten the dollar’s standing as the world’s leading currency and derail the Trans-Pacific Partnership agreement, the Republican blog said.
“And for all the downside, it probably won’t work,” they added.
The “right solution” is to include negotiating objectives on currency manipulation in trade promotion authority, since that is how Congress instructs the White House what it wants in trade deals, the blog said.
“TPA provides the administration with tools such as ‘cooperative mechanisms, enforceable rules, reporting, monitoring, transparency, or other means, as appropriate’ to address currency manipulation. It is incumbent upon the administration to continue pursuing efforts to rein in the practice, and Congress must continue to press for better results,” it said.
— Doug Palmer
 
 
Protectionist trade actions don't help the poor - AARES 
12 February 2015
Fuseworks Media
FUSMED
 
 
Trade policy adjustments to insulate domestic markets when world food prices spike have been ineffective in dealing with food price shocks that exposed millions of people to poverty in developing countries, a World Bank researcher told a New Zealand agricultural economics conference this week.

Dr Will Martin, the manager for agriculture and rural development research in the World Bank is an Australian who has worked for the Washington-based World Bank for the past 25 years. He is also President-Elect of the International Association of Agricultural Economists. He was speaking to more than 250 international delegates attending the Australian Agricultural & Resource Economics Society's conference in Rotorua this week.

His analysis of detailed expenditure and agricultural production data from 31 developing countries assesses the impacts of changes in global food prices on poverty in an effort to understand their impacts on the poor.

Food price increases unrelated to productivity changes in developing countries raise poverty in the short run in all but a few countries. "That's because the poor spend large shares of their incomes-- frequently about 60-70 percent--on food and many poor farmers are net buyers of food," he says.

"However, in the longer run, if prices stay high, two other important factors come into play. Poor workers are likely to benefit from increases in wage rates for unskilled workers resulting from higher food prices, and poor farmers are likely to benefit from higher agricultural profits as they produce more food. As a result, higher food prices appear to lower global poverty in the long run."

He says a natural and understandable policy reaction for many countries when food prices rise is to lower domestic prices through levies on exports, temporary import tariff reductions, or import subsidies. "But these are beggar-thy-neighbour policies that push up world prices," he says. He estimates that these policies accounted for nearly half the increase in world rice prices in 2007-8. Individually, most countries took action that reduced the impact of higher world prices on the poor. But, when the contribution of these policies to the higher world prices is taken into account, they turn out to have been ineffective.

"What countries need is a collective approach that enables relatively open trade to continue in those circumstances. Clearly, this still needs to be combined with social safety nets so poor people can cope in the short term, but then realise the longer term benefits of higher prices. We need to deliver policies that actually work rather than policies that appear to work."

Dr Martin says countries need to develop this ‘social safety net' so the poorest can get access to what they need when they need it.

He says the World Trade Organisation (WTO) showed with the abolition of variable import levies in the Uruguay Round that it can introduce trade policies that bring about the kind of collective action needed to tame food price spikes.

"The collective agreement of the EU-US over export subsidies in the Uruguay Round also showed what can be done when there is clear recognition of the problem. It's much more complex when many more countries are involved but we need to keep working away at the challenge if we are to make progress. Getting the confidence of policymakers to act differently will require a lot more research and policy formulation."

 
Talks target emissions cap on airline and shipping industries
Pilita Clark in Geneva 
Financial Times
February 12, 2015 4:07 pm
 
A move to cap emissions from airline and shipping companies has emerged in talks on the global climate change agreement to be signed in Paris at the end of this year.

The idea of imposing carbon pollution targets on each industry has appeared in the lengthy negotiating text that representatives from more than 190 countries began working on in Geneva this week.
 
The measure is being backed by countries in the EU, which fought a bruising battle three years ago to make international airlines flying to and from Europe pay for their carbon pollution.

Brussels eventually reined in its scheme, confining it to flights within the EU, after it sparked a diplomatic row with some of its largest trading partners, including China and the US.

An additional proposal in the Paris negotiating text would “encourage” international air and shipping bodies to develop a levy scheme to help countries adapt to climate change.

Aviation is one of the fastest growing sources of greenhouse gas emissions that the Paris deal is supposed to reduce, but the measure is expected to be opposed by many countries.

Still, some envoys in Geneva said they were pleased to see it on the table.

“We’re happy to see it being discussed,” said Mary Ann Lucille Sering of the Philippines, adding her country’s many islands meant air travel was important but it was a relatively small market compared with other nations.

Including shipping and aviation emissions in a global climate deal has proved difficult in the past.

The last big climate pact, the Kyoto protocol agreed in 1997, required rich countries to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions but did not include pollution from ships or aircraft, partly because it occurs around the world rather than in a single country.

Instead, it was left to each industry’s specialist UN agency, the International Civil Aviation Organization and the International Maritime Organization, to develop a global plan to address emissions.

ICAO is working on a proposal due to be considered in 2016 and a spokesman for the International Air Transport Association, the aviation industry’s main body, said the process was going well and had been recognised by countries in the UN climate talks.

 
“The industry is fully supporting ICAO’s work in this area,” the spokesman said, adding Iata’s members had agreed a resolution in 2013 calling on governments to develop a global market-based measure in line with its commitment to carbon-neutral growth from 2020.

But some say progress is still far too slow and the move to include aviation emissions in particular in the Paris deal is welcome.

Bill Hemmings, aviation and shipping programme manager at the Brussels-based Transport & Environment research organisation, said that with aviation and shipping each accounting for about 3 per cent of global C02 emissions, and with air travel in particular growing fast, it was time both sectors faced targets to limit their pollution.

“How can we have large countries like China and the US, and developing countries making commitments to cut their emissions while these two sit on their hands?” he said.

“The issue is not even on the agenda of the IMO, the UN’s shipping body. ICAO has promised action by 2016 but operates in complete secrecy. Both sectors are exempt from fuel tax so a levy on emissions to help countries adapt to climate change makes great sense,” Mr Hemmings said.
 
 
Valentine's Day: Behind the flower trade
Nyshka Chandran | @NyshkaC
CNBC.com February 13, 2015
 
Valentine's Day is arguably the biggest day in the calendar for the global flower industry, as the romantics round the world splash out a premium on expensive bouquets for their loved ones.
 
Just how big is the industry, who are the main players and which are the most sought-after flowers?
 
Last year, flower exports worldwide amounted to $20.6 billion annually, according to a report from Rabobank last month, a slight decrease from $21.1 billion in 2011.
 
Americans alone will spend $2.1 billion on flowers this year, the National Retail Federation said last month. Among holidays, Valentine's Day saw the highest fresh flower purchases in 2014, capturing 36 percent of total U.S. holiday transactions, data from industry website AboutFlowers showed. 
 
What's hot
 
Red roses are traditionally the most sought-after flower, but demand for others including tulips, Peruvian lilies, chrysanthemums and mini-carnations is also high, the Society of American Florists said on its website.
 
"A rose is a truly global product. Behind every Valentine's Day rose, there is an extensive network of people from all over the world - from the farmer, shipper, auctioneer and retailer all co-operating to transport roses from field to hand in a matter of days," said Alex Tabarrok, economist at George Mason University, in a new video on education website MRUniversity.
 
Major players
 
The Netherlands is the world's largest exporter of flowers, accounting for 52 percent of the world's cut flowers last year, thanks to numerous large greenhouses across the countryside, Rabobank said.
 
However, the Dutch share in global flower exports is declining as low-cost competitors like Kenya, Ethiopia, Ecuador, and Colombia, quickly catch up in production. 
 
"Growers in these countries are able to achieve large-scale production of good-quality flowers for competitive prices," Rabobank stated. 
 
"High-cost growers who do not want to sit on thorns need to differentiate themselves from low-cost countries, or become active in these low-cost regions." 
 
Colombia was ranked the world's second largest exporter in 2013 with a $1 billion floral industry, according to government agency ProColombia.
 
Rise of China
 
Asia isn't typically represented among flower producing nations but China's Yunnan province has the potential to become a leader in floriculture worldwide, PMA Research said earlier this month.
 
 
Yunnan's Dounan Flower Market is Asia's largest flower market, according to Chinese media reports, and sells up to 12 million flowers daily. 
 
"The biggest obstacle to reaching the European and North American markets is logistics. The opening of Kunming Changshui International Airport in 2012 addressed some of those obstacles with increasing access to Europe and cargo capacity that is expected to reach 950,000 tons annually by 2020," PMA said in a note.
END


  ________________________________  
Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.