APEC urges WTO members to ratify treaty granting special licenses for export of medicines
U.S. Opposes Waiver of Drug Patent Rules in Least Developed Countries
Pakistan ratifies WTO deal on Trade Facilitation
Modi calls for African cooperation to combat climate change
India calls for multilateral funding for BRICS nations
TPPA can help increase trade volume
It's time for Africa
U.S. trade czar says Britain would lose on trade outside the EU
Germany calls for more TTIP transparency
 
Details:
APEC urges WTO members to ratify treaty granting special licenses for export of medicines
28 October 2015
PNA (Philippines News Agency)
MANILA, Oct. 28 -- The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) has urged all HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (WTO) members to ratify the Protocol Amending the Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) Agreement, considering the importance of facilitating access to medicines.
The call was made by APEC ministers responsible for trade in their Statement on Supporting the Multilateral Trading System issued at the conclusion of their 21st meeting held in Boracay in celebration of the WTO's 20th anniversary last May.
The Protocol Amending the TRIPS Agreement is the first multilateral treaty amendment agreed by WTO members since the WTO Agreement came into force in 1995. It serves to permanently incorporate into the TRIPS Agreement additional flexibilities to grant special compulsory licenses for the export of medicines, referred to as the 'Paragraph 6 System".
First established by a decision taken by members in 2003, Paragraph 6 System is a 'waiver' and pending amendment allowing generic medicines to be made under 'compulsory licenses' exclusively for export to countries that cannot produce the medicines themselves.
The system deals with a problem identified in Paragraph 6 of the 2001 Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health by removing a limit in the TRIPS Agreement's Article 31(f) on the amount nations can export under a compulsory license to countries needing the medicines.
According to the WTO Agreement, a member formally accepts the Protocol by depositing what is referred to as an "instrument of acceptance" for the Protocol with the Director General of the WTO.
As stipulated in the Protocol, it shall enter into force in accordance with Article X:3 of the WTO Agreement, namely, the Protocol shall take effect upon acceptance by two-thirds of the members for members that have accepted the Protocol; thereafter, the Protocol shall take effect for each other member upon acceptance by it.
In their Statement on Supporting the Multilateral Trading System, the APEC trade ministers noted that since the WTO's establishment in 1995, the Asia Pacific has been one of the fastest-growing trading regions, benefiting significantly from the stability and predictability of the multilateral trading system.
The ministers reaffirmed the "value, centrality and primacy of the multilateral trading system under the auspices of the WTO in promoting trade expansion, economic growth, job creation and sustainable development, as well as in supporting developing economies to integrate into the global trading system".
"We will continue to work closely together to strengthen the rules-based, transparent, non-discriminatory, open and inclusive multilateral trading system as embodied in the WTO," they said.
They further pointed out that WTO has significantly contributed to the fight against protectionism since the onset of the 2008 financial crisis.
"We note that, while global economic growth continues, there is potential for stronger growth through more robust international trade," the APEC trade ministers declared.
Philippines News Agency
U.S. Opposes Waiver of Drug Patent Rules in Least Developed Countries
28 October 2015
Generic Line
Just days after the Trans-Pacific Partnership pact cut exclusivity protections for drug makers outside the U.S., a proposal that would extend a waiver allowing poor countries to ignore drug patent laws is raising more ire.
The plan to extend the waiver for United Nations-designated least developed countries past its 2016 expiry has the support of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Commission. It allows LDCs to produce drugs locally for treatments including HIV, tuberculosis and malaria without concern over patent lawsuits in other countries.
Bangladesh requested the permanent extension on behalf of the 48 LCDs. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization is set to consider it today and tomorrow at a meeting in Geneva.
Canada, Australia and Switzerland join the U.S. in opposing a permanent exemption. -- John Bechtel
Washington Business Information, Inc. 
Pakistan ratifies WTO deal on Trade Facilitation
28 October 2015
Dawn
Pakistan has become the 51st member of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) to ratify the Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA).
Pakistan's Ambassador to WTO Syed Tauqir Shah presented Pakistan's instrument of acceptance to Director General Roberto Azevedo, an official announcement said on Tuesday.
Concluded at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's 2013 Bali Ministerial Conference, the TFA contains provisions for expediting the movement, release and clearance of goods, including goods in transit.
It also sets out measures for effective cooperation between customs and other appropriate authorities on trade facilitation and customs' compliance issues. It further contains provisions for technical assistance and capacity building in this area.
The TFA will enter into force once two-thirds of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO membership has formally accepted it.
The TFA broke new ground for developing and least-developed countries as for first time in HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO history, the requirement to implement the TFA was directly linked to the capacity of the country to do so.
In addition, the TFA states that assistance and support should be provided to help them achieve that capacity.
A Trade Facilitation Agreement facility was also created at the request of developing and least-developed country members to help ensure that they receive the assistance needed to reap the full benefits of the TFA and to support full implementation of the new agreement by all members.
Implementation of the TFA has the potential to increase global merchandise exports by up to $1 trillion per annum, according to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's flagship World Trade Report released on Monday.
The report also found that developing countries will benefit significantly from the TFA, capturing more than half of the available gains.
Pakistan Herald Publications (Pvt.) Limited
Modi calls for African cooperation to combat climate change
29 October 2015
Indo-Asian News Service
New Delhi, Oct 29 (IANS) Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Thursday called for cooperation on climate change with Africa while addressing the India-Africa Forum Summit.
Modi said that both Africa and India want to "light up lives of our people and power their future", adding that it should be done in such a manner that "snow on Kilimanjaro does not disappear, the glacier that feeds the River Ganga does not retreat".
"No one can be more conscious of climate change than Indians and Africans," Modi said.
"We are each making enormous efforts with our modest resources to combat climate change. For India, 175 Gigawatts of additional renewable energy capacity by 2022 and reduction in emission intensity by 33-35 percent by 2030 are just two aspects of our efforts," he said.
"But, it is also true that the excess of a few cannot become the burden of many. So, when the world meets in Paris in December, we look to see a comprehensive and concrete outcome that is based on the well-established principles in the UN Convention on Climate Change."
Modi said India will do its part for it, but also wants to see "a genuine global public partnership that makes clean energy affordable; provides finance and technology to developing countries to access it; and the means to adapt to the impact of climate change".
He also invited African nations to join an alliance of solar-rich countries that India has proposed to launch in Paris on November 30 at the time of COP-21 meeting.
"Our goal is to make solar energy an integral part of our life and reach it to the most unconnected villages and communities."
He also said that India and Africa should also seek a global trading regime that serves our development goals and improves our trade prospects.
"When we meet at Nairobi Ministerial of the WTO in December, we must ensure that the Doha Development Agenda of 2001 is not closed without achieving these fundamental objectives," he said.
"We should also achieve a permanent solution on public stockholding for food security and special safeguard mechanism in agriculture for the developing countries," Modi added.
IANS India Pvt. Ltd.
India calls for multilateral funding for BRICS nations
29 October 2015
Dion News Service
The Minister for Science, Technology and Earth Sciences, Harsh Vardhan has said that India supports multilateral funding system which would provide the basis for announcing BRICS call for proposal to support multi-country research projects.
Addressing the 3rd Ministerial Meeting of BRICS on Science, Technology and Innovation (STI) at Moscow, Harsh Vardhan said active co-investment of resources including funds from each BRICS partner country in support of BRICS Call for proposal is desired.
He said that Indian Government attaches great importance to its engagement with BRICS which has emerged as a valuable forum for consultation, coordination and cooperation on contemporary global and regional issues of mutual interest.
At today’s meeting India has supported creation of BRICS Research and Innovation Networking Platform (RINP) under which it expects a BRICS Innovation Corps to be created and that an inventory of innovative products, services and solutions would be maintained.
India also welcomed the proposed BRICS initiative on ‘Global Research Advanced Infrastructure Network’ (GRAIN). Vardhan said that all BRICS countries must identify their common needs and share information on existing major research infrastructure specially those engaged in addressing the common societal challenges as well as those under construction or those that can be developed in future to avoid duplication of resources and money.
Harsh Vardhan said that the BRICS STI Cooperation MoU signed in Brasilia in March 2015 captures the spirit in connecting usefulness of knowledge and innovative products to usefulness of society.
He said as a follow up of the BRICS Young Scientist Forum mooted and being coordinated by India, a five (5)-day BRICS Young Scientist Conclave will be held at the National Institute of Advanced Studies (NIAS) in Bangalore, India during March 2016, with intent to create BRICS Young Scientists Corps.
The minister called upon BRICS countries to collectively explore the merit of establishing a BRICS Young Scientist Forum Secretariat in India with the Department of Science and Technology of India as the coordinator and with the commitment and support from all BRICS countries. This would give pace to building and implementing the BRICS Young Scientist's Regional Scientific Programs, he added.
Dion Global Solutions Ltd. 
TPPA can help increase trade volume
29 October 2015
Business Times
KUALA LUMPUR: Trans Pacific Partnership Agreement (TPPA) will help increase trade volume of member countries and bring down a proportionally higher number of trade barriers.
International Trade and Industry Minister Datuk Seri Mustapa Mohamed said under the TPP, countries can opt to join or stay out of the trade collective but the region wants to see trade barriers going down.
"It would be better if more countries join the TPPA as that will free up trade movements when the trade barriers are removed," said Mustapa, here, yesterday, after launching the PlatCOM Mega InnoSeed event and presenting awards to the winners of the Halal Hi-Tech Challenge.
Mustapa was commenting on the possibility of Indonesia joining the TPP trade pact.
Asked about the text of the TPPA document, which was supposed to be made public soon, he said his ministry is ironing out some technical matters and once finalised, the document will be made available to the public.
On the RM100 million allocations in 2016 Budget for Agensi Inovasi Malaysia (AIM), Mustapa said innovation has been proven to be a game changer and the government is determined up ramp up efforts to promote innovation in the country.
"There is an innovation movement in the country as we have seen tremendous results and contributions made to the economy," he said.
"The government's initiatives have borne fruit and to be a developed nation, we have to be innovative to increase our productivity," he added.
New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad
It's time for Africa
29 October 2015
Business Line (The Hindu)
There can be huge spin-offs, if India proceeds sensibly There should be no let-up in India’s efforts to scale up its engagement with the African countries. The ongoing Third India-Africa Forum Summit is being held in interesting times. It could address differences between India and the conglomeration of less developed and rapidly emerging economies that is Africa, as two major multilateral events draw close — the climate change meet in Paris next month and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO ministerial in Nairobi in December. Besides, the larger geopolitical and economic backdrop is intriguing and complex. While North Africa is in turmoil, the other parts have become more politically stable, creating room for sustainable trade and investment ties. While a fall in commodity prices has hurt most African economies, which rely solely on such exports, a partnership with India offers them the chance to break out of this vulnerability and diversify their manufacturing base.
China has belied expectations on this score, having invested billions in infrastructure and mining, but giving back little by way of jobs, technology or skills. India’s advantage over China lies in its democratic credentials and years of trade and cultural ties. The last two such summits saw India committing over $5 billion in concessional aid, which not only sent the message that it was serious about Africa, but also that it was willing to lend more on the recipient’s terms, in contrast to China, the US and the EU. India should stick to this approach, as the benefits are considerable. It can get Africa’s support on Doha Round issues such as intellectual property (as in the case of HIV-AIDS treatment earlier, where India’s role has been remarkable). Efforts by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD to drive a wedge between the least developed and emerging economies over issues such as climate change can be addressed.
India’s bilateral trade with the continent stands at about $75 billion, with at best a negligible surplus in the latter’s favour. India’s investment has been put at $50 billion (against China’s $26 billion) but this figure includes an ‘investment’ of $42 billion in Mauritius! Bilateral trade, after increasing by 32 per cent annually between 2005 and 2011, has decelerated. This is due to the drop in commodity prices impacting Africa’s exports of coal, oil and other minerals. These constitute over 70 per cent of India’s imports from Africa — essentially oil from Nigeria and Angola, and coal from South Africa. The importance of these countries in India’s growth ambitions can hardly be overstated. Likewise, India can promote the export of engineering goods, farm equipment, and medicines, besides services such as education and medical tourism.
For such progress, a long-term vision must be in place. A hands-off approach by New Delhi cannot work in the absence of mature economic institutions. Stray complaints regarding individual investors in Africa — whether it is over land acquisition, environment or labour — should be addressed tactfully as these can cloud overall investor sentiment. Let’s develop on our goodwill and learn from China’s mistakes.
Kasturi & Sons Ltd
U.S. trade czar says Britain would lose on trade outside the EU
By Krista Hughes and Philip Blenkinsop
28 October 2015
Reuters News
WASHINGTON/BRUSSELS (Reuters) - The United States is not keen on pursuing a separate free trade deal with Britain if it leaves the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union, U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman said on Wednesday, the first public comments from a senior U.S. official on the matter.
British voters are due to decide before the end of 2017 whether their country should remain in the EU, and opinion polls show rising support for leaving the bloc.
Froman's comments undermine a key economic argument deployed by proponents of a British exit, who say the United Kingdom would prosper on its own and be able to secure bilateral free trade agreements (FTAs) with trading partners.
The United States is Britain's biggest export market after the EU, buying more than $54 billion in goods from the United Kingdom in 2014.
"I think it's absolutely clear that Britain has a greater voice at the trade table being part of the EU, being part of a larger economic entity," Froman told Reuters in an interview, adding that EU membership gives Britain more leverage in negotiations.
"We're not particularly in the market for FTAs with individual countries. We're building platforms ... that other countries can join over time."
If Britain left the EU, Froman said, it would face the same tariffs and trade barriers as other countries outside the U.S. free trade network.
"We have no FTA with the U.K. so they would be subject to the same tariffs – and other trade-related measures - as China, or Brazil or India," he said.
Washington has just sealed a major trade deal with 11 other Pacific nations and wants to wrap up negotiations with the EU on the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) by the end of next year.
The United States is Britain's second-largest export market for vehicles outside the EU.
If Britain is not part of the EU and therefore not part of TTIP, British cars exported to the United States, such as those made by Jaguar Land Rover, would face a 2.5 percent tariff and could be at a disadvantage to German and Italian-made competitors.
British exports of fuel and chocolate could also be at a disadvantage if TTIP abolishes tariffs on those products.
Thomson Reuters (Markets) LLC
Germany calls for more TTIP transparency
28 October 2015
EurActiv.com
The President of the Bundestag has called for more transparency in the TTIP negotiations, otherwise he will vote against the trade agreement. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" EurActiv Germany reports.
Norbert Lammert, the President of the Bundestag, has threatened to vote against TTIP. He told German media that it was unthinkable "that the Bundestag would ratify a trade agreement between the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU and the US, to which it could not suggest alternative options".
The CDU politician called for increased transparency. Together with Minister for Economic Affairs Sigmar Gabriel (SPD), he considers "the very limited access through the respective US embassies unacceptable, both for the government and the parliament".
Lammert agreed with the Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker that the relevant negotiation documents, in particular, the outcomes of the negotiation "should be accessible to all HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EUmember states, governments and parliaments". Lammert added that this is something on which he "insists".
The negotiations for the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership began in July 2013. The intention of the agreement is that a free trade zone, incorporating the removal of trade tariffs and barriers, be established between the two parties. Critics of the plan fear reduced social, environmental and consumer protection standards, as well as the weakening of democratic institutions. Its proponents argue that the trade agreement is necessary if Europe is to remain globally competitive. EurActiv PLC
END
 
Josep Bosch, Information Officer
Information and External Relations Division
+41227395681
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.