Headlines:

EU to Propose New Rules on Banning Biotech Crops

U.S. Treasury warns Congress currency push could derail Pacific pact

White House wants no currency provision in trade bill

Obama makes fresh push for 'fast track' authority

India to host first-ever Global Exhibition on Services

International Trade Supports Seven Million Retail Jobs in the US

U.S. Democrats Want to Amend Pacific Trade Bill

Car, rice imports impasse stalls Japan, US trade deal

Russia’s agriculture minister says good-bye to his deputies, aides - sources

EU officials say public reservations over TTIP being taken "seriously"

L'ONU appelle les institutions financières à créer un partenariat mondial fort pour le développement durable

 

Details:

EU to Propose New Rules on Banning Biotech Crops

By Matthew Dalton 

22 April 2015

Dow Jones Top Global Market Stories

BRUSSELS--The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union is set to propose new rules that would allow individual member states to ban the sale of genetically modified crops for non-scientific reasons, drawing waves of criticism from the bloc's trading partners and the food industry on both sides of the Atlantic.

The U.S. and South American nations fear the plan, which would apply to any biotech product sold in the EU, could wreak havoc on agricultural trade with Europe. These nations export billions of dollars of biotech crops to the 28-nation bloc every year, mainly for use in animal feed. European farm groups are also strongly opposed, as are U.S. biotech giants such as HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Monsanto Co.

The expected proposal is an attempt by Jean-Claude Juncker, president of the European Commission, the EU's executive arm, to seek a lasting compromise on Europe's regulation of biotech crops. The 28-nation bloc is bitterly divided on the issue: Some nations such as the Netherlands, the U.K. and Spain support the technology, while France, Austria and others are opposed.

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Parliament and EU national governments must approve the commission's proposal before it can become law.

The EU's trading partners are warning the proposal could run afoul of international trade rules enforced by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization, setting up a confrontation at the Geneva-based arbiter of trade disputes. U.S. officials also worry the plan could undermine domestic support in the U.S. for reaching a deal on the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, or TTIP, the sweeping trade deal now under negotiation with the EU.

Under the plan, which officials say will be unveiled on Wednesday, the commission would promptly approve biotech crops for import after they have been deemed safe by EU scientific authorities. That has been a long-standing gripe from U.S. officials and the biotech industry: Crops that have passed scientific reviews get stuck in Europe's regulatory limbo; the commission is reluctant to defy member states that oppose biotechnology by approving the crops, even though it has the legal authority to do so.

But the proposal would also allow a member state to ban the use of these crops if it believes there is an "overriding" public interest. EU lawyers say this provision, reflecting what is essentially moral opposition to biotechnology in some EU nations, would allow bans under HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO rules, even on biotech crops that have passed safety reviews.

"We have some serious concerns on the potential outcome of such a revision" to the biotech rules, the ambassadors to the EU from the U.S., Canada, Argentina and Brazil wrote to the commission earlier this month. "We trust that the commission will ensure that any options under consideration are fully consistent with the EU's HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO obligations."

"Generally, all roads lead back to the core principle of sound science," said Brendan McGivern, a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO expert at the law firm HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"White & Case in Geneva.

EU scientific authorities have repeatedly found that most biotech crops are safe for the environment and for human consumption. But only one variety, a corn engineered by U.S. biotech giant HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Monsanto Co., is approved to be grown in Europe. The EU earlier this year finalized rules that allow individual nations to ban biotech crops from being grown in the EU, even if they are approved by the commission.

Now the EU is going much further in seeking to allow national governments to restrict all uses of the crop on their territories.

The EU has approved 58 biotech plants for importing into the bloc as food and animal feed. But 19 that have cleared scientific review are awaiting final approval, after the previous president of the commission, José Manuel Barroso, stopped the approval process so the commission could review Europe's rules for regulating biotech crops.

The commission will approve those 19 plants for import in the coming weeks as part of its proposal, EU officials said.

The proposal could have a significant impact on animal farmers in Europe. They rely on soybean animal feed imported from Brazil, the U.S., Argentina and Paraguay, 90% of which are biotech, the commission says. These four countries exported EUR11.6 billion of soybean products to the EU last year, 90% of the bloc's total imports.

Critics say the proposal would undermine the bloc's internal market, potentially creating logistical nightmares for farmers and food companies dealing with a patchwork of restrictions across the EU.

"We are particularly disappointed," said Mella Frewen, director of FoodDrinkEurope, which represents the EU food industry, "because the proposal shakes the foundations of the customs union and the single market."

Dow Jones & Company, Inc.

U.S. Treasury warns Congress currency push could derail Pacific pact

22 April 2015

Reuters News

* Senators plan to push for tough currency rules in trade bill 

* Treasury says Pacific trading partners oppose enforceable rules 

* Democrats push back against Republican rush to pass fast track (Adds details on legislation, reaction from senators) 

By Krista Hughes and Jason Lange 

WASHINGTON, April 21 (Reuters) - U.S. lawmakers' proposals to sanction countries that deliberately weaken their currencies could derail a Pacific trade pact that is a key part of the Obama administration's pivot to Asia, the Treasury warned on Tuesday. 

The Senate could vote on a Trade Promotion Authority bill to speed deals through Congress as early as next week, when Japan's Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Shinzo Abe addresses a joint meeting of Congress. 

Japan is a key partner in the 12-nation Trans Pacific Partnership (TPP), and supporters of a deal say that countries negotiating with Washington want to be sure that concessions they make will not unravel during ratification in Congress. 

U.S. Treasury Secretary Jack Lew said consultations with other TPP countries showed they would never sign up to rules that risk constraining central banks, whose easy money policies to stimulate growth can help to weaken currencies. 

"Seeking enforceable currency provisions would likely derail the conclusion of the TPP given the deep reservations held by our trading partners," Lew wrote in a letter to senior lawmakers. 

The Japanese yen and euro have fallen sharply against the dollar due to money-printing programs by their central banks, making companies based there more competitive in exports. 

An amendment drafted by Republican Rob Portman and Democrat Debbie Stabenow, to be introduced at a Senate Finance Committee debate on a package of trade bills on Wednesday, would beef up rules against currency manipulation. These currently allow the administration discretion on how to get trading partners to toe the line. 

Trade promotion authority, or TPA, allows Congress to set negotiating objectives for trade in exchange for a yes-or-no vote. That gives trading partners certainty deals will not be picked apart. 

"Without strong currency enforcement, it will not have my vote," said Stabenow, whose state of Michigan is home to U.S. auto manufacturers worried about more competition from TPP partner Japan, such as Ford and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"General Motors. 

Republican John Thune, a member of the Senate leadership team, said it would be "perfect timing" for the fast track bill to go for a full Senate vote during Abe's visit. 

"You've got to strike while the iron is hot," he said. 

But Senate Democratic leader HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Harry Reid said he was concerned about the rush on the legislation, which is opposed by many Democrats worried about the impact of trade deals on jobs and faces a close vote in Congress. 

Thomson Reuters (Markets) LLC

White House wants no currency provision in trade bill

21 April 2015

Agence France Presse

US President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Barack Obama's administration on Tuesday came out strongly against Democratic proposals to curb currency manipulation as part of a sweeping Pacific trade pact Washington is negotiating with 11 nations.

While the White House reiterated its support for a recent deal that gives President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Barack Obama "fast-track" authority to sign free-trade agreements without interference from Congress, some members of his party seek to attach measures that would add enforceable currency manipulation rules.

Such an addition is backed by the largest US labor union organization.

But in a letter to senior lawmakers, Treasury Secretary HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Jacob Lew said that while the administration strongly supports steps to end currency manipulation, "seeking enforceable currency provisions would likely derail the conclusion of the TPP (Trans-Pacific Partnership) given the deep reservations held by our trading partners."

"We have a serious concern that in any trade negotiation other countries would insist that an enforceable currency provision be designed so it could be used to challenge legitimate U.S. monetary policy, an outcome we would find unacceptable," Lew added.

Supporters of the currency provisions, particularly those whose states have a heavy auto-manufacturing base, argue that currency manipulation has led to the loss of millions of jobs.

"Currency manipulation is the mother of all trade barriers," Michigan congresswoman Debbie Dingell said after the deal on trade promotion authority was announced last week.

Some Democratic and Republican lawmakers, as well as organized labor, oppose the fast-track authority -- the first since 2007 -- that would give Congress an up-or-down vote on upcoming free-trade agreements without the chance to provide input on the negotiations.

It still needs to pass both chambers of Congress and earn a presidential signature.

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Richard Trumka, head of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"AFL-CIO which represents 12.5 million American workers, warned Congress would "give away" crucial leverage on negotiating better deals for US companies and workers by approving trade promotion authority without enforceable currency provisions.

"If we eliminate currency manipulation, we have the chance to gain almost six million jobs," Trumka told the Senate Finance Committee, which holds a vote on the trade bill Wednesday.

Democrats have expressed skepticism about the Trans-Pacific Partnership because it would lower barriers to foreign imports and might disadvantage American workers.

Many also decry the economic gamesmanship of countries like China, which has long been accused of manipulating its currency in order to boost exports.

And while China is not in the TPP, Trumka says accord members Japan, Malaysia and Singapore are also seen as currency manipulators.

Schumer said he was "disappointed" in Obama's efforts to rein in Chinese currency action and suggested Congress come together to pressure Beijing through trade legislation.

"It's the one point in time throughout this TPP process where Congress will be able to show to China and the world that's it's not business as usual," Schumer said.

mlm/sdo

Agence France-Presse

Obama makes fresh push for 'fast track' authority

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Shawn Donnan

22 April 2015

Financial Times (FT.Com)

US President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Barack Obama on Tuesday stepped up his efforts to win the "fast track" authority he needs from Congress to conclude a major Pacific trade deal, dismissing critics within his own party as wrong.

Mr Obama has made securing the Trans-Pacific Partnership with Japan and 10 other economies one of the pillars of his second-term economic policy. The deal would cover some 40 per cent of the global economy and be the biggest regional agreement ever negotiated by the US.

But the president needs what is formally known as Trade Promotion Authority from Congress to close the deal with negotiating partners and faces a tough fight with members of his own party to get it.

In an interview with HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"MSNBC due to be broadcast Tuesday night, Mr Obama in particular took on criticisms levelled by Elizabeth Warren, the Massachusetts senator leading the opposition against the trade push. She has argued that the TPP would contribute to what has been an erosion of the American middle class and give undue rights to multinational corporations to challenge the US and other governments before extrajudicial panels.

"I love Elizabeth. We're allies on a whole host of issues. But she's wrong on this," the president said, according to a partial transcript released by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"MSNBC.

The president said securing the TPP was crucial to helping boost the American economy and the politically-important middle class.

"I've spent the last six and half years yanking this economy out of the worst recession since the great depression," he said. "Every single thing I've done from the Affordable Care Act to pushing to raise the minimum wage to making sure that young people are able to go to college and get good job training to what we're pushing now in terms of sick pay leave. Everything I do has been focused on 'how do we make sure the middle class is getting a fair deal'."

"I would not be doing this trade deal if I did not think it was good for the middle class," he said. "And when you hear folks make a lot of suggestions about how bad this trade deal is, when you dig into the facts they are wrong."

The comments came as committees in Congress began considering a bipartisan bill introduced last week that would grant the president fast-track authority, or TPA.

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Tom Donohue, president of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"US Chamber of Commerce, told a Senate finance committee hearing on Tuesday that it was vital for Congress to pass TPA. "Without TPA, the United States will be relegated to the sidelines as other nations negotiate trade agreements without us - putting American workers, farmers, and companies at a competitive disadvantage," he said.

The tabular content relating to this article is not available to view. Apologies in advance for the inconvenience caused.

<>But HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Richard Trumka, the head of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"AFL-CIO, the country's biggest trade union and traditionally an ally of the president, told senators the bill introduced last week fell short of what was needed.

The consequences of getting it wrong were substantial, he argued, with the TPP and a separate negotiation with the EU potentially covering some 60 per cent of the global economy.

"If [delivering those deals is] not done right you will see the continuation of wage stagnation, you will see inequality continuing to grow . . . You will see the middle class in this country continue to be decimated," Mr Trumka told the hearing.

Committees in both the Senate and lower House of Representatives are due to consider the fast-track bill further on Wednesday and Thursday setting up votes in both houses of Congress by early May. The Financial Times Limited (AAIW/EIW)

India to host first-ever Global Exhibition on Services

BS Reporter 

21 April 2015

Business Standard

In an effort to position itself as a leading services exporter, India is holding a Global Exhibition on Services (GES) for the first time which will see participation by as many as 60 countries from across the world.

The GES, which will be inaugurated by Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Narendra Modi, on April 23 is being organized by the Ministry of Commerce and Industry in association with the Services Export Promotion Council (SEPC) and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Confederation of Indian Industry (CII).

"The IT and ITeS sector has grown by leaps and bounds. But there are other areas that have to leverage their strength in trade in services. We are, hence, looking at nine to ten other sectors that have shown tremendous potential," minister of state (independent charge) for commerce and industry Nirmala Sitharaman told reporters here today.

Sitharaman also said that the government plans to hold it annually in the month of February from next year onwards.

During the two-day event, India will be showcasing its potential in sectors such as Information Technology, telecom, tourism, healthcare, logistics, education, R&D, space and professional services among others. It will also have over 5,000 structured buyer-seller meetings.

According to commerce secretary HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Rajeev Kher, apart from foreign participation, a number of states are also participating in the GES showcasing there area of strength in services trade.

As many as 39 countries, out of the 60, are going to put up stalls exhibiting their expertise in various services. Some of them are US, UK, South Korea, UAE, Hong Kong, Germany, Malaysia, Thailand and others.

The states that are participating are Assam, Bihar, Goa, Gujarat, Haryana, Jammu and Kashmir, Punjab, Rajasthan and Odisha among others.

India has the second fastest growing services sector in the world after China. The growth of services sector GDP has been higher than that of the country's overall GDP during 2000-2001 to 2013-2014.

The sector contributes 57 per cent to the country's GDP. India is also a leading exporter of services with a CAGR of 20.2 per cent followed by China at 16.6 per cent.

India had been also pushing for greater access in the services market under the Doha round of talks at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO). However, this has not seen much headway due to lack of interest on the part of the developed countries.

Ironically, India is also not part of the Trade in Services Agreement (TiSA), which is currently being negotiated among 23 countries outside the purview of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO. US and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union are also part of TISA, the talks for which was launched in 2012. Together, these countries account for 70 per cent of world trade in services. Once concluded, it will open the floodgates of services export from across all sectors such as a banking, telecom and construction among others.

Business Standard Limited (India)

International Trade Supports Seven Million Retail Jobs in the US

21 April 2015

Business Wire

New HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"NRF Report Provides State-by-State Account of Trade's Benefits

WASHINGTON--(BUSINESS WIRE)--April 21, 2015-- 

International trade supports millions of American jobs and is essential to the U.S. economy, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"National Retail Federation says in a new report that provides a state-by-state breakdown of the benefits of trade. According to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"NRF, trade supports nearly seven million retail jobs and benefits American businesses, families and workers.

"Free and open trade is an essential element of the U.S. economy and its continued expansion and prosperity," NRF President and CEO HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Matthew Shay said. "International trade benefits American consumers and families with lower-priced and more-diverse goods, supports millions of American jobs, and creates new investment opportunities for American businesses and retailers, large and small, both here and abroad."

The report, "Trade Matters for Retailers and Families," was conducted by the Trade Partnership for HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"NRF. It includes details on the number of trade-supported retail jobs in each state and the economic benefits of pending trade agreements such as the Trans-Pacific Partnership with Pacific Rim nations and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union.

The report follows last week's introduction of legislation that would renew Trade Promotion Authority. Under TPA, the administration would be required to consult with Congress to set negotiating objectives and priorities and require Congress to hold a straight up-or-down vote once agreements are finalized.

"We applaud congressional action to renew trade promotion authority," Shay said. "It is critical that Congress quickly consider the bill in order to advance pending trade agreements with our allies and trading partners in Asia and Europe."

"Tearing down trade barriers and repealing market-distorting tariffs is in everyone's economic and strategic interests," Shay said. "Approving trade agreements like the TPP and TTIP will not only benefit American businesses but also American consumers and workers. We hope this report helps Congress understand the positive role that international trade plays in individual states and congressional districts."

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"NRF strongly supports international trade agreements that eliminate import tariffs on goods and services and open up new markets for U.S. companies. Along with seeking TPA renewal, TPP and TTIP, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"NRF also supports the long-term extension of the African Growth and Opportunity Act and retroactive renewal of the Generalized System of Preferences.

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"NRF is the world's largest retail trade association, representing discount and department stores, home goods and specialty stores, Main Street merchants, grocers, wholesalers, chain restaurants and Internet retailers from the United States and more than 45 countries. Retail is the nation's largest private sector employer, supporting one in four U.S. jobs -- 42 million working Americans. Contributing $2.6 trillion to annual GDP, retail is a daily barometer for the nation's economy. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"NRF's This is Retail campaign highlights the industry's opportunities for life-long careers, how retailers strengthen communities, and the critical role that retail plays in driving innovation. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"www.nrf.com

PERMALINK

Business Wire, Inc.

U.S. Democrats Want to Amend Pacific Trade Bill

By Siobhan Hughes and William Mauldin 

22 April 2015

The Wall Street Journal

WASHINGTON -- A bloc of congressional Democrats is bucking White House pressure to exclude concerns over currency manipulation from a bill to expedite a Pacific trade pact, widening a rift between President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Barack Obama and his base that threatens the trade deal's passage.

The White House and Republicans have formed an unusual alliance in favor of fast-track legislation to put the proposed 12-nation trade deal to an up-or-down vote without amendments. But as Mr. Obama seeks to build a coalition to pass the trade bill, he faces a threat from New York Sen. Chuck Schumer and his Democratic allies.

Mr. Schumer, who has long pushed for measures to crack down on China's currency-management practices, sees the trade legislation as the last chance to take action as China rises as a big economic competitor of the U.S., with jobs tied to high-end manufacturing and services in the balance.

"If not now, when?" Mr. Schumer said in an interview. The coming trade debate over whether to give the White House fast-track authority for the first time in 13 years, he said, is "perhaps the last train to leave the station when it comes to the rapacious policies of China."

The currency fight is turning the White House's major selling point for the Trans-Pacific Partnership deal on its head. The Obama administration portrays the pact -- which would include nations such as Australia, Canada, Japan, Malaysia and Vietnam -- as a strategic counterweight to China, which isn't part of the trade deal. But if that is the aim, Mr. Schumer and others ask, why not go after the currency lever that critics say the Asian nation has long used to give its exports an edge.

For years, U.S. officials and lawmakers have criticized China for holding its yuan down against the dollar. But some economists say Beijing's gradual appreciation of the yuan over the past decade means the value of China's currency is now roughly in line with market fundamentals. Although last year saw China intervening to keep a lid on the value of the yuan -- amid concern a stronger currency was undermining the country's exports -- U.S. officials say Beijing appears to have largely refrained from such intervention since then.

In a letter to Senate committee leaders Tuesday, Treasury Secretary HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Jacob Lew said other countries "have made clear that they will not support the introduction of enforceable currency provisions in the context of trade agreements, and specifically, the TPP."

Mr. Schumer's currency legislation has passed the Senate previously, and he is now threatening to offer it as an amendment in a Wednesday committee vote or on the floor of the Senate. If approved, the amendment could weaken the chances for the overall fast-track bill, which would become less palatable to fast-track supporters, including some business groups.

White House officials are seeking to head off Mr. Schumer and other lawmakers for fear that adding currency rules to the Pacific trade negotiations could sour the talks when they are close to completion. They also worry that rules restricting monetary policy, even if narrowly tailored, could backfire by restricting legitimate efforts by central banks to stimulate growth by cutting interest rates and other measures.

In an interview Tuesday on HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"MSNBC, Mr. Obama pushed back against critics on the left, such as Sen. Elizabeth Warren (D., Mass.), an opponent of the Pacific deal. "I love Elizabeth. We're allies on a whole host of issues," he said. "But she's wrong on this."

The first test will come when the Senate Finance Committee votes Wednesday on the fast-track bill, also known as Trade Promotion Authority. Senate Finance Committee Chairman Orrin Hatch (R., Utah) has been working to steer Mr. Schumer away from offering the amendment by promising to hold hearings instead, but that is unlikely to satisfy Mr. Schumer. Mr. Hatch will rule Wednesday on whether an amendment from Mr. Schumer is in order.

One part of the calculation: A currency provision could help win Democratic votes. "I'm very comfortable including currency manipulation," said Sen. Ben Cardin (D., Md.), a member of the committee. "I'm one of those who's trying to get to yes in moving forward with fast track, so I'd like to see more of those issues." Dow Jones & Company, Inc.

Car, rice imports impasse stalls Japan, US trade deal

22 April 2015

The Mercury

US and Japanese officials failed to reach agreement in marathon bilateral trade talks in Tokyo, a setback for Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Shinzo Abe's hopes of arriving for a summit in Washington next week with a pact in hand.

US Trade Representative Michael Froman left Tokyo after negotiations concluded around 4am yesterday, with differences remaining over vehicle and rice imports. Froman had travelled to Japan on Sunday for two days of talks with Japanese Economy Minister Akira Amari to help pave the way for a broader Asia- Pacific agreement involving 10 other nations.

Differences on trade matters have "substantially narrowed," Froman said before leaving the Japanese capital. The two countries have reached "stage nine out of 10" in the discussions, Abe said in a television interview.

"They tried to spin it in a positive way, but what seems to be pretty clear is that there is no breakthrough," said James Brown, an assistant professor for international affairs at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Temple University in Tokyo.

"On a foreign policy level, this is a major disappointment" ahead of Abe's trip to the US that begins on Sunday.

The slow progress by Japan and the US in advancing the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) trade pact in order to remain a centre of economic gravity in Asia comes as China enhances its own clout by luring more than 50 countries to join a new China-led regional infrastructure bank (AIIB). Japan and the US have been trying to overcome differences since Japan first said it would seek to join the TPP in 2013.

Speaking after the talks ended, Amari told reporters that he would meet again with Froman if needed before a meeting of all 12 nations involved with the TPP. He didn't indicate when such a meeting could be held.

Vital pillar

US officials have taken every opportunity in recent weeks to underscore that TPP is a vital pillar of its "rebalance" to Asia, and the US and Japan both raised concerns over transparency and governance in shunning the China-led HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank.

US Defence Secretary HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Ashton Carter strayed from military issues in a Tokyo appearance to talk about the importance of TPP in a joint press conference with Japanese Defence Minister General Nakatani on April 8. Two days earlier, Carter told an audience in Arizona that the deal was "as important to me as another aircraft carrier."

The TPP would link economies across the Pacific, making up roughly 40 percent of the world's gross domestic product. The other participants are Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore and Vietnam.

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"US Senate Committee on Finance introduced a bipartisan bill last week in Washington that could have sped passage of TPP-related trade legislation in Congress. The legislation would let the White House send Congress trade pacts for votes without amendment, known as trade promotion authority. It also would give Congress the right to revoke the so-called fast-track process if enough lawmakers find the president ignored negotiating goals.

"Fortunately, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"US Congress does seem to be working on getting that trade promotion authority, and if that goes through then this will be a lot easier to do," said Robert Feldman, chief economist at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Morgan Stanley MUFG Securities in Tokyo. "There is always a great deal of brinkmanship involved in these negotiations, so the fact that things are reported to have gotten a little bumpy at a very, very late stage doesn't surprise me a bit."

Reluctant

The setback if it endures would make it less likely that Japan and the US will get a deal this year. With the US presidential campaign beginning to heat up, Congress may prove more reluctant to approve any trade detail next year before the vote.

"No-one doubts that the gaps between the US and Japanese positions on market access issues have narrowed," Richard Katz, publisher of the US-based Oriental Economist Report, wrote after the talks ended. "But it remains in serious question whether they will narrow enough to allow the two countries to come to an agreement in time so that TPP can be ratified in 2015 - which means signing TPP by around the end of June."

While TPP talks languish, China and the other members of the AIIB plan to sign the articles governing its management by the end of June. - Bloomberg

Independent Online

Russia’s agriculture minister says good-bye to his deputies, aides - sources

21 April 2015

ITAR-TASS World Service

ECONOMY: FYODOROV-MINISTRY

Russia’s agriculture minister says good-bye to his deputies, aides - sources

MOSCOW, April 21. /TASS/. Russia’s Minister of Agriculture Nikolai Fyodorov has said good-bye to his deputies and aides and thanked them for good work, two sources in the ministry’s administration told TASS on Tuesday.

Reports about Fyodorov’s possible resignations have been circulated in the media but there have been no official confirmation.

Fyodorov’s aide Viktor Vasilyev refused to provide any comment.

Fyodorov was not present at the Russian State Duma lower parliament house earlier on Tuesday, when Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Dmitry Medvedev delivered the government’s annual report.

Fyodorov’s visit to Egypt has been cancelled, the ministry’s press service told TASS. A source said that Fyodorov’s new post would be linked with Russia’s relations with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO).

ITAR-TASS Information Telegraph Agency of Russia

EU officials say public reservations over TTIP being taken "seriously"

Enzenhofer Peter 

21 April 2015

Xinhua News Agency

VIENNA, April 21 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Xinhua) -- European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker and Austrian Minister of Economy Reinhold Mitterlehner addressed concerns over TTIP, or the free trade pact between the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union and the United States, following a meeting in Vienna Tuesday.

"We both take the reservations (over the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, or TTIP) among the population very seriously," Mitterlehner told the media after the meeting.

The two officials said solutions to concerns are being sought, such as a court that could oversee arbitration, and that these measures are also part of the negotiating process.

The negotiations are not taking place publicly, Juncker said, though added that he is surprised that after years of claims for documents relating to the negotiations to be made public, which they then were, "nobody is particularly interested."

He added the site containing the documents is "very seldom visited," but hoped that this would eventually change.

Mitterlehner said the target for completion of the TTIP negotiations is still by the end of the current year, ahead of the next presidential elections in the United States.

TTIP talks have begun in July 2013, although progress was much slower than originally anticipated. The ninth round of talks over the pact run from April 20 to 24 in New York.

In Europe, the treaty proponents claimed that the pact will significantly boost economic growth and create a great number of new jobs.

On the other hand, critics are convinced that the TTIP will undermine the existing protection of consumers and allow large-sized corporations to block regulations that they find disadvantageous.

Xinhua News Agency

L'ONU appelle les institutions financières à créer un partenariat mondial fort pour le développement durable

liangnini 

21 April 2015

NEW YORK (Nations Unies), 20 avril (Xinhua) -- A l'ouverture d'une réunion de haut niveau entre les institutions financières internationales et les agences de développement au siège des Nations Unies, à New York, le secrétaire général de l'Organisation, Ban Ki-moon, a appelé les gouvernements, le secteur privé et la société civile à travailler en étroite collaboration pour faire avancer l'ordre du jour du programme de développement pour l'après-2015.

"Trop de choses sont en jeu", a déclaré M. Ban, soulignant la nécessité d'identifier et de s'attaquer aux causes profondes des plus grands défis auxquels fait face la croissance économique mondiale, à savoir la montée des tensions géopolitiques, le taux de chômage élevé des jeunes et les inégalités entre les sexes en matière d'emploi.

"L'engagement fort de tous les secteurs ici présents illustre la coopération sans précédent qui est essentielle pour aller de l'avant s'agissant du programme de développement durable", a ajouté le secrétaire général dans son allocution d'ouverture.

Cette réunion annuelle de haut niveau, organisée à l'initiative du Conseil économique et social des Nations Unies (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"ECOSOC), comprenait des représentants de la Banque mondiale, du Fonds monétaire international (FMI), de l'Organisation mondiale du commerce (OMC) et de la HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Conférence des Nations Unies sur le commerce et le développement (CNUCED).

Plusieurs ministres des finances, chefs d'entreprise et représentants de la société civile étaient également présents à cette réunion qui se poursuivra jusqu'au mardi 21 avril.

"Le programme de développement pour l'après-2015 est ambitieux. Les besoins de financement sont énormes. Ils ne peuvent être atteints que si nous travaillons ensemble, mais nous ne réussirons pas à moins de forger un partenariat et de tirer les leçons de l'économie mondiale actuelle", a déclaré M. Ban.

"La reprise de l'économie mondiale continue d'être marquée par sa lenteur", a-t-il ajouté. "Nous devons nous assurer de la disponibilité des ressources nécessaires à tous les niveaux, aussi bien national et international, que public et privé".

La séance de la matinée devait porter sur la cohérence, la coordination et la coopération dans le cadre du financement du développement durable pour le programme de développement pour l'après-2015. Le débat devait se poursuivre dans l'après-midi sur les défis actuels et les opportunités nouvelles en matière de mobilisation des ressources financières.

Cette réunion intervient à la veille de la troisième Conférence internationale sur le financement du développement à Addis-Abeba, en Ethiopie, au mois de juillet 2015, qui rassemblera des chefs d'Etat et de Gouvernement du monde entier.

Se référant à la future Conférence d'Addis-Abeba, le secrétaire général a déclaré qu'elle serait l'occasion de mettre au point un programme de développement sur le plan politique marqué par trois éléments : la mise en œuvre d'un cadre cohérent et exhaustif pour le développement durable ; l'obtention de résultats concrets dans un certain nombre de domaines critiques ; et l'établissement d'un processus de suivi fort pour veiller à ce qu'"aucun pays ne soit oublié".

"Seul un effort concerté de toutes les parties prenantes nous permettra de réussir. Nous devons travailler en étroite collaboration pour faire de cette année une année de l'action mondiale", a-t-il insisté. Fin

Related Articles

END



 

 

cid:image001.png@01CC55E4.A4F90770

 

Josep Bosch, Information Officer

Information and External Relations Division

+41227395681

 
