New US WTO proposal on food stockpiling

Canada first to send list for preferential treatment to LDCs
(AE) TRADE: EU28 still hopes TTIP deal can be reached at end of year

(AE) COMMERCE: TTIP, les Vingt-huit gardent l’objectif d’un accord fin 2015

Germany pledges to stand firm in US-EU TTIP trade talks

Germany’s SPD won’t back down in U.S. trade talks

India-EU FTA talks unlikely to move forward sans data security

No beef, no TPP entry: US experts

Plain packaging spreads despite the smokescreens

 

 


New US WTO proposal on food stockpiling


22 March 2015

Press Trust of India

From Shreerupa Mitra Jha’

 

Geneva, Mar 21 (PTI) The US has come up with a new WTO proposal to find a permanent solution to food stockpiling after the earlier one was contested by the so-called Group of 33 countries, including India.’

 

In the second dedicated session this year to clinch a deal to the factious issue of food stockpiling, the Geneva-based World Trade Organisation (WTO) saw the G-33 rejecting a proposal by the US which comprises three main elements.’

 

They were reviewing efficacy and trade effects of existing food security programs and the extent to which they meet their goals, evaluating the real and potential problems encountered in implementing food security programs because of constraints in the existing WTO rules and drawing from the best practices and recommendations on food stockpiling.’

 

Best practices in food stockpiling would include programs in states that are most economical, targeted and effective and ones that are not trade distorting and have enhanced transparency.’

 

India said the the US proposal may result in an outcome where countries are advised as to what kind of food security programs they should adopt which is not part of the existing mandate. In trying to address the food security issue vis-a-vis the proposal one of the outcomes could be a decision on public stockholding whereas the mandate is the other way round, India argued.’

 

Indonesia, speaking on behalf of the G-33 countries which also includes China and the Philippines, said that the real issue is getting a permanent solution not to engage in an academic program or to expand the mandate to review existing programs.’

 

The informal meeting also saw the playing out of the old hardened battle lines between the proponents of the G-33 proposal and the opponents of it.’

 

The G-33 proposal suggests to amend the Agriculture Amendment to provide new flexibilities, for programs when governments buy food from low-income farmers at supported prices to build up stocks, to be shifted from the Amber Box — all domestic support measures considered to distort production and trade- to the Green Box-subsidies that do not distort trade or cause minimum distortion.’

 

The EU along with Australia and some other countries have called for maintaining the “integrity of the Green Box” and keeping the “Green Box, Green”.’

 

One of the suggestions to the logjam was a solution on the basis of the calculation of Aggregate Measurement Support (AMS) the base period for which is still the 1986-88 prices — India has been arguing that this has made it increasingly difficult for developing countries to stay within the WTO-prescribed limits.’

 

An interim peace clause was brokered last year in November, when India had blocked the global Trade Facilitation Agreement to find a solution to the stockpiling logjam, which protected developing countries from legal consequences if it exceeded its Amber Box limits as a result of stockholding for food security.’

 

India also suggested a new Friend of the Chair to expedite the process of finding a solution before the end of the year as “time is running out”. PTI SRM KUN

 

 


Canada first to send list for preferential treatment to LDCs


Distributed by Contify.com

22 March 2015

Himalayan Times

 

KATHMANDU: It looks likely that least developed countries (LDCs) may soon begin negotiations with developed countries for preferential facility for trade in services. The preferential treatment for LDCs, that was initiated by the World Trade Organisation (WTO) at its ninth ministerial conference held in Bali in December 2013 has gathered momentum.

 

As the developed countries had made a commitment of extending a waiver on trade in services and service suppliers, LDCs had collectively sent a proposal for the operationalisation of the waiver. Canada, in this regard is the first country to send a notification to the Council for Trade in Services of WTO outlining the services where it will provide the facility.

 

As per its notification, Canada will allow temporary movement of natural persons, who have specialised knowledge and capacity. It has mentioned that in case of a business visitor it will allow 90 days for their visit. Canada will also permit undergraduate students to work off campus without work permit for up to 20 hours per week during regular academic sessions and full time during scheduled breaks. It will also allow students from LDCs to work in Canada after they graduate.

 

Considering the collective request of the LDCs, Canada has promised to provide full market access for construction works to maritime agency services. Other professional services such as accounting, auditing and bookkeeping, investigation and security and veterinary services will also be covered, as per the notification.

 

Canada has welcomed producers of LDCs to produce audiovisual projects with Canadian producers through co-ventures. In addition, training opportunities can be extended for technical jobs in film, television and new media.

 

Regarding financial services, it has extended facilities to LDCs to open subsidiaries of financial institutions, full-service branches or lending branches. “The framework for foreign bank branches allows LDC service suppliers a choice of juridical forms that provide for specific business powers and regulatory requirements,” as per notification.

 

“Canada will exempt tax on any income of LDC resident earned in Canada from international shipping or from operation of an aircraft in international traffic on the reciprocity. The exemption includes income from logistical services when they are incidental to the operation of ships or aircraft in international traffic like accounting and marketing.”

 

Besides, Canada has also offered 50 per cent reduction on fees for companies and individuals of LDCs during registration and maintenance of patents, geographical indications (GIs), trademark and industrial design at the Canadian Intellectual Property Office.

 

Council for Trade in Services has circulated notification to all member LDCs. Following the Bali ministerial conference, LDCs had collectively requested for implementation of the Bali Promise on July 21, 2014.

 

 


(AE) TRADE: EU28 still hopes TTIP deal can be reached at end of year


21 March 2015

Bulletin Quotidien Europe

 

Brussels, 20/03/2015 (Agence Europe) — At their summit on Thursday 19 and Friday 20 March, Europe’s leaders said they hope a free-trade deal (TTIP) with the US can be reached at the end of the year. They agreed to communicate more on the benefits of such a deal and to hold dialogue with civil society.’

 

The European Summit conclusions document says the EU and the United States will need to pull out the stops to conclude the negotiations on an ambitious, global and mutually beneficial agreement by the end of the year, and the member states and European Commission will have to boost their efforts to communicate about the TTIP’s benefits and boost dialogue with civil society.’

 

The president of the European Council, Donald Tusk, said they had had a good exchange of views and had underscored that the EU and the United States must do all they can to reach agreement by the end of 2015. The president of the European Commission, Jean-Claude Juncker, said all governments shared the objective of concluding at the end of the year and some controversial elements will need to be examined during the negotiations with the Americans.’

 

In the face of deep civil society suspicions about the TTIP, Tusk and Juncker wanted to ensure the EU’s leaders were firmly behind the transatlantic deal this week. Highly controversial issues such as settling disputes between investors and states (ISDS), approximation of rules on either side of the Atlantic and liberalisation of services (and therefore risks for public services) have generated concerns in some countries and in civil society.’

 

The TTIP negotiations kicked off again earlier this year after a gap of several months in the autumn due to the changing EP and Commission and the US mid-term elections. The eighth negotiating meeting was held in Brussels in early February and two rounds of talks are planned — one in the United States in April and one in July in Brussels, before the summer break. (Emmanuel Hagry)

 

 


(AE) COMMERCE: TTIP, les Vingt-huit gardent l’objectif d’un accord fin 2015


21 March 2015

Bulletin Quotidien Europe

 

Bruxelles, 20/03/2015 (Agence Europe) — Les dirigeants européens ont réaffirmé, lors de leur sommet des jeudi 19 et vendredi 20 mars, leur souhait de conclure un accord de libre-échange avec les États-Unis (TTIP) d’ici fin 2015. Ils ont aussi convenu de communiquer davantage sur les avantages d’un accord et de dialoguer avec la société civile.’

 

« L’UE et les États-Unis devraient faire tous les efforts pour conclure les négociations sur un accord ambitieux, global et mutuellement bénéfique d’ici la fin de l’année. Les États membres et la Commission devraient redoubler d’efforts pour communiquer sur les avantages du TTIP et accroître le dialogue avec la société civile », soulignent les conclusions du Conseil européen.’

 

« Nous avons eu un bon échange de vues et nous avons souligné que l’UE et les États-Unis devaient faire tous les efforts possibles pour conclure un accord d’ici la fin 2015 », a confirmé le président du Conseil européen, Donald Tusk. « Tous les gouvernements partagent l’objectif de conclure à la fin de cette année. Certains éléments qui donnent lieu à controverse devront être examinés durant les négociations avec les Américains », a commenté le président de la Commission, Jean-Claude Juncker.’

 

Face à la méfiance ancrée dans la société civile à l’égard du TTIP, MM. Tusk et Juncker souhaitaient s’assurer cette semaine du soutien ferme des dirigeants européens en faveur d’un accord transatlantique. Des questions très controversées, comme le règlement des différends investisseur/État (ISDS), le rapprochement transatlantique des normes ou encore la libéralisation des services (et donc des risques pour les services publics) alimentent les craintes de certaines capitales et de la société civile.’

 

Les négociations TTIP ont été relancées début 2015 après une pause de plusieurs mois à l’automne dernier due au renouvellement des instances dirigeantes de l’UE et aux élections américaines à mi-mandat. La huitième session de négociations s’est tenue début février à Bruxelles et deux sessions sont programmées, une en avril aux États-Unis, puis une autre à Bruxelles avant la pause estivale, en juillet. (Emmanuel Hagry)’

 

 


Germany pledges to stand firm in US-EU TTIP trade talks


21 March 2015

Deutsche Welle

 

Germany’s economy minister has pledged to prevent any clauses in a US-EU trade deal that go against his party’s ideals. Social Democrats Sigmar Gabriel says this includes protection clauses called for by the US.’

 

Sigmar Gabriel, of Germany’s center-left Social Democrats (SPD) party, who is also the country’s deputy chancellor, told Munich-based newspaper Sueddeutsche Zeitung in an interview published on Saturday that “what the SPD doesn’t want won’t happen.”‘

 

The European Commission is aiming to stop negotiation disparities from obstructing the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) deal. The agreement could encompass almost half the global economy and could potentially generate $100 billion (92 billion euros) in added economic output for the US and EU.’

 

The European Parliament and other opponents of the TTIP accord fear that US multi-nationals will use a special clause — an Investor-State Dispute Settlement (ISDS) — to test Europe’s laws on food, labor and environment. Many US companies argue that such regulations restrict free commerce. Washington has said it will not accept a deal without a provision allowing ISDS challenges to the EU’s — usually stricter — regulatory laws.’

 

The dispute centers on the use of arbitrators, or independent judges, to settle disputes between national governments and companies that feel they have been treated unjustly, such as by a certain law or expropriation.’

 

Protestors and politicians alike have expressed concern that big companies could impose undue control over governments, thereby undermining the rule of law.’

 

Gabriel appears resolute that the EU should not accept what he calls “privatization” of negotiations.’

 

“We won’t accept any pressure for further liberalization, or privatization. We won’t lower any social, environment or consumer protection standards,” he said. “And we will not — I am completely sure of this — see any privatization of arbitration.”‘

 

Opposition Greens party member Katharina Dröge commented Saturday that: “Gabriel now has to deliver, if his promises are supposed to be more credible this time around.”‘

 

An opinion poll, published by German pollsters Emnid in February, shows support among the German population for the EU-US trade deal has diminished. Just 39 percent of respondents, Emnid reported, were prepared to describe TTIP as “a good thing.”‘

 

jlw/msh (dpa, AFP, Reuters)

 

 


Germany’s SPD won’t back down in U.S. trade talks


21 March 2015

 

BERLIN, March 21 (Reuters) — Germany’s economy minister has promised to block any clauses in a trade deal between the European Union and the United States that go against the ideals of his centre-left Social Democrats (SPD), including investor protection clauses wanted by the Americans.’

 

“What the SPD doesn’t want won’t happen,” Sigmar Gabriel, who is also Germany’s deputy chancellor, told the Sueddeutsche Zeitung newspaper in an interview published on Saturday.’

 

The European Commission is trying to prevent differences on arbitration from blocking the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP), which would encompass almost half the global economy and could generate $100 billion a year in additional economic output on both sides of the Atlantic.’

 

Many in Europe, including the European Parliament, fear U.S. multinationals will use a so-called investor-to-state dispute settlement (ISDS) mechanism to challenge Europe’s food, labour and environmental laws on the grounds that these restrict free commerce. The United States will not accept a deal without it.’

 

Unblocking the issue with a revamped form of ISDS could help negotiators reach a trade deal by the end of 2015.’

 

European Trade Commissioner Cecilia Malmstrom defended the ISDS mechanism this week, saying European companies needed it because U.S. law does not bar discrimination against foreign investors and that if ISDS were modernised, governments would not be bullied by big multinationals to change national laws.’

 

Gabriel appeared adamant that Europe should not accept what he termed the “privatisation” of arbitration, though he added that Malmstrom was helping to overcome scepticism about TTIP.

 

“We won’t accept any pressure for further liberalisation or privatisation. We won’t lower any social, environmental or consumer protection standards,” he said. “And we will not — I am completely sure of this — see any privatisation of arbitration.” (Reporting by Stephen Brown; Editing by Mark Potter) 

 

 


India-EU FTA talks unlikely to move forward sans data security


22 March 2015

Press Trust of India

 

New Delhi, Mar 22 (PTI) The negotiations for the much delayed free trade agreement with the EU are unlikely to start soon as it would be difficult for India to move forward on the pact without getting the data secure nation status, a top government source said.

 

India is asking for data secure nation status from the European Union (EU). The tag is crucial as it will have a bearing on Indian IT companies wanting market access in the 28-nation bloc.

 

India is among nations not considered data secure by the EU. The EU law mandates that European countries doing outsourcing business with countries that are not certified as data secure have to follow stringent contractual obligations, which increases operating costs and affects competitiveness.

 

“Data security issue is very important for India. It will be difficult for the Commerce Ministry to move forward on the free trade pact without getting clarity on data security matter,” the source said.

 

No negotiations were held after both sides failed to bridge substantial gaps on crucial issues in May 2013.

 

“The EU should come on the table with incremental approach. India could consider their demands of reducing duties on wines, spirits and automobiles,” the source added.

 

India and EU are negotiating Bilateral Trade and Investment Agreement (BTIA) that will include trade in goods, services and investments since June 2007.

 

Besides demanding significant duty cuts in automobiles, EU wants tax reduction in wines and spirits and dairy products and a strong intellectual property regime.

 

The domestic auto industry is concerned that any concessions in the sector on demands by the bloc would have far-reaching consequences for it and have an impact on the Modi government’s Make in India initiative.

 

Recently, the European Union sought a political push by Prime Minister Narendra Modi to restart the stalled talks for the agreement and had expressed readiness to adopt flexibility to iron out differences on crucial issues. Two-way commerce stood at USD 101.5 billion in 2013-14. PTI RR KSR MR

 

 


No beef, no TPP entry: US experts


By William Lowther 

Staff reporter in Washington

Taipei Times

22 March 2015

 

Taiwan will never be allowed into the proposed Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) trade agreement until it removes restrictions on the import of US beef and pork, a conference on US-Taiwan relations was told on Friday.

 

It would be difficult to exaggerate the importance of agricultural issues, especially beef and pork, to [US] Congressional House and Senate attitudes about the TPP, analyst Chris Nelson said.

 

A former Congress staff member with decades of experience on US-Taiwan issues, Nelson said that until the US agricultural community had signed off on the TPP, it aint going to happen.

 

If the agricultural community does not get what it wants from Taiwan on the beef and pork issues, he said, Taiwan would not gain entrance to the TPP.

 

If Taiwan wants to get into TPP and it is still screwing around on beef and pork, it is not going to meet the basic qualification and be taken seriously, Nelson said.

 

Asked if a solution to the beef and pork issue was a prerequisite to gaining US support for Taiwanese entry to the TPP in a second round of negotiations that could start later this year, former Congressional Research Service specialist in Asian security affairs Shirley Kan said: The fact that you even have to ask this question just astonishes me.

 

This is serious, she said. Are you in denial?

 

We have heard all the arguments and excuses from Taiwan, she said. How they cant do a thing, because elections are coming up. Well, there are no elections this year in Taiwan. Lets not waste this year. If people are serious, this is the window of opportunity. Whether you use it or not is up to you.

 

She said that Taiwan had a lot of work to do to restore trust as a reliable economic partner that relied on scientific and international standards.

 

Taiwan has to by itself, today remove the remaining obstacles concerning beef and pork, she said.

 

Kan said that, if this was not done, people might look back in years to come and say that Taipei had committed a strategic blunder.

 

Will Taiwan let this opportunity go? she asked.

 

Kan said that it was ironic that the Chinese Nationalist Party (KMT) and the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) could not forge a domestic political consensus for the benefit of the country.

 

Where is the leadership in the KMT and the DPP? she asked.

 

Taiwan is struggling to gain US support for membership in the TPP, which could be of enormous benefit to Taiwans economy.

 

                                                                  


Plain packaging spreads despite the smokescreens


Nick Miller 

22 March 2015

Sun Herald

 

Australia’s plain packaging laws for cigarettes have started a fire spreading across the developed world, writes Nick Miller.

 

‘It’s a bit stunning ... dominos falling everywhere.’

 

Mike Daube, mild-mannered health policy professor from Western Australia, is surveying the virtual battlefield in the war against big tobacco. And he likes what he sees.

 

“It really is the most dramatic global development in tobacco control that I can remember in more than 40 years.”

 

This month alone saw Ireland and Britain legislate for plain cigarette packets with big ugly health warnings, following Australia’s 2012 lead. Norway and France — and others — are hard on their heels.

 

These wins have come despite fierce opposition from the tobacco industry. Lawyers have threatened huge lawsuits, piles of specially-commissioned reports have been delivered to key lobbyists, legislators and opinion-makers, and the industry even (Daube’s colleagues claim) played dirty tricks along the way.

 

“I haven’t seen the industry as ferocious about anything in more than 40 years,” says Prof Daube. “They clearly do see it as a massive threat, especially now that so many dominos are falling.”

 

Also this week, billionaire philanthropists Michael Bloomberg and Bill Gates dug for small change in the sofa and found $US4 million to help developing countries fight legal threats from tobacco companies.

 

The fund was launched (and Prof Daube was speaking) from Abu Dhabi, where the 16th World Conference on Tobacco has the air of a war room, mid-campaign.

 

There were rousing speeches. Talk of tactics and strategies and alliances. War stories were shared and heads put together to try to read the mind of the enemy.

 

Dr Douglas Bettcher, director of prevention of noncommunicable diseases at the WHO, was there. He agrees tobacco control measures are being adopted at “an extraordinary pace”.

 

Two and a half weeks ago Ireland passed plain packaging legislation, last week similar legislation passed the UK House of Commons and Singapore announced a public consultation on plain packaging. This week the House of Lords passed it into law in the UK, Norway released a public consultation document proposing it and plain packaging bills are under discussion in Panama and South Africa, Dr Bettcher says. This is not to mention moves in France, New Zealand, Burkina Faso and Turkey.

 

“All of this progress is being made despite the industry’s best efforts to thwart it,” he says. “Given that the industry fights hardest against the most effective tobacco control measures, it must be very worried about what the globalisation of plain packaging could do, and it is very busy concocting false evidence and lobbying hard against it.

 

“This is an important moment in the history of tobacco control. We are witnessing the creation of a global movement.”

 

A keynote presenter in Abu Dhabi was Dr James Reilly, a mellifluous Irishman with a flair for the dramatic. He sounds like a victorious general back from the front.

 

This month Ireland became the second country in the world and the first in Europe to enact plain packaging legislation. Reilly shepherded the law through, as Minister for Children. “This has been a long journey,” he says. He called for a round of applause for Australia for paving the way and inspiring their decision to follow — however, he says, “there were far more twists and turns than we ever anticipated.

 

“To start with, European law did not permit plain packaging. Ireland had to use its 2013 presidency of the EU to push new laws through. But when the directive made its way to the European Parliament we saw the full power and influence of the tobacco industry at work,” Reilly says.

 

Documents leaked to The Observer newspaper showed 161 lobbyists were hired by just one tobacco company. Philip Morris International strategised to delay the directive until the EU presidency passed to tobacco-friendly Lithuania.

 

In one year lobbyists claimed almost £1.24 million in expenses for meetings with MEPs, The Observer reported. They held personal meetings with a third of all the huge parliament’s members, some up to five times. They targeted farmers’ organisations, retail bodies and trade and business organisations.

 

“Members of the EU parliament complained that the scale of lobbying on this directive was unprecedented,” Reilly says. “There was a very real danger that the parliament would vote in favour of reducing the size of warnings.”

 

The Irish prevailed in Brussels. The focus switched back home — and the tobacco industry followed.

 

They enlisted members of the EU parliament, US congressmen, Indonesian farmers and Irish retailers to their cause.

 

“We were lobbied on a scale that Irish politics had never seen before,” Reilly says.

 

Benson and Hedges owner JTI Ireland (a 55-billion-euro multinational based in Geneva) warned in the last desperate week before the bill went to parliament, that the government had just days to withdraw or face a High Court claim for hefty damages.

 

“[Their] letter was especially aggressive,” says Reilly. “Not only did they attempt to tell a sovereign government that we did not have the authority ... they attempted to tell us how far we could progress it through our parliament and insisted that we provide them with a written undertaking within a matter of days not to progress it any further.”

 

Imperial Tobacco and Philip Morris echoed the threats.

 

“But we had built a strong coalition that proved impenetrable,” Reilly says. As a doctor he had seen firsthand the devastation caused by lung cancer. He told his stories to his colleagues. Not one member of parliament voted against the law, he says.

 

“[Big tobacco’s] only aim is to protect their profits. Our aim and our duty is to protect the health of our people especially that of our children. We have the truth on our side and truth, as an old lady once told me, is not fragile, will not break. Nor will we.”

 

Cigarette companies including BTI are now “considering their legal options”, Fairfax was told.

 

Then it was the UK’s turn. Prime minister David Cameron had once been a plain packaging fan but by 2013 the plan sat in the coldest corner of the backburner after his Australian strategist-for-hire Lynton Crosby reportedly told him to “scrape the barnacles off the boat” in preparation for the 2015 election.

 

Crosby, who also consults for Philip Morris, denied that he had ever discussed plain packaging with the PM. But for whatever reason, it seemed dead.

 

But then up popped the policy again, suddenly, amid the dying embers of the final legislative sitting. Fairfax understands the government’s hand was forced by a strong push for a private members bill in the House of Lords.

 

Again, the tobacco companies campaigned strongly. Media were heavily briefed against plain packaging, as were MPs. Opinion columns rehearsed the tobacco lobby’s song sheet (to be fair, by now the anti-tobacco lobby’s arguments were just as well-practised).

 

The law passed, despite a sizable rebellion among MPs (and many who had to abstain, citing conflicts of interest or revealing previous tobacco lobby gifts such as tickets to the Chelsea Flower Show).

 

A spokesperson for British American Tobacco told Fairfax there will be legal action. “This legislation is a case of the UK Government taking property from a UK business without paying for it. That is illegal under both UK and European law.”

 

“The UK Government has left us with no other choice ... Any business that has property taken away from it by the state would inevitably want to challenge and seek compensation.”

 

You could call it The Castle argument. As Darryl Kerrigan might put it, a cigarette packet is more than just a drawing on a box. By removing a company’s right to use their own brand, you are stealing something from them. The tobacco lobby has other arguments but this is the core of their fight: not to lose their identity.

 

Unlike in The Castle, this line failed in Australia’s High Court. But it is now being fought in two international jurisdictions including the WTO, on the basis that the laws breach Australia’s treaty obligations. And it will be fought again against the UK and possibly Ireland.

 

And now it is Norway’s turn to enter the fray.

 

This week, in a restaurant on a scenic hill overlooking Oslo, Norway’s health minister lunched with the local secretary-general of the Norwegian Cancer Society, Anne Lise Ryel, on the day of the launch of a consultation paper on plain packaging — which also proposed new transparency rules on tobacco industry lobbying.

 

There was another guest at the table: Nicola Roxon, Australia’s former health minister and attorney-general, the politician who used her two key roles in the former Labour government to formulate and then enact the laws that set a precedent for the world.

 

Roxon is out of politics but finds herself in demand globally for her experience in the fight for plain packaging.

 

“We were looking to Australia to see what happened and to learn,” Ryel tells Fairfax.

 

They have seen dirty tricks already: in a previous legal fight against Philip Morris the tobacco companies spread their money around Oslo’s law firms, leaving them unable to advise the government.

 

Bent Hoie, Norway’s health minister, tells Fairfax that Australia should be “commended” for leading the way. “That has been very important for us, we have a complete example to follow. We can use their experience and be better prepared for what kind of resistance we will meet.”

 

Ms Roxon says she is proud — and Australia should be proud of what it has achieved and what might yet be achieved following Australia’s lead.

 

“I’m really pleased to be able to share our experience and hope that other countries will be able to avoid some of the problems,” she says.

 

She says the Norwegians are “super-organised and super-committed” but have been picking her brains on the tobacco industry’s likely response, especially how they brought employer and business lobbies into the argument.

 

It may sound like big tobacco is losing an existential battle. But not so fast. Last year the world smoked more than 5.8 trillion cigarettes. The number was comparable to the year before, in which tobacco industry profits were more than $US44 billion according to Tobacco Atlas.

 

Barely a 10th of the world’s population lives in countries with bans on tobacco advertising. Low- and middle-income countries now account for more than 80 per cent of tobacco users — and tobacco-related deaths. The reduction in smoking rates in countries such as Britain, Australia and Brazil was more than offset by growing consumption in China alone.

 

“While developed markets are the source of current profits, developing markets are the drivers of future profits,” a BAT spokesperson tells Fairfax.

 

So why bother with Norway, when you’ve got China?

 

Ryel says she believes her country, and others, are setting an example, and providing a template that others can follow.

 

“That’s why it’s so important that we help the other countries, to see the force we put the other way. What happens in Norway, we think and hope is helpful for other countries that want to go on board, they will feel more secure.”

 

If this idea catches on, it could snuff out tobacco on a global scale.
