Headlines:

New Zealand gov't welcomes WTO praise for open economy

US meat sector urges Senate to repeal labelling or risk retaliation

Top U.S. trade official hopes Asia-Pacific trade deal sent to Congress by year's end

Kazakhstan to harmonize tariffs within EEU upon completion of transition period

Kazakhstan to eliminate restrictions to foreign capital in telecommunications sector 

ITA Members Tentatively Set July 13 Round, Despite Entrenched Positions

Despite Obama's initial victory, the TPP fight isn't over yet

Argentina's Gov’t expects US$280M in new beef sales

The Global Economy Needs More Trade in Services

 

Details:

New Zealand gov't welcomes WTO praise for open economy

John Macdonald 

2 July 2015

Xinhua News Agency

WELLINGTON, July 2 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Xinhua) -- New Zealand Trade Minister Tim Groser on Thursday welcomed the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization's commendation of the country's open and transparent trade policy.

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO Trade Policy Review, released Monday, praised New Zealand as "among the most open economies in the world," although it also raised concerns about high levels of private debt.

"New Zealand was also highly commended for its economic policies, which are reflected in its high rankings in international indicators of ease of doing business, economic openness and human development," Groser said in a statement.

"Members also expressed confidence that New Zealand had strong fundamentals and trade policy settings for the achievement of sustainable growth."

New Zealand is subject to a Trade Policy Review within the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO every six years.

Xinhua News Agency

US meat sector urges Senate to repeal labelling or risk retaliation

1 July 2015

Hong Kong Shipping Gazette Daily Enews

THE US Senate Agriculture Committee has been urged by the meat sector to join Congressmen in voting to repeal country-of-origin labelling (COOL) rules, after Canada and Mexico threatened US$3 billion in trade sanctions.

"COOL is simply a protectionist measure intended to exclude or diminish the presence of Canadian and Mexican livestock from the US market," said North American Meat Institute president Barry Carpenter.

"It is, and always has been, a non-tariff barrier. Anyone ignoring this fact is not a serious participant in this discussion," he said.

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"US Department of Agriculture has calculated that COOL implementations for the beef and pork industries has cost $1.5 billion and diminished productivity by $200 million a year. Consumer research by Kansas State University found most US consumers aren't even aware of COOL for meat, the American Shipper reported.

In May, a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organisation appellate body issued a final rule finding the United States in non-compliance in its COOL rules, marking the third time the WTO has found the US mandatory COOL rules in violation of US trade obligations.

Canada and Mexico are prepared to levy retaliatory tariffs of $3 billion on US goods, including beef, pork, cherries, ethanol, wine, orange juice, jewellery, mattresses, furniture and parts for heating appliances.

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"US House of Representatives on June 12 passed legislation by a vote of 300 to 131 to repeal certain COOL requirements for beef, pork and chicken.

Senate Agriculture Committee chairman Pat Roberts, Republican from Kansas, said: "The House has moved quickly to prevent retaliation by repealing mandatory COOL for meat. Now the responsibility falls on us. The Senate must act prior to the WTO's authorisation of retaliation", which could occur as soon as September.

HKSG Media Ltd.

Top U.S. trade official hopes Asia-Pacific trade deal sent to Congress by year's end

GaoPan 

2 July 2015

Xinhua News Agency

WASHINGTON, July 1 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Xinhua) -- A top U.S. trade official said Wednesday that he hoped to finalize a trade deal with 11 other countries in the Asia Pacific "in the near term" and send it to Congress for ratification before the end of this year. 

"We're in the final stages of negotiating the Trans-Pacific Partnership," U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman said at an event organized by Politico, referring to a trade deal covering about 40 percent of global economy and nearing completion after more than five years of negotiations.

"We're down to a reasonable number of outstanding issues", but "by definition those issues tend to be the most difficult," Froman said, citing examples of market access issues and intellectual property rules. 

"The first order of business" was to complete those negotiations and bring that agreement to Congress for approval by the end of the year, after getting trade promotion authority, also known as fast-track authority, from Congress last week, the U.S. trade official said.

Other TPP participants had signaled that they would like to put their best offers on the table and conclude the trade deal only after the Obama administration secured the fast-track authority from Congress, which would allow the president to submit trade deals to Congress for an up-or-down vote, not amendments. 

The United States will have conversations with other TPP participants in the coming days and prepare for a chief negotiators meeting and a ministerial meeting to bring this deal to a close, Froman said, but declined to give a specific timetable.

Froman downplayed the differences between the U.S. and Japan over market access negotiations, which was crucial to the conclusion of the broader TPP negotiations, noting that the two sides had "made a very good progress in the last year and a half" despite of some outstanding issues. 

Froman also said the U.S. will find the best way to achieve meaningful market access for U.S. exporters, not necessarily means cutting all tariffs to zero. "Our preferred way is tariff elimination but there are other ways to achieve that as well, tariff reduction, expansion of quotas, the improvement of quality and quantity of access," he said.

Xinhua News Agency

Kazakhstan to harmonize tariffs within EEU upon completion of transition period

1 July 2015

Interfax: Kazakhstan General Newswire

ASTANA. July 1 (Interfax-Kazakhstan) - Kazakhstan will start negotiations with its partners within the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Eurasian Economic Union (EEU) on tariffs harmonization upon completion of a 4-year transition period preceding its accession to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO, Minister for Economic Integration Zhanar Aitzhanova has said.

The minister pointed out import customs duties to be applied upon Kazakhstan's accession to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO apart from the EEU common trade policy. Kazakhstan's duties would be lower on nearly 3,500 commodities items compared to the EEU or centralized customs tariffs because bilateral negotiations with 30 HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO member states regarding commodities access to markets and with 15 HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO member states regarding services access to markets were finalized in 2009 prior to the creation of the Customs Union, Ms. Aitzhanova told a Wednesday briefing in Astana.

For this reason Kazakhstan agreed with its EEU partners that it would apply lower customs duties within 4 years and then start negations with them as part of its HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO commitments, according to her. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO has such experience related to the EU enlargement. When the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO members join the EU this union enters into talks with the other HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO members to harmonize import customs duties of the EU member states, according to the minister.

It was reported earlier that a final meeting of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO working group took place on June 22 this year in Geneva, at which the completion of negotiations on Kazakhstan's accession to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO was officially announced.

Interfax Information Services, B.V.

Kazakhstan to eliminate restrictions to foreign capital in telecommunications sector  

1 July 2015

Kazinform International News Agency

ASTANA. KAZINFORM - Restrictions to participation of foreign capital in the communications sector will be removed 2.5 years after accession of Kazakhstan to the WTO, Minister of Economic Integration Zhanar Aitzhanova has said at a briefing in the CCS.

"In the telecommunications sector, 2.5 years after accession to the WTO we will cancel 49% restriction to participation of foreign capital in those companies that provide intercity and international terrestrial communications," Aitzhanova said.

She noted that, in addition to the JSC "HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Kazakhtelecom", in Kazakhstan there are about 10 companies providing communications services, according to the website ofHYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" Prime Minister of Republic of Kazakhstan.

June 22 the final meeting of the working group was held in Geneva. At the meeting they officially announced the completion of negotiations on Kazakhstan's accession to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization.

Kazinform International News Agency

ITA Members Tentatively Set July 13 Round, Despite Entrenched Positions

1 July 2015

Inside US-China Trade

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization members who are participating in negotiations to expand the Information Technology Agreement (ITA) have tentatively scheduled a new round of talks for the week of July 13, but whether it will take place hinges on whether South Korea and China can show any willingness to break the current stalemate.

Plans for the round were set at a meeting on Thursday (June 25) organized by WTO Director-General HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Roberto Azevedo at the request of a number of participants, according to Geneva sources. That meeting followed consultations that Azevedo held with members to gauge if there was any movement in the talks, sources said.

The director-general, however, told the ambassadors from the ITA expansion participants he could discern no significant change in their respective positions on product scope since the talks stalled in December 2014.

As such, the July 13 round is not set in stone. Azevedo is set to hold another round of consultations next week to gauge again where members are. If members are not giving ground, the round will be canceled, sources said.

Major ITA expansion participants, and U.S. business groups backing the effort, are still hoping to conclude the product scope talks before the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO's summer break and resolve the issue of tariff phaseout periods before the December HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO ministerial in Kenya. Members fear that holding another round of talks that does not resolve the ITA expansion's lingering product issues could lead the talks to collapse altogether, one Geneva source said.

The reason for the deadlock between China and Korea is rooted in the fact that flat-panel displays were left out of the November 2014 breakthrough reached between the U.S. and China that led to an initial resumption in the ITA talks. Since then, China has insisted it cannot accept any more concessions, blocking Korea's attempts to secure tariff concessions on other priority items like organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs).

But even if the deadlock between Korea and China were resolved, other issues remain. Taiwan, for instance, also sought to include flat-panel displays in the ITA, and has also been seeking additional concessions from China.

Other HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO members -- including the United States and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union -- are continuing to mount on pressure on South Korea to drop its demands to extract additional tariff concessions from China. Sources said members are continuing to suggest that Korea could be kicked out of the ITA if it does not yield. One source described it as Òan underlying threatÓ that is not being mentioned in formal meetings.

Sources have given differing accounts though on whether this is a serious threat. This is primarily because, if booted out, Seoul would still benefit from the tariff concessions of others as the ITA is an open plurilateral. This means that participants agree to drop tariffs on covered products for all HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO members; if they closed the deal without Korea, it could simply "free ride" on all the other countries' concessions.

But one Geneva source countered that Seoul would face more political damage than economic if it's left out of the agreement. For instance, Korea's willingness to negotiate in the ITA could affect its ability to join the Trans-Pacific Partnership in the future, this source continued.

Inside Washington Publishers

Despite Obama's initial victory, the TPP fight isn't over yet

2 July 2015

Business Times Singapore

THE White House and Republican leaders on Capitol Hill won a significant political victory last week when Congress passed the "fast-track" trade legislation that would allow President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Barack Obama to conclude the negotiations on the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) and advance his plans to "pivot" American policy towards Asia.

Overcoming strong opposition in the Democratic majority in Congress and the labour unions, President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Obama and his Republican partners succeeded in clearing several legislative roadblocks and winning passage of the Trade Promotion Authority (TPA) bill in both the House of Representatives and the Senate, and allowing the president to sign it. The TPA gives the White House the power to submit trade deals to Congress for an up-or-down vote without amendments in the next six years. It ensures that lawmakers would not be able to demand changes to trade agreements with foreign governments after they are concluded.

But the Senate's passage of the TPA with a 60-38 vote, with only 13 Democrats voting for the bill, demonstrated the political hurdles that the White House will be facing in the coming months. First, it still has to conclude the negotiations on the TPP accord among the US, Singapore, Malaysia, Vietnam and the rest of the Pacific Rim economies; and then President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Obama will have to win the support of Congress for the trade pact itself.

According to the current timeline, the negotiations between the US and its 11 trade partners were scheduled to conclude by the end of July, when an agreement was to be signed.

But several issues in the negotiations have yet to be resolved, which include expanding access to Japan's agriculture and auto markets, and adopting new intellectual property protection rules. Responding to the pressure from American manufacturers which would be impacted by the deal and which enjoy wide support on Capitol Hill (which include the powerful auto industry), American negotiators are expected to adopt a tough stand on these and other issues, and especially over Japan's trade policies. That could end up slowing down the negotiating process.

Moreover, even if the TPP negotiations are concluded by end-July, the guidelines provided by the TPA legislation ensure that it would take at least six months for the agreement to get through Congress. During that time, lawmakers will debate whether the final accord is in line with the commitments made by the White House on issues like labour rights and environmental rules.

That kind of congressional debate could provide an opportunity for Democratic lawmakers, labour unions and environmental groups that oppose the TPP to employ various legislative tactics that would make it difficult to bring the trade accord to a vote.

This congressional debate could spill over into the 2016 presidential primaries and against the backdrop of growing opposition among leading Democrats, including presumptive Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton, to President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Obama's ambitious trade agenda.

The expectation is therefore that leading Democratic lawmakers and the labour unions would renew their efforts to kill the TPP. That would leave President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Obama no choice but to invest his dwindling political capital in trying to work with the Republicans to save a trade agreement that remains central to his global agenda and to his legacy as president.

U.S. President Barack Obama (left) delivers a statement on Cuba from the Rose Garden at the White House in Washington, on July 1, 2015. 

Singapore Press Holdings Limited

Argentina's Gov’t expects US$280M in new beef sales

1 July 2015

Buenos Aires Herald

Change in US regulation could open the door to further export opportunities, officials say

The decision by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"US Department of Agriculture to amend its regulations and allow fresh beef into the United States from Brazil and Argentina was received with optimism by the Kirchnerite administration, which said that US$280 million per year in new exports could be clinched “very quickly.”

So said Economy Minister Axel Kicillof, who nevertheless still had harsh words of criticism for the commercial practices of the United States.

The change in US regulations is expected to be published in the coming hours and, according to government sources, would take effect in 60 days.

For his part, the Agriculture Minister anticipated yesterday that fresh Argentine beef production hubs will have to be approved by US authorities before sales start taking place. Animals will have to be periodically checked for diseases and be born and raised in the same region too.

In a press conference with other top officials, Kicillof argued that Argentina has been free from the foot-and-mouth disease since 2007, but that the US applied “protectionist measures with no justification, which damaged Argentine producers and North American consumers.”

“This was only obtained after a long fight,” the minister said from the Pink House. “As the United States failed to recognize until today that we are free from foot-and-mouth disease, US$1.6 billion were lost in exports, due to the despicable policies of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"US government. If we include the associated markets of Canada and Mexico, you have to add US$432 million to that,” he argued.

Mexico and Canada's association with the US at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) bloc means that US measures have an effect on those markets too.

Kicillof was backed by Foreign Minister Héctor Timerman, who said that the US failed to open its markets in the last eight years due to “the intense lobbying of US firms against the production of highly competitive agricultural countries.”

Timerman also blamed former President Fernando De la Rúa for the initial ban, which he said took place “due to poor government handling of the foot-and-mouth issue in 2001.”

Agriculture Minister Carlos Casamiquela opted instead to emphasize the work done in Argentina to reverse the prohibition, saying that the SENASA food quality regulators “persisted through all these years to demonstrate our capacity to produce beef that's free from foot-and-mouth.”

WTO conflicts

Timerman also recalled an ongoing conflict between Argentina and the US regarding lemon exports. Argentina is ready to ask for sanctions at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization (WTO) if negotiations don't progress quickly in that area, he said.

“We sell lemons the world over, we are the number one global producer, and only the protectionist measures from the US are stopping our products from reaching their markets,” Timerman said.

Conflicts go both ways, however. Earlier this year, the WTO rejected Argentina's bid to overturn a ruling in favour of the United States, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union and Japan in a case against national licensing rules that the international body has said have been used to unlawfully restrict imports.

Argentina has until the end of the year to propose a solution on that matter. Although the country is using its questioned DJAI import permits less frequently as of late, importers have still questioned the delays of Central Bank foreign currency sales needed to complete the transactions.

Producers still not happy

Both the Rural Society (SRA) and the Consortium of Argentine Beef Exporters (ABC) said yesterday that the US re-opening its market was clearly good news, but they did not go overboard in their reactions.

“There are still some steps remaining in this process, we need to show prudence when assessing the impact of this because it will not be immediate,” the SR said.

It also argued that the real limiting force to pushing Argentine exports back were government restrictions. “None of the commercial and sanitary efforts that are still being made will be fruitful if the government keeps its currency commercial policy of closed markets and arbitrary distribution of export permits,” a press release said. “It is because of these government restrictions that we have moved from being the third beef exporter worldwide to being 14th behind Belarus.”

Some economists critical of the government, like Jorge Remes Lenicov, former economy minister to caretaker president Eduardo Duhalde in 2002, seemed to agree with the cautious optimism, saying the news was “very positive” but that “there are still internal matters to solve, because the profitability of the sector is not enough to export today.”

ABC's president Mario Ravettino also called for subsidies to beef processing and cold storage plants, arguing that companies were having trouble in protecting all their jobs. But Ravetino did not focus the blame on the government, saying beef prices had suffered from a 15 percent drop lately. He praised the good work done at the WTO to defend Argentine interests.

Herald staff with DyN, Télam

Heraldo de Buenos Aires Ltd

The Global Economy Needs More Trade in Services

By John Calverley 

2 July 2015

The Wall Street Journal Europe

U.S. President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Barack Obama lobbied hard for the authority to negotiate trade pacts that could not later be altered by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"U.S. Congress, and now he has his desired trade-promotion authority. As a result, the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), a proposed treaty among 12 Pacific nations, is within reach. There are hopes that the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) currently being negotiated between the U.S. and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union might follow soon.

If these two trade pacts are passed, trade in services will be one of the main beneficiaries, boosting economic growth in both developed and emerging countries. Projections from the Peterson Institute, for instance, suggest global trade could go up by nearly $500 billion, with $300 billion added to incomes.

While tariff reduction on goods was the main focus of trade deals in the 20th century, the new generation of pacts address "behind the border" obstacles such as restrictive or biased procurement policies, arcane investment rules and weak intellectual-property protection -- all of which stand as barriers to trade in services.

According to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Bank, such barriers remain widespread in many developed countries but are especially cumbersome in emerging markets. If they could be removed, trade in services could soar. The Peterson Institute believes U.S. service exports could more than double over time, especially if the TPP is expanded to include more nations. Which is why developed countries, increasingly reliant on services exports, are so anxious to address them.

There are benefits for emerging markets, too. So much of their manufacturing, especially low-wage manufacturing, adds little value and is under threat from automation and robotics. Services trade is central to economic progress, particularly when countries reach middle-income status, as China is doing now. Moving up the value chain sometimes means developing specialist manufacturing, but more often it means a greater focus on services such as design, brand development and improving sales services.

The importance of services trade is often underestimated. By conventional measures, services are less than 20% of exports globally. But when trade is measured in value-added terms, services account for 45%, which is more than trade in manufacturing (37%), with the remainder being raw materials and foodstuffs.

Services are also becoming more tradable in their own right as the cost of digital technology continues to come down, making it easier to export such services as business-process outsourcing, medical diagnostics or education. The TPP is the first free-trade agreement to include a separate chapter on e-commerce.

With a rise in services trade, productivity and growth in emerging as well as developed markets could see a boost.

The initial flurry of business-process outsourcing around the turn of the millennium was driven by plummeting telephony costs and the proliferation of the Internet. India has been the biggest beneficiary of this trend, and many other countries have followed its example, including Morocco, the Philippines, South Africa and Tunisia.

The new wave of digital technology, based on broadband and mobile, is giving outsourcing another lift and extending it into new areas. Video conferencing and virtual reality can help people feel like they're interacting in the same space. Computer translation is another technology -- still rudimentary, but improving rapidly -- that will be important as it gains ground.

It's not hard to see why services trade is high on everyone's agenda.

While global manufacturing supply chains are under threat from rising wages in China and -- in the longer term -- from automation and technology such as 3-D printing, services trade is likely to become increasingly important, which is good news for the global economy.

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Bank has drawn a connection between trade in services and higher wages, as well as a larger reduction in poverty compared to manufacturing. And service companies require less investment, making them easier to establish.

Many countries understand this, which is why promoting services and service exports has become a priority for so many. There's a lot more focus on creating a business environment in which services can flourish -- and more momentum behind trade deals like TPP and TTIP.

The path to a strong service sector requires infrastructure, such as reliable electricity and broadband, and also benefits from a well-educated population, with an emphasis on creativity. Promoting trade in services, to help generate competition and higher productivity, requires strong protection for intellectual property and a reduction in the favoritism often shown to state-owned enterprises or companies connected to the state.

TPP and TTIP can help pave the way by introducing new international rules in these areas.

And if the trade deals can be agreed to and ratified, they are likely to be the model for future agreements, expanding membership and giving the world another shot at trade-led growth.

Mr. Calverley is the head of global thematic research at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Standard Chartered.

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Dow Jones & Company, Inc. 

END

 

 

 

cid:image001.png@01CC55E4.A4F90770

 

Josep Bosch, Information Officer

Information and External Relations Division

+41227395681

 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.
