Sri Lanka to ratify WTO agreements to allow production of generic drugs
Kazakhstan Thanks Ukraine For Assistance In Accession To WTO
Domestic industry worried over import of cheap American poultry products
NCE President to address WTO 5th Global Aid for Trade in Geneva
Kazakhstan and EEU to finalize import duties harmonization in 6-7 year

 
Sri Lanka to ratify WTO agreements to allow production of generic drugs
20 June 2015
Daily FT
 
The Government has allowed the Industry and Commerce Ministry to ratify a World Trade Organisation linked agreement that allows for the local production of generic drugs in special circumstances.
 
Industry and Commerce Minister Rishad Bathiudeen will ratify the relevant amended agreement after receiving Cabinet approval this week. The move will allow Sri Lanka to access a global movement to allow generic drug production to poorer countries.
 
Agreements of Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) administered by the World Trade Organisation (WTO) requires all WTO Members to implement appropriate legislation which protects intellectual property rights including copy rights and related rights, trade marks, geographical indications, industrial designs, patents, layout designs and integrated circuits and undisclosed information.
 
Notwithstanding the obligations imposed on members to provide substantial intellectual property rights protection for patented medicinal drugs in the context of the TRIPS, the agreement provides some flexibilities for members to permit the local manufacture or produce generic versions of patented medicines without the authorisation of patent holders, when their population face any eminent health crises situations such as malaria, tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS and other circumstances of extreme urgency, the Cabinet paper noted.
 
The TRIPS agreement introduced intellectual property law into the international trading system for the first time and remains the most comprehensive international agreement on intellectual property to date.
 
In 2001, developing countries, concerned that developed countries were insisting on an overly narrow reading of TRIPS, initiated a round of talks that resulted in the Doha Declaration. The Doha Declaration is a WTO statement that clarifies the scope of TRIPS, stating for example that TRIPS can and should be interpreted in light of the goal to promote access to medicines for all.
 
The most visible conflict has been over AIDS drugs in Africa. Despite the role that patents have played in maintaining higher drug costs for public health programs across Africa, this controversy has not led to a revision of TRIPs. Instead, an interpretive statement, the Doha Declaration, was issued in November 2001, which indicated that TRIPs should not prevent states from dealing with public health crises. After Doha, PhRMA, the United States and to a lesser extent other developed nations began working to minimize the effect of the declaration.
 


 
Kazakhstan Thanks Ukraine For Assistance In Accession To WTO
20 June 2015
Ukrainian News
 
Kazakhstan thanks Ukraine for assistance in accession to the World Trade Organization, press service of the Kazakh President has said.
 
The Presidents of Ukraine and Kazakhstan have discussed cooperation and expressed hope for remarkable results of upcoming meeting of the interstate Kazakh-Ukrainian commission for economic cooperation.
 
Besides, the Presidents discussed the upcoming visit of the Ukrainian President to Astana (Kazakhstan).
 
As Ukrainian News earlier reported, President Petro Poroshenko is confidence of intensification of cooperation between Ukraine and Kazakhstan in view of reelection of Nursultan Nazarbayev as the President.
 


 
 
 
Domestic industry worried over import of cheap American poultry products
Financial Express
 
India lost a case with the World Trade Organization ruling that Indian ban on import of poultry meat, eggs and live pigs from the US was "inconsistent" with the international norms. India will have 12-18 months to implement this ruling, after which the US can begin exports of these products to India. The Compound Feed Manufacturers Association (CLFMA) of India has been cautioning the government about the impact on the Indian poultry sector.
 
Amit Saraogi, chairman, CLFMA, says the association is in constant touch with the government to find a solution to this issue and see if FSSAI regulations could make a difference. If we start getting cheaper chicken legs, the domestic poultry industry will be destroyed, he said at the sidelines of a meet held in Pune.
 
"The cost of one processed chicken to domestic companies is around $3 per chicken, but it is just $1 per chicken for US companies, so if they are entering at this rates, you can see the impact. This could damage industry to the extent of 30-40%," he said. The poultry industry in India is to the tune of R80,000 crore of which 65% of the market consists of chicken and 35% comes from eggs. Saraogi says the association is still in the process of finding ways and means to tackle the situation.
 
The WTO recently upheld a ruling that India was unfairly blocking imports of US poultry and eggs. Under WTO rules, India will be given a period of time to dismantle the trade barriers that have been found to be illegal. If it fails to dismantle the barriers, the US would have the right to impose trade sanctions against India equal to the amount of lost agricultural trade.
 
The US poultry industry has estimated that exports of poultry meat alone could exceed $300 million annually once India's restrictions are removed.
 
Currently, the US exports 20% of its poultry meat production each year. The US intends to export chicken legs, which are in high demand in India. Legs are treated as waste in the US along with chicken beak and other parts, while chicken legs are sold at a premium in India.
 
According to Saraogi the share of chicken legs is around 40% of the $9.37 billion (R60,000 crore) Indian market. He also said the quality of chicken legs from the US is not good, asserting that American exporters keep the legs for months, before they export them to other countries.
 
The US had dragged India to the WTO on 6 March 2012 saying that India imposed the trade barriers in 2007 to prevent avian influenza from entering the country. India's Ministry of Commerce and Industry had informed the dispute settlement body that the primary reason for restricting the entry of various agricultural products from the US was because of concerns about the spread of the avian influenza, but the WTO ruled that these restrictions were not equally applied to other countries affected by the disease, and that they were not backed up by the relevant scientific evidence.
 
The European Union, Australia, China, Japan, Colombia, Ecuador, Guatemala, Vietnam, Argentina and Brazil subsequently joined as third parties in the dispute.
 
The Association has also urged the government to consider the import of soymeal.
 
Currently the industry produces 9 million tonnes of which 70 % is used for animal feed. It wants the government to allow duty- free imports of soybean meal and other oil meals.
 


 
NCE President to address WTO 5th Global Aid for Trade in Geneva
19 June 2015
Daily FT
 
The WTO 5th Global Aid for trade is being held in Geneva from 1-4 July. Sarada M. De Silva, President of the NCE, Chairman of the Ceylon Cinnamon Association (which consists of producers, processors, harvesters and exporters) and Founder Chairman of the Spice Council, has been invited to address the side event No. 12 related to the Global Aid for Trade event on 'Geographical Indications (GI)' on 'GI as a vector of development, and a warranty of quality in international trade'.BUP_DFT_DFT-8-5
 
This is not the first instance in which De Silva has been invited to address the Global Aid for Trade events. At the event held in 2013 he addressed the UNIDO session at the event on 'Ceylon Cinnamon' and at the WTO Standards, Trade, Development, and Facilitation (STDF) session on Phytosanitary issues related to Ceylon Cinnamon.
 
It is pertinent to note that Sri Lanka does not have to date a single GI which is registered overseas. In this regard, De Silva has been lobbying for the registration of Ceylon Cinnamon in the National Intellectual Property Law of Sri Lanka since the 1990s.
 
During this period he has been working with Dr. D. M. Karunaratne, Director General of the National Intellectual Property Office in Sri Lanka and Gothami Indikadahena, Director Department of Commerce. Due to the efforts of De Silva, Ceylon Cinnamon, Ceylon Tea, and the Ceylon Blue Sapphire have been incorporated in the local National Intellectual Property law as a protection for GI.
 
Unfortunately, the local Intellectual Property Law of Sri Lanka does not have a separate section for the protection of GI, nor a register of GI. After extensive lobbying, to correct this situation and latterly with the Ministry of Industry and Commerce in Sri Lanka and G.R. Ranawaka, Current Director General of the National Intellectual Property Office and the Legal Advisory committee to NIPO a cabinet memorandum has been submitted by the Ministry of Industry of Commerce for the purpose.
 
The benefits that will accrue to Sri Lanka from the overseas registration of GI of Ceylon Cinnamon are as follows: As a differentiation factor between Cassia and Cinnamon; a higher level of protection than a certification or trade mark; growth of market share; as a tool for regional promotion; control of production and improvement of quality standards; traceability; improvement of quality; creation of value for local rural communities; ability to be defended anywhere in the world against imitations or adulteration; adds value to the originality of the producers; sustainable production.
 
Nimal Karunatilake, Ambassador of Sri Lanka to the WTO, and Senior Representative at the WIPO, is assisting Sri Lanka to prepare the Technical Dossier along with Department of Commerce, EDB and cinnamon stakeholders to obtain GI for Ceylon Cinnamon. The efforts of the UNIDO-WTO/STDF-FAO-TSC Cinnamon project are appreciated for all the assistance given to enhance the cinnamon industry.
 


 
Kazakhstan and EEU to finalize import duties harmonization in 6-7 year
19 June 2015
Interfax: Kazakhstan General Newswire
 
ST. PETERSBURG. June 19 (Interfax) - It takes Kazakhstan 6-7 years to harmonize its import duties with the other states participating in the Eurasian Economic Union (EEU) after its joining the World Trade Organization (WTO), EEU Commission Minister for Trade Andrei Slepnev said on the sidelines of the St.Petersburg International Economic Forum.
 
Kazakhstan's commitments as a WTO member had been approved before the EEU was created and are lower than the import tariffs in Russia and the rest of EEU.
 
"During a certain period of time a number of tariffs applied in Kazakhstan will be lower than the EEU tariffs. In this connection, we need to figure our what necessary amendments we will have to make to our law and, most importantly, what regulatory mechanisms need to be in place to prevent these goods from coming into the rest of the Union," the minister said.
 
"There are different goods on that list. We do not have problems with some of them, for instance aircraft and even vehicles as these goods are to be registered. As far as the other goods are concerned, we are now developing control mechanisms including labelling. A pilot labeling project will be signed in July and we well launch it. Then, we will start harmonizing import operations in the framework of the WTO procedures. I think, this will take 6-7 years," Slepnev said.
 
 
 
 
 
