Headlines:

Trade talks run into overtime as WTO searches for its future
WTO ministers try to broker stalemate over agriculture deal
WTO ministerial conference in Nairobi getting dragged out, says minister
No Deal Visible for India in Final Lap of WTO Talks
U.S. repeals meat labelling law, after facing Canadian retaliation
Spending Bill Eliminates Rule for Labels Specifying Meat's Country of Origin
WTO - Algeria for More Transparent Membership Process
Iran aims to boost economy by joining world trading system
Moscow's actions run counter to WTO logic - Ukrainian foreign minister
Tobacco industry suffers court blow over Australia ban; Plain packaging
FACILITATOR AG TEXT LEAVES OUT SSM, STOCKHOLDING; REFLECTS MANY U.S. DEMANDS
Japan approves $27 bln extra stimulus budget to boost growth

 

Details:

Trade talks run into overtime as WTO searches for its future

By Thomas Burmeister and Albert Otti, dpa

18 December 2015

dpa International Service in English

Nairobi (dpa) - High-level talks at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO) would be extended to Saturday as rich and emerging countries were locked in disputes over farming subsidies and the future scope of free trade talks, delegates told dpa in Nairobi.

"It's quite improbable that we will finish this conference today, as planned. Many of us have rebooked our flights for the weekend instead," EU Trade Commissioner Cecilia Malmstrom wrote earlier on her blog.

Delegates said agriculture had emerged as one of the most contentious issues.

Two years ago, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO members granted India the right to keep buying up large food stocks at low prices, a measure that was to be reviewed at regular intervals.

However, the large South Asian country effectively demanded that this exemption be made permanent.

While India argues that it needs to intervene in the farming sector to secure food for millions of poor citizens, neighbouring Pakistan and other countries in the region accuse New Delhi of distorting the market with government-sponsored cheap products.

The dispute was holding up agreement on a wider deal that was drafted in principle already on Thursday. It foresees the end of agricultural subsidies by 2020 in developed countries and by 2023 in developing countries.

Beyond this issue, negotiators had yet to solve a fundamental dispute over the future scope of global trade liberalization talks within the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO framework.

Emerging and developing countries demanded that HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO members continue the stalled round of Doha talks that were launched in 2001 to foster fair trade conditions for poorer countries as part of a global free-trade deal.

Emerging countries like China and India are championing the Doha round because it affords them the status of developing countries, allowing them to benefit from special trade conditions.

In contrast, the United States and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union want the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO to find solutions to issues of globalized trade, such as regulations on foreign investments, online trade and production processes that span several countries.

dpa Deutsche Presse-Agentur GmbH

WTO ministers try to broker stalemate over agriculture deal

Deng Yaomin

18 December 2015

Xinhua News Agency

NAIROBI, Dec. 18 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Xinhua) -- Trade Ministers went into long hours of negotiations on Friday after an apparent deadlock on key aspects of a deal on stopping state financial support to farmers to produce crops for the international export markets at below market prices.

Amina Mohammed, Kenyan Foreign Affairs Cabinet Secretary who is chairing the 10th HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO) ministerial conference here in Nairobi, told journalists there was no stalemate and disagreements between the developed and the developing countries and talks had been narrowed to the extent that both sides were cooperating on an inclusive deal.

"We have got good momentum. We are waiting for a final decision being made on the work program of the future. We are very close but not yet there. We hope to get there in a few more hours," Mohamed said late Friday as the four-day conference was postponed.

She revealed there was a major deadlock on the export competition area. The ministers attending the talks have been unable to agree on the time frame of eliminating the domestic support for the local large-scale farmers who are accused by farmers in poor countries of flooding the markets with cheap agricultural products.

The poor countries insist a timeline that considers the immediate lifting of the subsidized production of crops such as cotton, maize and other products, should be agreed at the Nairobi meeting.

"There is no direct dispute or conflict between the United States and India or any other country. Everybody is determined to make this happen. We are negotiating a trade dispute and everyone tries to get what is best," the Kenyan minister said.

Experts said the big question facing the Nairobi round of the trade talks was whether the rich countries were willing to negotiate in good faith and to give in to the demands for the removal of the subsidies to farmers in their countries to create an equal trade.

Meanwhile, the Kenyan foreign minister has praised the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO for redeeming its waning influence on the global trade arena at the Nairobi talks.

"We are hoping to have a Nairobi Declaration that will prepare us for a more serious negotiating round such as the one in 2001 when we agreed on the Doha Round. We are optimistic it shall be done" she said.

Xinhua News Agency

WTO ministerial conference in Nairobi getting dragged out, says minister

18 December 2015

ITAR-TASS World Service

NAIROBI, December 18. /TASS/. Ministerial conference of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization member-states in Nairobi, Kenya, is getting dragged out, Russian Minister of Economic Development and Trade, Alexei Ulyukayev told reporters on Friday.

"There are chances to reach agreement on major issues but the final decision is postponed," he said. "We'll continue working."

Adoption of the final declaration has been put off to December 19.

A package of documents on export competition in the agrarian sector remains the biggest stumbling block. The dragged-out discussions concern precisely this item of the conference agenda, a source on the Russian delegation said earlier.

The controversies revolve around a ban on export subsidies in agriculture -- an aspect particularly important for Russian agricultural producers and especially the ones specializing in production of meat and milk. These subsidies create inequitable conditions for competition with producers from the countries which, unlike Russia, issue subsidies to farmers and thus enable them to keep lower prices for their products.

The main point of controversy is the year when this condition should take effect -- in 2020 or in 2026.

Other issues considered at the conference concern the regulations for providing agricultural aid and the operations of state-controlled trade enterprises for support to agricultural exporters.

ITAR-TASS Information Telegraph Agency of Russia

No Deal Visible for India in Final Lap of WTO Talks

Kirtika.Suneja

19 December 2015

The Economic Times - Delhi Edition

It may be a disappointing finish for India at the tenth HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO ministerial with no deal in sight even as the talks went on till late night Friday beyond the original deadline of afternoon.

Even though India, along with China, US, EU and Brazil were in talks with WTO DG HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Roberto Azevedo and chair Amina Mohamed since morning, sources said that the discussion was only on export competition and agriculture, and nothing on India's key demand of reaffirmation of Doha, even till late night. However, despite this, India doesn't plan to walk out of the talks.

The ministerial was scheduled to end on December 18 but is likely to get extended as no side is budging from its position. While China is sup porting India in reaffirming Doha, India is fighting its own battles in this small grouping.

A source said that the EU has adopted techniques to tire out India such as day long discussions on issues that they favour besides asking for para by para discussions on these at the last moment." Till now, they sought only our inputs but now their strategy is to have detailed discussions on issues of their choice," the source said and added that India would now steer the talks towards Doha.

Sources also said that India insisted on the sanctity of all Doha decisions as the EU, US, Australia and Brazil are against its continuation. However, Sitharaman said that there are no differences with Africa.(Our correspondent has gone to Nairobi at the invitation of Government of India)

Bennett, Coleman & Co., Ltd.

U.S. repeals meat labelling law, after facing Canadian retaliation

18 December 2015

Waterloo Region Record

OTTAWA - A potential trade war between Canada and the United States was averted Friday when Congress passed a massive spending bill that also repealed a controversial meat labelling law.

The 2,000-plus pages of legislation contained a two-page rider that scrapped the U.S. labelling law, known as COOL, which had become a major irritant among Canada, Mexico and the U.S.

President Barack Obama formally signed the bill Friday to complete the legislative process.

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization granted Canada and Mexico the right to impose $1 billion in punitive tariffs on various U.S. products after finding that the country-of-origin labelling provisions on beef and pork products violated international trade rules.

Canada and Mexico argued that the measure was nothing more than thinly disguised protectionism. Supporters said consumers have a right to know where their meat comes from.

International Trade Minister Chrystia Freeland and Agriculture Minister Lawrence MacAulay both welcomed the passage of the legislation, calling Friday "a great day for Canada."

"This is a real vindication of the power and significance of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO dispute-resolution mechanism, which has secured a real win for Canada," Freeland said in a teleconference call from Nairobi, where she and MacAulay were taking part in a trade conference.

"This is a decision that will have a real and immediate benefit to the Canadian economy."

Freeland said she expects the labelling regime will disappear quickly.

"We will be monitoring the situation to make sure there are no problems in this area," MacAulay added.

The ministers thanked Canadian diplomats and some American politicians and industries which supported doing away with the measure.

The Senate had been the last barrier because domestic political interests kept some senators opposed to repealing the law.

Kansas Sen. Pat Roberts, the Republican chair of the Senate's powerful agriculture committee, expressed relief Friday at the news. Roberts said the retaliatory measures would have been damaging to various sectors of the U.S. economy.

"From the ranchers in Kansas to the jewelry makers on the East Coast, every state had something to lose from keeping mandatory COOL intact," Roberts said in a statement.

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO ruling, the latest in a series that Canada won in the dispute, cleared the way for widespread retaliation.

The targeted U.S. products included not only agricultural ones such as cattle, pork, apples, rice, maple syrup and wine, but extended to non-agricultural products, such as jewelry, office chairs, wooden furniture and mattresses.

Freeland said Canada still intends to obtain formal approval next week from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO for retaliation, even though the tariffs won't be imposed.

"We think that it is prudent of us to take the legal process to its formal, technical conclusion," she said.

On Friday, the Senate voted by a 65-33 margin to approve the massive bill that included $1.14 trillion in new spending in 2016 and $680 billion in tax cuts in the decade to come.

Toronto Star Newspapers Limited

Spending Bill Eliminates Rule for Labels Specifying Meat's Country of Origin

By Kelsey Gee

18 December 2015

Dow Jones Institutional News

The spending bill passed by Congress on Friday eliminates a meat-labeling regulation that for years has divided the U.S. livestock industry and angered two of the nation's biggest trading partners.

A provision in the $1.15 trillion spending measure, which is expected to be signed by President Barack Obama, repeals a rule that since 2009 has required meat packers to list animals' country of origin on packages of beef and pork.

The provision drew bipartisan support in Congress because lawmakers were concerned Canada and Mexico soon would slap tariffs on U.S. goods in retaliation for the rule, which they deemed as protectionist. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization last week gave Canada and Mexico the authority to impose $1.01 billion in tariffs after ruling earlier this year that the rule discriminated against Canadian and Mexican livestock

Industries from wine to furniture makers lobbied Congress to repeal the rule to avoid tariffs on their exports. Canadian trade officials in recent years said the country could target U.S. food items such as frozen orange juice, ketchup and beef. Also on the list were stainless-steel pipes and tubes, swivel chairs and mattresses. That upset the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"U.S. Chamber of Commerce and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"National Association of Manufacturers, which jointly led a coalition of industry associations pushing for a repeal.

Sen. Debbie Stabenow (D., Mich.) said it was "critical that we come together to resolve this issue so that our businesses do not face the cost of retaliation. I'm pleased we've done that on a bipartisan basis."

Last week's decision by the world trade body marked a major setback to the country-of-origin labeling rule, also known as COOL, after years of unsuccessful efforts by meat packers and members of Congress to repeal the law. An attempt to dismantle the labeling rule in the U.S. Farm Bill in 2013 was thwarted, as were multiple attempts to halt its rollout in federal courts.

"Our attitude was we were going to use every available mechanism to get a bad idea, and a bad law, repealed," said HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Mark Dopp, general counsel for the North American Meat Institute, a group that represents livestock producers and meat packers such as HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Tyson Foods Inc. "While we couldn't initiate HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO litigation, we were glad that the Mexican and Canadian governments did."

Some groups representing smaller U.S. ranchers and farmers, many of whom supported the labeling rule, decried the repeal provision.

"This is a rotten way to do legislation, by attaching these barnacles on the omnibus bills in the dark of the night," said Roger Johnson, president of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"National Farmers Union, a Washington, D.C.-based organization.

Industry groups have sparred over the meat-labeling rule for more than a decade, even as mandatory country-of-origin labels now appear on many foods, including peanuts, fish and apples.

The meat-labeling effort gained traction in Congress in the early 2000s amid concerns over mad-cow disease, prompting consumer groups to argue such labels could help shoppers avoid food from countries with lax safety regulations. But meat packers said the regulations imposed unnecessary burdens and costs by requiring them to track and sort animals throughout their lifetimes.

Ruth Laughery, a rancher in Wyola, Mont., said she is angry the labeling rule is on the chopping block.

"The repeal...is going to affect our markets as more cattle come into the country," said Ms. Laughery. "My husband and I are just trying to make a living off of the American dream of having our own business."

Dow Jones & Company, Inc.

WTO - Algeria for More Transparent Membership Process

18 December 2015

All Africa

Algiers, Dec 18, 2015 (Algerie Presse Service/All Africa Global Media via COMTEX) -- Minister of Trade Bakhti Belaib called Thursday in Nairobi, Kenya, for the establishment of a "more transparent and simple process, matching the development level of the countries applying for HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO) membership," the ministry said in a statement.

The minister, in Kenya for the 10th HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO ministerial conference which is taking place in an African country for the first time, expressed Algeria's wish for the success of Doha cycle.

He stressed Algeria's will to integrate the multilateral trade system, the source added.

Doha process is an international negotiation cycle initiated in 2001 by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO in order to "liberalize international trade" and contribute to "the development of the southern countries."

The tenth HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO ministerial conference opened Tuesday (December 15th) and is to run Until December 18th.

All Africa Global Media

Iran aims to boost economy by joining world trading system

18 December 2015

Iran Daily

"I'm here with an important message," that Iran is prepared to negotiate its way into the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization, Mohammadreza Nematzadeh told a gathering of the WTO's 162 members in Nairobi, Kenya, reported Reuters.

"Now that years of intensive negotiations have finally cleared all the misunderstandings around Iran's nuclear activities, we are taking the next step towards integrating more deeply into the global economy."

Iran currently is the largest economy outside the WTO, which governs trade relations between the United States, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union, China, Russia, and other major economies.

US Secretary of State John Kerry told Congress on Thursday that Tehran is fulfilling its obligations in a "transparent" and "verifiable" way, so the United States has started to take steps toward lifting some sanctions.

Iran now hopes to follow the same path to prosperity. In anticipation of the sanctions being lifted, Nematzadeh said Iran is already opening up its trade and investment regime and pursuing bilateral and regional integration with its neighbors and European trading partners.

"Finalizing WTO membership is therefore a priority for the Iranian government. As the largest non-member economy in the world, our full membership will be win-win for all and a significant step towards creating a truly universal organization."

Iran first applied for WTO membership in 1996. It recently updated its membership application and is ready to submit it to the WTO and proceed to talks with other nations on lowering tariffs and other barriers to trade, Nematzadeh said.

Countries seeking to join the WTO have to bring their own laws into line with WTO rules.

If it joins the WTO club, Iran would have to limit its tariffs and be transparent about policies that affect trade, such as energy subsidies and agricultural rules.

Other large economies that are not WTO members include Belarus, Uzbekistan, and Iraq. Related 

Iran Cultural & Press Institute

Moscow's actions run counter to WTO logic - Ukrainian foreign minister

18 December 2015

Interfax: Ukrainian General Newswire

KYIV. Dec 18 (Interfax) - Ukrainian Foreign Minister Pavlo Klimkin will attend a meeting as part of trilateral consultations with the European Commission and Russia in Brussels on December 21, which will focus on problems relating to the EU-Ukraine free trade area agreement taking effect from January 1, 2016.

"Russia acts not just voluntaristically, it acts against any logic of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO [HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization] because within the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization, problems arise before they are responded to," Klimkin told reporters in Kyiv on Friday.

"As for Russia, it thinks up merely political, some mythical problems and wants us to assume some obligations, wants us to delay what is indeed efficient implementation of the free trade area by ten years and then for good," the minister said.

"Where we can talk, we will consider in what way experts will cooperate, but these will be merely technical matters," he said.

The free trade area will work from January 1, 2016, and "we need to make efforts to make it a really efficient implementation of the agreement," Klimkin said.

Ukraine talks to every HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"EU nation so that they "send a political signal to their business sector," he said.

Interfax Information Services, B.V.

Tobacco industry suffers court blow over Australia ban; Plain packaging

By Jamie Smyth in Sydney

19 December 2015

Financial Times

The tobacco industry has lost a case against Australia's ban on branded cigarette packets, marking a setback for the sector in its plain-packaging battle.

The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Permanent Court of Arbitration yesterday declined on jurisdictional grounds to allow a case by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Philip Morris against Australia to proceed.

The move in effect ends a challenge based on claims by the tobacco group that Canberra is violating intellectual property laws.

Philip Morris Asia Limited took the case under a bilateral trade agreement between Australia and Hong Kong, arguing that the sweeping ban on trademarks breached foreign investment protections.

The court, based in Singapore, did not publish its ruling.

The Australian government welcomed the judgment. Fiona Nash, minister for rural health, said: "Plain packaging is a legitimate public health measure which is consistent with Australia's international legal obligations."

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Philip Morris said the outcome did not validate plain packaging. Marc Firestone, international senior vice-president and general counsel, said: "It is regrettable that the outcome hinged entirely on a procedural issue that Australia chose to advocate instead of confronting head on the merits of whether plain packaging is legal or even works."

Australia became the first country to introduce plain packaging legislation, in 2011. Tobacco consumption has since fallen, and the UK and Ireland have announced plans to follow suit. In December, tobacco groups issued legal action against the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"UK government, which plans to introduce its packaging regime in May.

Canberra has defeated challenges from tobacco groups in Australian courts. It faces a challenge at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization, which is hearing complaints by Indonesia, the Dominican Republic, Honduras and Cuba, which claim violation of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO agreements by the creation of an unnecessary barrier to trade and the impeding of trademark use.

A survey of smoking published in July by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Australian Institute of Health and Welfare found that daily smoking rates fell at their fastest pace for two decades between 2010 and December 1 2013, when one in eight Australians said they lit up at least once a day.

The survey found that young people were taking up the habit later, with the average starting age rising to 15.9 years, up from 14.2 in 2010.

The average number of cigarettes smoked per week fell from 111 in 2010 to 96 in 2013.

Smoking has been falling in Australia for more than two decades. Recent tobacco tax rises are also likely to have had an impact.

The Financial Times Limited 

FACILITATOR AG TEXT LEAVES OUT SSM, STOCKHOLDING; REFLECTS MANY U.S. DEMANDS

18 December 2015

Inside U.S. Trade

NAIROBI, Kenya -- A draft agriculture text released here by the ministerial facilitator reflects some U.S. demands, such as leaving out a special safeguard mechanism and permanent solution on food stockholding programs, as well as including an 18-month term for repayment of export credits and less extensive disciplines on food aid than demanded by other countries.

But the text, circulated early on the third day (Dec. 17) of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization's tenth ministerial here and obtained by Inside U.S. Trade, also contains language that the U.S. may find objectionable narrowing the scope of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) covered under export credit disciplines. Export credits are one of the four pillars of export competition, along with export subsidies, agricultural state trading enterprises (STEs) and food aid.

The facilitator was expected to release a revised text on Friday, the final scheduled day of the ministerial, that is intended to be presented to members for a decision on a "take it or leave it" basis (see related story).

A cover page to the text states that it is a "good faith attempt" by the facilitator and chairman of the agricultural negotiating group to identify compromise outcomes, but does not purport to represent a consensus by members. The aim of the texts "to assist Ministers to find common ground, and in keeping with this aim they should be considered to expire at the end of the Tenth Ministerial Conference," the cover page says.

One informed source allied with developing countries blasted the text as "calibrated to suit the U.S. proposals." This source pointed out that it only contains commitments to negotiate in the future on the special safeguard mechanism (SSM) demanded by countries like India and the Philippines and the food stockholding permanent solution pushed by India.

The SSM would allow developing countries to snap back their tariffs on agriculture products in the event of import surges or falling prices. On public stockholding, India and other members of the G-33 group are seeking to permanently exempt subsidies provided through such programs from counting toward HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO subsidy limits.

In a Dec. 17 interview, South African Trade Minister Rob Davies said his country can live with the agriculture text as proposed by the facilitator, but noted that the African Group may seek further changes on the food aid language. He said South Africa has not been a proponent of the SSM and the stockholding solution, although it has supported India and other developing countries on those issues.

By contrast, civil society groups attending the ministerial here blasted the facilitator's text, largely because it excluded the SSM and the stockholding solution.

"The new text on agriculture makes a travesty of developing country concerns," Ranja Sengupta, a representative of Third World Network, said in a statement.

"There is no progress and no deliverable on the special agricultural safeguard or the permanent solution to food security proposal on public stockholding, which are genuine concerns of developing countries while the export competition package is being sold as the big deliverable but which does nothing but protect U.S. interests such as on 540 days (1.5 years) on credit repayment. The developing countries gain nothing from this text and should firmly reject it."

The informed source called the text's language on food aid "insufficient." The food aid provisions largely reflect an earlier U.S. proposal on this topic that imposed weaker disciplines on the so-called monetization of food aid than a joint proposal put forward by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union, Brazil and other countries. Monetization refers to donated food items being sold by non-governmental organizations in a country as aid.

While the joint proposal would have capped monetization at a certain percentage of overall in-kind food aid donations, the facilitator's text preserves non-binding language from the U.S. proposal stating that members "shall endeavour to monetize international food aid only where there is a demonstrable need for monetization for the purpose of transport and delivery of the food assistance, or the monetization of international food aid is used to redress short and/or long term food deficit requirements or insufficient agricultural production situations ... ."

However, the facilitator's text adds a new requirement that "local and regional market analysis shall be completed before monetization occurs for monetized international food aid," and sets out parameters for such analysis.

On agricultural STEs, which some officials had described as the most difficult pillar of export competition, the only binding discipline in the facilitator's text is that members "shall ensure that agricultural exporting state trading enterprises do no operate in a manner that circumvents any other disciplines contained in this Decision."

It also contains language stating that members "shall strive to ensure" that the use of export monopoly powers by agricultural STEs has minimal trade distorting effects and does not displace or impede exports of other countries. That falls short of a U.S. proposal tabled in November to eliminate STEs with an export monopoly power for agricultural goods by a certain, unspecified date.

In addition, the facilitator's text establishes a work program on agricultural STEs to discuss the issues raised in the 2008 Doha round agricultural text.

The 2008 text would have imposed stricter disciplines on agricultural STEs be requiring the elimination of export subsidies, export financing, government underwriting of losses, and export monopoly powers for such entities. On export subsidies, the aspect of export competition where the gaps were the narrowest, the facilitator's text adopts the phaseout periods proposed by the chairman of the agriculture negotiating group. Those are for developed countries to phase out export subsidies by in five years, and developing countries to do so in eight years.

This language falls short of Switzerland's demands for it to be given a seven-year phaseout of export subsidies for developed countries without a staging period.

The facilitator's text also adopts the chairman's proposal for an additional five-year period in which developing countries could not be subject to dispute settlement challenges with regard to export subsidies after they eliminate them. This is a form of the so-called peace clause created under the Uruguay Round Agriculture Agreement.

On export credits, the facilitator's text includes language that seems to respond to demands by China to carve out some of its state-owned enterprises (SOEs) from the disciplines. That Chinese footnote had been opposed by the U.S., Australia and other countries. The facilitator's text responds to China's demands by stating that disciplines will apply to export financing provided by governments as well as any "public body" as referred to in Article 1 of the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures (ASCM).

China has won several HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization cases against the U.S. that have set a higher threshold for determining whether an SOE is a public body under the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures than the original methodology of majority ownership used by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"U.S. Commerce Department.

Specifically, the Appellate Body has found that control, as evidenced by majority ownership, is not necessarily enough to prove that an SOE is a public body under Article 1 of the ASCM. Instead, the entity must possess, exercise or be vested with "government authority" and must be performing a "government function," the Appellate Body has found.

That language is similar to the footnote that China had originally proposed to the export credit text. The footnote stated: "A financial institution or entity shall not be taken as export financing entity unless it possesses, exercises, or is vested with Government authority."

The adoption of the 18-month repayment period reflects the U.S. position that it was not willing to go beyond its current practice. The U.S. agreed to limit the loan repayment period for export credit guarantees under its GSM 102 program to 18 months under its bilateral deal with Brazil to settle a longstanding dispute over cotton subsidies.

But the facilitator's text leaves out another aspect of the Brazil deal, which was to require that, for guarantees with loan tenors between 12 and 18 months, the U.S. charge fees based on the benchmark rates established by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD). The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"EU, Brazil and other countries had proposed a similar discipline in the export competition text, but this was not reflected in the facilitator's text.

Also in line with the U.S. position, the facilitator's text states that export credit programs should be "self-financing," but stops short of establishing a specific time over which rates must cover operating costs and losses of the program, as the 2008 Doha text did.

Inside Washington Publishers

Japan approves $27 bln extra stimulus budget to boost growth

18 December 2015

Reuters News

* Abe seeks right balance between growth and fiscal reform

* Budget features steps to support farmers, elderly

* Critics see them as attempts to win votes in upper house polls 

By Tetsushi Kajimoto

TOKYO, Dec 18 (Reuters) - HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Japan's cabinet approved on Friday a $27 billion extra budget for the fiscal year ending in March to revitalise growth, while critics see some of the spending as targeting voters ahead of an upper house election next year.

The 3.3213 trillion yen ($27.12 billion) stimulus budget features spending to support the low-income elderly with cash benefits worth 30,000 yen per person and farmers expected to be hit by the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) trade deal.

The extra budget adds to the initial 96.3 trillion yen outlay, bringing this fiscal year's general-account budget spending to 99.6 trillion yen. It compared with a 3.1 trillion yen extra budget spending the last fiscal year.

The budget underscores a challenge to Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Shinzo Abe, who must strike a balance between fixing the industrial world's heaviest public debt burden and reviving the economy ahead of the upper house election around mid-2016.

Finance Minister Taro Aso said the extra budget will help achieve a strong economy to cope with the fast-ageing population. But the government's scheme to give cash benefits to the elderly comes at a time when it plans to cut benefits to low-income families with children.

"Propensity to consume is high among the elderly. so there'll be a certain effect to stimulate consumption," said Koya Miyamae, senior economist at SMBC Nikko Securities. "But I can also understand the criticism that the steps are aimed at winning votes" among the elderly and farmers.

For fiscal discipline, the government will not issue extra bonds to fund the stimulus. It reduced its plans to issue new bonds by 444.7 billion yen from the initially planned 36.9 trillion yen for the current fiscal year.

The government will tap sources such as unspent money from the previous year's budget and tax revenue that has exceeded initial budget forecasts.

The government revised up the tax revenue estimate for this fiscal year by 1.899 trillion yen to a 24-year high of 56.4 trillion yen, reflecting rising corporate profits helped by a weak yen and tumbling oil prices, although the economy has barely grown in the current fiscal year.

The extra budget will be sent to parliament for approval early next year, along with a draft budget for the fiscal year that starts in April.

With this budget, the government is set to achieve its aim of halving the primary budget deficit - excluding new bond sales and debt-servicing - from five years ago, the ministry said.

($1 = 122.4500 yen) 

Thomson Reuters (Markets) LLC

END

 

cid:image001.png@01CC55E4.A4F90770

 

Josep Bosch, 

Head of Media unit

Information and External Relations Division

+41227395681

 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.
