WTO member countries determined to make progress on Doha
U.S. Government Finds That When Enforcing Trade Rules, No Good Deed Goes Unpunished
Firms prepare for new tax rules as China vows crackdown
China intends to turn inward for technology, threatening U.S. sales
Asia trade talks heat up as fast-track battle rages
Obama's trade push strains alliances
The math says trade pact's job creation is zero, not 650,000
EU, US look for 'fresh start' in trade talks
Beijing-backed pact seeks blueprint
What Could Happen If the Eurozone Breaks Up?
 
 
 
WTO member countries determined to make progress on Doha
31 January 2015
Bulletin Quotidien Europe
 
The resolve expressed at the World Economic Forum in Davos last weekend to make progress in the Doha round talks was this week confirmed in Geneva. WTO Director-General Roberto Azevedo welcomed the “strong engagement” shown by the WTO member countries during the meeting of the trade negotiations committee on Thursday 29 January.
 
“We have made more progress in a week than we did in the first six months of 2014 (…) Members have started to go into more detail and to engage on the substance. While substantive positions haven't changed a great deal since last time these issues were discussed, it is clear to me that the tone of the discussion has changed. Despite the gaps between positions, I sensed a desire to overcome them”, said Azevedo. He also noted “a willingness to entertain new thinking in certain areas”. “Now it is time to move from ideas to proposals. This is still going to be incredibly difficult but I never thought it would be impossible, and I haven't changed my mind”, he added.
 
Intensive work awaits the negotiations from the 160 member countries in the first six months of this year in order to develop a clear and realistic work programme around sections that were not resolved in the Doha round - particularly agriculture, industrial products and services.
 
During an informal meeting organised by Switzerland on the sidelines of the World Economic Forum in Davos on 24 January, trade ministers from around 20 WTO member countries asserted their “resolve to engage constructively in order to define, by July, a clear and realistic work programme around the negotiation themes that were not resolved at the Doha round”. They also stated that “the emphasis should be placed on issues of interest for the less developed countries”, according to a press release published by the Swiss federal department of the economy on 24 January. The ministers also hailed the invitation from Kenya - which will host the 10th WTO ministerial conference in Nairobi in December.
 
“I've been following the WTO issues for five years. I've never had such a feeling of progress”, said Swiss trade minister, Johann Schneider-Ammann, who chaired the meeting attended by the ministers of around 20 countries - Brazil, Canada, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Egypt, Indonesia, Japan, Kenya, Malaysia, Mexico; Norway, New Zealand, South Africa, South Korea, Switzerland, Thailand, Turkey, the USA and the EU - with the notable exception of India. 
 
 
 
U.S. Government Finds That When Enforcing Trade Rules, No Good Deed Goes Unpunished
Forbes.com 
31 January 2015
 
President Obama said in his State of the Union Address that his administration was cracking the whip on trade partners that break the rules. And so it did this week; the Commerce Department hit China with punitive tariffs in retaliation for its dumping of solar panels in the U.S. market.
 
You’d think the U.S. solar industry would be popping the champagne corks and singing “Happy Days are Here Again.”
 
But no. They’re not happy about it at all.
 
“We don’t think it’s good for anyone,” said John Smirnow, the Solar Energy Industry Association’s vice president for trade and competitiveness. “We don’t see U.S. solar manufacturers directly benefiting,” he said, because the trade sanctions against China will increase the cost of solar power here and make it less competitive against other fuels.
 
A Commerce Department spokesman declined to comment.
 
The Chinese have been dumping solar panels on the U.S. market, i.e., selling them for less than their fair market value, for years. They can pull this off because the Chinese government subsidizes the solar industry, such as by giving solar panel manufacturers free land on which to build their factories.
 
This is patently unfair and a clear violation of WTO rules. The U.S. International Trade Commission ruled as such on Jan. 21. The ITC ruling authorized the Commerce Department to retaliate against China with anti-dumping and countervailing duties and Commerce took the initial steps in that process this week. Countervailing duties are applied when a foreign government is found to be subsidizing exports to the United States.
 
It’s not just domestic solar manufacturers who dislike the Commerce Department’s approach. The companies that buy and install solar panels like it even less. They were buying from China at Wal-Mart prices and apparently didn’t care that China was breaking the rules. They’re going to have to start paying fair market value for solar panels and they’re miffed about it.
 
So are environmentalists. They’re afraid the retaliatory measures against China will slow the growth of solar power in the U.S.
 
Smirnow said a better solution would have been a negotiated agreement with China. There’s at least one problem with that argument: the Chinese are inveterate cheaters who regularly renege on their agreements.
 
China was also accused of dumping solar panels on the EU market. After an investigation confirmed it, the EU decided to negotiate instead of retaliating. The two sides reached a settlement in July 2013. Soon afterward, a group of European solar manufacturers accused China of reneging on it.
 
“Not one Chinese manufacturer seems to follow the agreed minimum prices for imports into the EU,” said the president of EU ProSun in Germany. This led to another investigation and another negotiated settlement in March 2014.
 
Now, the Chinese are accused of dumping solar glass, an important component of solar panels, into the EU, so yet another investigation is underway.
 
The Shanghai Daily reported on Jan. 30 that China’s trading partners initiated 97 investigations into its exports in 2014. Sixty-one of them concerned dumping. The paper suggested that other countries were attacking China through the WTO, because they were jealous of China’s growth.
 
The United States has the world’s largest economy, the world’s highest per capita income and the world’s highest consumer buying power. For other countries, getting duty-free access to this market is like winning the lottery. That makes it doubly important that the U.S send a message to its trading partners: either you play by the rules or you get stung.
 
Negotiating a settlement with China in the solar dumping case would not have sent that message.
 
 
 
Firms prepare for new tax rules as China vows crackdown
1 February 2015
Reuters News
 
The Chinese government's vow to increase tax scrutiny of foreign companies has sent firms rushing to tax advisors ahead of the implementation on Sunday of new rules designed to rein in cross-border tax avoidance.
 
Tax professionals and business lobbies alike have welcomed the move as an attempt to bring China's tax regime more in line with international standards.
 
But it has also caused concern that authorities could use the policy, which came into effect on Feb. 1, as a political tool to put the pinch on foreign companies, on top of what business lobbies lament is an increasingly tough business climate in the world's second largest economy.
 
"We've definitely been getting a lot of questions from clients on how to avoid being investigated for anti-avoidance measures," said Roberta Chang, a Shanghai-based tax lawyer at Hogan Lovells.
 
The measures, an elaboration on China's existing "general anti-avoidance rule" or GAAR framework, have more companies taking a hard look at how they structure their businesses.
 
Under the new policy, for example, a firm that invests in China through companies in Hong Kong or Singapore to take advantage of tax benefits that do not exist between China and its home country could find itself on the wrong side of Beijing tax authorities if it cannot prove it has substantial business operations there or employees on the ground.
 
"Companies are increasingly putting substance in their holding companies," Chang said.
 
Andrew Choy, Greater China International Tax Services Leader at Ernst & Young, said the GAAR rules are a signal that companies need to pay attention to tax planning.
 
"In general, people will be more conservative," Choy said.
 
Chinese regulators hit Microsoft Corp with about $140 million in back taxes last November, an early case of what could be a wave of "targeted actions" to stop profits going overseas, according officials at China's State Administration of Taxation.
 
With a slowing economy likely to reduce 2015 fiscal revenue growth to a three-decade low of just 1 percent, according to a Deutsche Bank report, it makes sense for Beijing to try to boost its coffers.
 
Tax specialists say companies need to be aware that China's tax regime is evolving, albeit as part of a global trend to curb tax avoidance.
 
At a meeting of G20 leaders in Australia in November, Chinese President Xi Jinping endorsed a global effort to crack down on international tax avoidance.
 
"Compared to the U.S. or the UK, China's tax rules are still simpler. But China doesn't want to be seen as an undeveloped country with tax rules. It wants to catch up to other international players," Chang, of Hogan Lovells said.
 
FAIR AND TRANSPARENT?
 
At the forefront of evolving international tax policy is the debate about whether the right to tax should be tilted towards industrialised, capital exporting countries where firms reside, or so-called source countries such as China, where many generate significant profit.
 
"There is a large element from a government policy perspective that has to do with whether China is going to tax particular profits or some other country," said Jon Eichelberger, a tax expert and partner at Baker & McKenzie's Beijing office.
 
Chinese state media has said tax evasion and avoidance by foreign companies costs the world's second largest economy at least 30 billion yuan ($4.8 billion) in tax revenues each year.
 
Larry Sussman, managing partner at O'Melveny & Myers' Beijing office, said the scope of the scrutiny could also reach private equity firms and M&A activity.
 
"Anything cross-border coming in and coming out, for that matter, which could implicate Chinese investors," Sussman said.
 
Despite the elaboration to the GAAR rules, they remain loosely defined, giving tax authorities discretion on whether companies meet the demands for economic substance.
 
James Zimmerman, Chairman of the American Chamber of Commerce in China, said Chamber members welcomed an upgrade to the tax regime, so long as the policies were consistent with China's World Trade Organization obligations.
 
"AmCham-China is hopeful that the Chinese government will apply the tax laws and regulations in a fair, uniform, and transparent manner, and we will be monitoring China's enforcement record going forward on behalf of our member companies," Zimmerman said. 
 
 
 
China intends to turn inward for technology, threatening U.S. sales
Bloomberg News   
31 January 2015
 
Chinese regulators summoned bank officials for a meeting this month to emphasize the need to carry out a nationwide directive to cut China's reliance on foreign technology, said people familiar with the matter.
 
In the Jan. 15 meeting, the China Banking Regulatory Commission suggested lenders not buy new mainframe computers in 2015 and draft plans to replace the ones they now have, said the people, who asked not to be identified. A senior CBRC official said in November banks rely on foreign brands for 80 percent of their core servers and systems.
 
The directive is a follow-up on a broad national strategy, reported by Bloomberg News in December, to purge most foreign technology for banks, state-owned enterprises and the military by 2020. The move, which would grant reprieve to foreign companies that turn over their core technology, threatens sales for vendors including Microsoft, IBM Corp. and Cisco Systems.
 
The CBRC told bank officials in the meeting to think of ways to use more domestic products or foreign brands that comply with government demands to share core technology or give China's security inspectors access to their products, the people said. They said banks should also draft a five-year plan on making the transition.
 
China's displacement plan and its intention to start a new national security review mechanism have raised concern among U.S. business groups. In a letter Jan. 28, the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and 17 other groups called for urgent talks with Chinese Communist Party officials on the "growing trend" of policies toward using Chinese-developed or "secure and controllable" information communications technology.
 
"Our concern is not with the goal of enhancing security, but with the means to reach it," said the letter to the party's Central Leading Group for Cyberspace Affairs.
 
The CBRC didn't respond to a faxed request for comment Thursday.
 
China has benefited from global integration through the World Trade Organization, the letter said. The country's share of information, communication and technology exports rose to 30 percent in 2012 from 2 percent in 1996, it said.
 
China has carried out a trial to test whether NeoKylin, a Linux-based operating system from China Standard Software, can substitute for Windows, people familiar with the matter said in December.
 
Servers are one technology product in which Chinese brands have seen sales surge while foreign providers posted lower shipments. In the third quarter of last year, Hewlett-Packard Co. server shipments fell by 14.9 percent and IBM's fell by 15 percent, according to the research group Gartner Inc. At the same time, shipments by Inspur rose 81.9 percent, while Huawei Technologies Co. posted an increase of 34.3 percent.
 
"In line with China's World Trade Organization commitments, it is of critical importance that policies be developed in a transparent and open manner," the U.S. business groups said in the letter.
 
Business groups signing the message letter include The Software Alliance, the Semiconductor Industry Association, the Telecommunications Industry Association and the US-China Business Council.
 
 
 
Asia trade talks heat up as fast-track battle rages
Politico,
31 January 2015
 
Talks have accelerated on what would be the biggest trade deal in world history thanks to a Republican Congress that wants to give President Barack Obama more power to negotiate the agreement and a group of Asian nations that are closer than ever to making concessions on consumer goods sold around the globe.

Here at the Asia-Pacific trade talks, a mad scramble is underway among pharmaceutical giants, major clothing companies and big agricultural groups who are trying to influence the outcome of the Trans-Pacific Partnership negotiations, a proposed agreement stretching from Chile to Japan that would encompass 40 percent of global gross domestic product and about a third of world trade.
 
“There’s a real air of seriousness about concluding these talks and getting to the finish line, and everything I saw here this week reaffirms that the U.S. government is firmly committed to trying to get this done in the 30 to 60 days or whatever the time period is,” said Augustine Tantillo, president of the National Council of Textile Organizations, which lobbies on behalf of the U.S. textile industry.

Tantillo and other lobbyists and interest groups were busy meeting with officials from Vietnam, New Zealand and the 10 other countries in the talks, which are taking place at the Sheraton New York Times Square Hotel. Trade officials could be spotted holding court at large circular tables as lobbyists and advocates pitched their positions on everything from apparel rules to access to medicines.

Dozens of lobbyists and industry group leaders descended on the hotel this week to roam the halls in an attempt to push negotiators toward their positions on controversial areas like drug patents and agricultural protections, which are still unresolved after nearly five years of negotiations.

At the same time, trade officials are taking notice of the new atmosphere in Washington. Obama is, for the first time, publicly calling for “trade promotion authority” legislation that will ease the passage of the agreement in Congress.

“This is throwing talks into a higher gear as we enter the home stretch,” said Trevor Kincaid, a spokesman for the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative. “While Congress and the administration are preparing for the end game, so are the teams.”

“We are making good progress in a number of areas and teams are checking remaining issues off the list,” Kincaid added.

Pressure to complete a deal is growing. At some point next month, lawmakers are preparing to introduce the trade promotion bill, which has been buoyed by the GOP takeover of Congress last November that put Senate Republicans only a handful of votes away from a filibuster-proof majority of support for trade and widened the margin of trade-friendly Republicans in the House.

The fast-track bill, as the legislation is also known, would expedite the passage of the Asia-Pacific deal in Congress by putting it to an up-or-down vote, limiting debate and preventing lawmakers from offering amendments to the agreement. Its passage is expected to give countries in the deal, which have a combined GDP more than two-thirds greater than that of the NAFTA nations, more confidence to negotiate without fear of Congress picking the agreement apart and reversing hard-won gains or concessions — a magical ingredient that will catalyze the talks, moving them into the endgame.

“We’ve seen a great level of optimism by the United States since the midterm elections, and U.S. industry stakeholders have been promoting a highly positive spin about TPA,” said Yves Leduc, director of international trade for the Dairy Farmers of Canada. “I think there is recognition that 2015 is the window in which they are working,” he said.

With the legislation imminent, the uncertain deadlines that have plagued the talks are giving way to a more concrete timeline for getting a deal done in the coming months. Trade ministers could meet as soon as March, when they would try to reach an “agreement in principle” representing what a final deal will look like, sources close to the negotiations said here this week.

The shortened timeline is forcing action at the negotiating table, prompting the country officials and interest groups to tip their hands on their true bottom lines. Whatever the negotiators decide to include in the trade deal could have a ripple effect on entire industries, with the potential to offshore more U.S. textile jobs and impact the financial feasibility of drug research and development, to name two possibilities.

Those and other interest groups say they are fighting for their lives and those for whom they advocate — in some cases literally — as in the case of strict new drug patent rules that could limit access to cheap generic medicines in the developing world.

For Leduc, it’s now a matter of mounting a major defense. Canada protects his industry and others — poultry and eggs — through a so-called supply management system, which restricts imports and tightly controls production as a way of stabilizing those sectors — and they’re coming under fire in the 11th hour to open up their markets to more U.S. imports.

The chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, Wisconsin Republican Paul Ryan, wielded a block of smoked Gouda from his home state while stressing the importance of prying open dairy access to the Canadian market during a trade hearing with U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman this week. U.S. negotiators were unsuccessful in gaining such access through the NAFTA.

“Exports are becoming only more important in the entire U.S. dairy sector …” Ryan said. “I’m concerned that Japan is not doing nearly enough and that Canada is not even negotiating to remove significant tariff and nontariff barriers to U.S. dairy.”

Other groups are rushing to make sure final concessions reflect their interests.

“We’re still very much focused on the negotiators,” said Rohit Malpani, director of policy and advocacy at Doctors Without Borders. “We still think there is opportunity for other countries to really push back against what continues to be the worst trade agreement in terms of access to medicines that has ever been negotiated.”

His organization has been making its position known in the skies above New York City, flying an aerial banner along the Hudson River that reads: “Doctors to Obama: Keep #TPP Away From Our Medicines.”

The U.S. pharmaceutical industry is pushing for strong patent protections and long periods of data protection for cutting-edge biological drugs. Companies argue those protections are needed to create a financial incentive for recovering the massive costs involved in developing the medicines.

It was a point that Froman alluded to in outlining both sides of the issue at Tuesday’s hearing. “We have 40 million Americans whose jobs are related to IP [intellectual property]-intensive industries,” Froman said. “And our goal is on one hand to promote innovation and creativity in this country, and also to ensure access to affordable medicines particularly in developing countries.”

Public health advocates like Malpani, however, argue that much of what the industry is demanding would only extend patent monopolies in developing countries and cut off access to affordable generic versions.

They weren’t pulling any punches this week when they brought in Nobel Prize-winning economist Joseph Stiglitz to brief negotiators on what he argues is at stake in the agreement’s drug provisions.

“Maybe not in your family, but in somebody else’s family somebody will die as a result of what you do or do not do in this agreement, or their lifestyle will be affected significantly,” he told room full of trade officials.

U.S. textile industry officials were also out in force this week, pressing U.S. officials to stand firm on rules that would help preserve an industry that has been in dire straits for years. Vietnam, an apparel-making powerhouse, is pushing for a deal that would be boon to its massive export industry, which is second only to China’s in size.

“We’re here this week delivering the same very clear and consistent message that an agreement has to be balanced,” Tantillo said. “It has to be good and not just for folks who do the final assembly such as apparel makers, it also has to balanced for folks who produce the inputs, the components, the yarns and fabrics.”

Past trade deals have been careful to safeguard what’s left of the American textile industry, guided by vigilant members of Congress with strong textile constituencies.

Washington is already standing firm behind a “yarn-forward” rule that would allow tariff reductions only for clothing sewn from fabric made in TPP countries. Right now, Vietnam gets much of its cloth from China, which is currently excluded from the deal.

The domestic industry is also continuing to push for “reasonable” periods of time for phasing out tariffs on textile imports from Vietnam.

“We believe the government is fully absorbing our input,” Tantillo said.

But big apparel companies like Gap and Nike, which have major production in Vietnam, want the rules of origin to be more flexible, allowing tariff cuts on clothes and shoes made of fabric from China and other countries not currently in the agreement — and they’re starting to gain a voice in Congress from members whose districts or states are home to the companies’ headquarters or production facilities.

“You’ve got members asking if the rules of origin are going to be flexible enough to do business,” said Steve Lamar, executive vice president of the American Apparel and Footwear Association. “That’s not a line of questioning you’ve seen in the past.”
 
 
 
Obama's trade push strains alliances
31 January 2015
The Burlington Free Press
 
President Obama is engaging an unfamiliar opponent in his effort to advance his trade agenda this year: congressional Democrats.
 
For the first time in his six years in the White House, the president is more at odds with his own party than Republicans as he pushes for enhanced authority to negotiate trade pacts.
 
The battle will test his powers of persuasion and his relationships among even his closest allies on Capitol Hill.
 
"Show me a trade deal that not only increases (gross domestic product), but increases the average worker's monthly paycheck, and I'll be for it: That's the message," Rep. Steve Israel, D-N.Y., said Thursday. "And if the administration can get us there, it'll pass with Democratic votes."
 
Top Senate Democrats are skeptical. "I've always been suspect in my entire career in Congress of these trade agreements," Minority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev., said last week. "Why? Because I have not been shown that these trade agreements have helped the middle class."
 
House Democrats are meeting here for their three-day annual retreat in which the party is ruminating over sweeping losses in last year's elections that saw Republicans grow their majority in the House and take control of the Senate.
 
The prevailing view among Democrats is that the party has to do a better job communicating and advancing an agenda that appeals to middle-income Americans, and trade pacts do not fit neatly in that lane.
 
"A lot of Americans were told that NAFTA (North American Free Trade Agreement) was going to work for them personally, and it didn't," Israel said.
 
Obama and Vice President Biden will meet privately with Democrats to discuss their agenda, but other speakers at the same event pressed lawmakers to fight the administration on trade.
 
AFL-CIO President Richard Trumka urged Democrats here to oppose granting Obama fast-track negotiating authority.
 
Fast-track is a controversial power that would give a president significant leeway to negotiate trade deals, allowing Congress only a yes-or-no vote on the final package. Lawmakers couldn't amend or filibuster an agreement.
 
Fast-track authority expired in 2007, and Obama wants it renewed to enhance the administration's negotiating hand.
 
Senate Finance Chairman Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, intends to bring fast-track up for a committee vote in late February, and a floor showdown could come in March.
 
 
 
The math says trade pact's job creation is zero, not 650,000
1 February 2015
The Washington Post
 
"Estimates are that the TPP [Trans-Pacific Partnership] could provide $77 billion a year in real income and support 650,000 new jobs in the U.S. alone." -Secretary of State John F. Kerry, in an opinion article, Jan. 14
 
"Completing the Trans-Pacific Partnership provides the opportunity to open up markets, lower tariffs and, according to the Peterson Institute, increase U.S. exports by $123 billion and help support an additional 650,000 jobs." - Secretary of Agriculture Tom Vilsack, in an interview with the Greater Baton Rouge Business Report, Jan. 26
 
The Fact Checker frequently warns readers to be wary of claims by politicians that various policy initiatives will yield tens of thousands of jobs. Such claims are often based on studies that rely on a variety of assumptions, any of which can be called into question. So we were interested when we received a call from a reader who wondered how the administration calculated that a proposed international trade agreement, known as the Trans-Pacific Partnership, would support 650,000 jobs.
 
The Obama administration is on a full-court press to complete negotiations on the trade pact, involving 12 Pacific Rim nations, and also win from Congress the authority for an up-or-down vote from lawmakers, which officials say is necessary to close the deal. The TPP is one of the few areas in which the White House can expect strong support from Republicans, though many Democrats remain skeptical or hostile.
 
The Fact Checker, of course, takes no position on whether the proposed trade deal is good or bad. But we were curious about how this number was calculated.
 
Notice that Vilsack referred to the Peterson Institute for International Economics, which is a well-regarded centrist think tank that focuses on international economic policy. The Peterson Institute advocates for free-trade agreements but also for programs that aid people who may be hurt by globalization.
 
In 2012, the Peterson Institute published a book on the TPP by Peter A. Petri, Michael G. Plummer and Fan Zhai. The book does include an estimate that, by 2025, the United States would experience a gain of $77.5 billion in income from TPP, as well as a $124 billion increase in exports. (More on those numbers, which are expressed in 2007 dollars, below.) But nowhere in the book does it say 650,000 jobs would be created.
 
Asked about the statistic on 650,000 jobs, the White House referred us to the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative. Spokesman Matthew McAlvanah directed us to page 58 of the book. "They do not provide an estimate on jobs," he acknowledged. "However, they do provide a methodology that one could use."
 
Essentially, the book suggests that an income gain of $121,000 would be "roughly equivalent to creating an extra job." So the Obama administration took the figure of $77.5 billion and divided it by $121,000, which yields 640,000. Rounded up, that becomes 650,000.
 
There's just one problem. This is the incorrect way to use Petri's research, especially when officials such as Kerry combine the jobs figure in the same sentence as the income prediction. Again, Kerry's statement: "The TPP could provide $77 billion a year in real income and support 650,000 new jobs in the U.S. alone."
 
The calculation on jobs can only be done if one assumes that wages have been frozen and there is no income gain. So it's completely misleading to suggest there would be both a gain in income and a gain in jobs.
 
Petri said that his book did not discuss job gains - because economists do not believe that job growth is significantly affected by trade policy.
 
"The reason we don't project employment is that, like most trade economists, we don't believe that trade agreements change the labor force in the long run. The consequential factors are demography, immigration, retirement benefits, et cetera," he said. "Rather, trade agreements affect how people are employed, and ideally substitute more productive jobs for less productive ones, and thus raise real incomes."
 
The same dynamic exists with the claim that the trade bill would increase exports by $124 billion by 2025. The Commerce Department estimates that about 5,500 jobs are supported by every $1 billion in exports, so in theory that also would yield about 650,000 jobs. But that calculation would ignore the fact that the Petri book found that imports would increase by virtually the same amount as exports, meaning the net number of new jobs is zero.
 
The mix of jobs would change, however. "Employment could be negatively affected by the adjustment implications of a trade agreement," Petri said. "We estimate job shifts - employment moving from one sector to another - and in difficult labor markets such shifts can lead to transitional unemployment, retirement or wage cuts.
 
"In the case of the TPP," Petri added, "such shifts will be small and slow, dwarfed by routine job separations and new hires in the economy. So adjustments and costs should be covered many times by gains. This makes possible strong transitional assistance for workers and communities that are adversely affected."
 
Finally, let's put these numbers in context. Petri's book says that a gain of $77.5 billion in income amounts to just a 0.4 percent increase in the pre-deal baseline for the United States' $20-trillion gross domestic product. You read that right: 0.4 percent.
 
Indeed, a gain of 650,000 jobs would also be just 0.4 percent of projected employment of 168 million people, Petri said. "The percentage change is small," Petri acknowledged, which he said is what one would expect from a large and efficient economy such as the United States.
 
McAlvanah provided a lengthy response that highlighted the various ways one could calculate 650,000 jobs from the Petri data, but the statement did not address the fact that the study itself did not offer these calculations - or that effects of one action, such as more exports, are canceled out by another action, such as imports.
 
There is a long history of presidential administrations touting imaginary job gains from trade deals. Bill Clinton, relying in part on jobs predictions from the Peterson Institute, in 1993 predicted the North American Free Trade Agreement would yield 200,000 jobs in two years - and a million in five. Neither turned out to be true.
 
Clearly, with the Peterson Institute refusing to play the game this time and cough up a jobs number, the Obama administration decided to concoct its own. But, as we have shown, one cannot at the same time claim both a gain of $77 billion in income and a gain of 650,000 jobs. The same effects simply cannot happen at once.
 
Moreover, these are big numbers with virtually no context. It is pretty lame to use such huge numbers to tout what, in the context of the U.S. economy, amounts to minuscule changes in income - 10 years from now.
 
Our advice remains: Be wary whenever a politician claims a policy will yield bountiful jobs. In this case, the correct number is zero (in the long run), not 650,000, according to the very study used to calculate this number. Administration officials earn Four Pinocchios for their fishy math.
 
 
 
 
EU, US look for 'fresh start' in trade talks
1 February 2015
Agence France Presse
 
US negotiators travel to EU headquarters in Brussels Monday to jumpstart talks on the world's biggest-ever free trade deal, which after nearly two years remain bogged down by public opposition.
 
The future of the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Pact, or TTIP, is in doubt in the face of bitter opposition by activists and mixed signals from key governments, including Europe's biggest economy Germany.
 
"This is the dirtiest trade deal in Europe's history," a new video posted by the anti-TTIP group Corporate Europe said.
 
Particularly controversial is a plan to let companies have legal disputes with governments heard by supra-national tribunals, which campaigners say would undermine national sovereignty and favour corporations.
 
The historic drive to create a market of 850 million people, linking the 28-nation European Union and the United States, began 20 months ago and on the eve of the eighth round of talks many believe the process is at a make-or-break stage.
 
The four days of talks starting Monday will be the first since the new European Commission led by Jean-Claude Juncker took office in November, with the outspoken Swede Cecilia Malmstroem charged to salvage the talks as the new trade commissioner.
 
"This is the first round after the fresh start. I am very curious how things have developed," said Luisa Santos of Business Europe, an influential pro-business and pro-TTIP lobby in Brussels.
 
The ambitious pact would be unique in history, analysts said. It would not just slash the already low trade tariffs between the world's two top economies, but crucially it would also harmonise regulations to an unprecedented degree, affecting goods and services as far-ranging as Roquefort cheese and accounting.
 
"We are dealing mainly with regulation and more specifically, de-regulation," said Tom Jenkins, a senior advisor at ETUC, a European trade union group.
 
"People are quizzical to say the very least," he said.
 
Campaigners are convinced that powerful interests are selling the consumer short in secret negotiations. But instead of setting aside negative opinion, as is often the case in the early rounds of trade talks, the EU decided to face the critics, embracing dialogue and transparency, at least to a degree.
 
"We are aware of the sensitivities, of all the concerns and criticisms," an EU source told AFP. "We are also aware of our own efforts towards transparency and we are also aware that more can be done." The EU has even published texts that previously would have remained confidential, including the bloc's official negotiating mandate.
 
"Traditionally, trade deals were made in smoke-filled rooms, behind closed doors. TTIP is the first where there is a crack in the door," Jenkins said. But the most contentious part of the deal may be the hardest to get rid of, given how keen the United States is to include rules for investor protection.
 
The Investor-State Dispute Settlement, or ISDS, allows firms to sue national governments through tribunals instead of national courts if they feel that local laws -- such as health and safety regulations -- violate the trade deal and threaten their investments.
 
The influential German government has blown hot and cold on the clause despite greenlighting the EU's mandate to achieve it. Opposition to ISDS became so intense that Malmstroem's predecessor Karel De Gucht, in order to move the talks forward, excluded it from the US-EU negotiations pending the outcome of a public consultation.
 
The EU received almost 150,000 replies -- an EU record -- and almost all were negative. "The consultation clearly shows that there is a huge scepticism against the ISDS instrument", Malmstroem said.
 
Anti-TTIP protesters also handed in a petition signed by 1.1 million people. To make matters worse, some in the EU question Washington's true commitment to the deal, fearing it might be more interested in Asia.
 
"We have to ensure there is strong political commitment from both sides," said Business Europe's Santos. But US Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs Victoria Nuland recently swiped away such talk, calling for a "transatlantic renaissance".
 
 

 
Beijing-backed pact seeks blueprint 
31 January 2015
South China Morning Post
 
Steps are under way to draft a framework for a proposed free-trade pact that Beijing is championing as a rival bloc to a US-led trade initiative that excludes China.
 
The Free Trade Area of the Asia Pacific (FTAAP), encompassing members of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (Apec) grouping, has received high-profile support from the Beijing leadership.
 
The study will draw on input from the Apec Business Advisory Council (Abac), with the goal of drawing up a blueprint for the trade pact by the end of this year, according to Doris Ho, the chairwomen of the advisory group comprising private-sector representatives that makes recommendations to the Apec economies.
 
“It’s going to be a whole-year-long study, hopefully shorter,” Ho said at a press conference by the council yesterday at the end of a four-day meeting in Hong Kong.
 
“We’re going to get consultants and experts to study all the existing [free trade] agreements,” she said.
 
“We’re going to see what are the ones that are really effective. Eventually you take and pick from everybody’s experience, and then we end up with a framework hopefully for what the FTAAP would look like. We have to give that in before the end of the year to the leaders.”
 
The FTAAP is seen by some as a rival trade pact to the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), which is being negotiated by the US and 11 other countries, but excludes China.
 
An Apec leaders summit in Beijing at the end of last year agreed to launch a study into the proposal. President Xi Jinping urged Apec members at the meeting to speed up talks on the trade liberalisation framework, which he described as a “historic step”.
 
Aside from the FTAAP and the TPP, 16 countries including China and the 10 Asean members have been negotiating another free-trade agreement known as the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP). This grouping also includes South Korea, Japan, India, New Zealand and Australia.
 
Ho could not provide a timetable of when the trade pact – sought by Abac since 2004 – might be implemented.
 
She dismissed any suggestion that the FTAAP would be at odds with the TPP and the RCEP, saying some trade agreements in the region could serve as “building blocks” for the FTAAP.
 
“We would like to see [the FTAAP] really address some of the future emerging economic and business issues,” said Ho, who is the 2015 chairwoman for Abac.
 
 
 
 
What Could Happen If the Eurozone Breaks Up?
Investopedia
31 January 2015
 
Fears of a eurozone collapse first surfaced when Standard & Poor's downgraded Greek debt to junk status in 2010. That fear hasn’t truly left the financial markets since. The possibility of one of the world’s largest economic zones abandoning their shared currency terrifies the financial markets for a good reason. In this article, we will look at the possible fallout of a eurozone collapse.

No Escape Hatch

At the time of this writing, there is no way to exit the European Union and the euro once a nation joins. That isn’t to say that a way couldn’t be created. The process of amending the EU treaty is far from simple, though, as other member countries would have legal challenges for any member endangering the eurozone and its shared economic fortunes.

It is more realistic to picture a few of the weaker nations abandoning the EU and the euro in a “consequences be damned” rush that would leave them investment dead zones for years, if not decades, as legal and economic challenges piled up. Accounts would be frozen, currencies swapped, and wealth destroyed, but the eurozone would continue with the existing nations taking far more of a hit. This scenario is less likely than bailouts and quantitative easing to keep the weaker nations in the fold. So what would bring about total collapse? The exit of some of the EU’s largest economies like Germany and France.

In this case, the euro would likely be abandoned en masse and central banks would need to go through the difficult and costly process of switching over to national currencies again. A number of the nations would be taking a serious haircut on the value of whatever currency they float to replace the euro because their individual finances are much weaker than those of the whole. This would likely include all the "PIIGS," as Portugal, Italy, Ireland, Greece, and Spain are sometimes referred. It may include every nation but Germany as it is the strongest economy in the eurozone and one of the main drivers for the euro’s strength in currency markets. However, Germany would still lose on the whole even with a stronger currency - as would every country in the eurozone.  
 
Trade Losses

The eurozone grew partially out of a desire to make commerce easier across the European continent. The EU is essentially a massive free trade zone with the added advantage in that currency risk is eliminated because of the shared euro for those countries in the eurozone. (Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Sweden, and the United Kingdom are EU members that are not in the eurozone.) It is unlikely that the open trading would survive the dissolution of the eurozone. Even if it does, the currency differences between nations are going to make current trade relations difficult to maintain. Will people in Greece buy as many Peugeots and Volkswagens when they are 40 or 50 percent more expensive due to the Greek currency being much weaker than a franc or a mark? Doubtful. The differences will reshape production and trade across Europe as companies are reintroduced to the competitive advantages and disadvantages of regional economies and currencies.

 
Worldwide Impact

Of course, an unwinding of the eurozone would have huge repercussions for economies all over the world. The world’s largest economy, the United States, has investments and trade ties with the EU that would be negatively impacted by a breakup of either the eurozone or the EU as a whole. On a basic level, many of the euro bonds would take losses when they are translated into another currency or simply defaulted on entirely. This wholesale destruction of capital and the uncertainty of currency risks and contract law would shrink the imports and exports between the United States.

This shrinking of the global trade and financial uncertainty could cause a worse global recession than that of the 2007-08 global financial crisis. The high growth economies that sell to the EU and US would slow down along with the rest of the world. Even China, which has diversified its trading partners, would see a decline as the western economies suffer losses on a national level along with every level of investor from institutional to retail to pension fund. There would be less demand for goods from China, South Korea, and Japan in the downturn, spreading the EU contagion to a region less exposed through traditional investment.

Recovery

Even if the eurozone were to collapse, the worldwide economy would eventually recover, though there would be regions that go far deeper into recession and depression for multiple years. Most European nations would be facing multi-year recessions or depression. The economic pressures would be matched by political chaos as countries lose pensions, industries, and wealth as a result of the break up. Investors approaching European investments in the aftermath would require a risk premium similar to those of developing nations until trust could be rebuilt.

That said, trade would eventually come to the rescue as always. French wine, Greek olives, German cars, Italian charcuterie and many other European products would find buyers. The separated economic fortunes and currencies of these nations would ebb and flow as they used to, but commerce within the former eurozone would likely never take place with the ease that it currently does. The world would recover, but the loss of wealth and the new normal would not be an improvement for anyone involved.

The Bottom Line

A eurozone breakup is extremely unlikely because of the high economic price it would extract from everyone involved. The exit of weaker nations from the shared currency or the larger union is a slightly more realistic possibility, but even that cannot take place under the treaty as agreed to by all member nations. There is no exit strategy for nations in the EU or the eurozone because most members acknowledge that they are far better off together than they ever were apart.
 


  ________________________________  
Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.