Indian Government to review sugar export policy after prices rise
EU votes against state bans: Autonomy on GM feed vetoed
India opposes proposed European Trademark rules
TPP still gives the US excessive IP protections
Destruction of WTO-created system by sanctions to harm everyone, including Europe - Putin
UK economy: A long-overdue focus on infrastructure
Forget NAFTA, the TPP is new 'gold standard'

Indian Government to review sugar export policy after prices rise
Prabhudatta Mishra
13 October 2015
Financial Chronicle
The government is reviewing plans to provide incentives to boost sugar exports after price realisation of mills increased, with local rates of sugar prices moving up on a lower production estimate this year.
The compulsory export quota fixed for each mill will remain while any financial incentives, either for mills or to sugarcane farmers, will be reviewed again, sources said. The food ministry last month asked mills to export 4 million tonne (mt) of sugar so that huge stockpiles accumulated over the past five years could be reduced.
The price realisation of sugar mills was about Rs 23 per kg when the government initiated plans to boost exports. Now that the ex-mill prices have increased to Rs 28 a kg, the entire plan needs to be reviewed again, sources said. Besides, global prices have also increased in last one month, they added. The sugar futures in New York have gone up 19 per cent to 14.24 cents a pound since September 1.
The government was considering a plan to give direct incentive to cane farmers and mills in return can adjust the incentive while making payment to growers. This plan was mooted, as the government did not want to get into problem at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO.
The government also took note of latest production estimates of sugar as both mills and state governments have lowered their initial forecast on deficient rainfall. At a meeting of cane commissioners of states, it was estimated that 26 mt sugar could be produced in the current season, beginning October 1 against earlier projection of 27-28 mt.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Indian Sugar Mills Association also cut its forecast to 27 mt from an earlier estimate of 28 mt. The initial estimate was made on the basis of cane acreage while assessment also took into account the poor rains in Maharashtra and other states.
“Export is not economical even though international prices are up,” an executive at a global sugar-trading firm said, adding, “Without government help, the mills will not be able to export.” India exported 1.1 mt of sugar in 2014-15 season as the government provided a subsidy of Rs 4,000 a tonne on raw variety.
Globally, there may be a deficit in production of sugar even as India is likely to come up with a surplus. The industry supported the decision to fix the export quota, but demanded that the government should link the sugarcane price policy with market rates of sugar as a long-term solution. Deccan Chronicle Holdings Limited
EU votes against state bans: Autonomy on GM feed vetoed
14 October 2015
The Irish Examiner
THE HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Parliament's Environment and Public Health Committee yesterday voted against proposals that would allow EU member states to control genetically modified (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" GM) food or feed in their country.
This is a setback for HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Commission plans to legislate for HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" GM crops. It is, however, or at least it seems to be, a victory for the industrial farming and food lobby. Also, like many public policy decisions taken at national level or above, the heavy shadow of the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) looms.
This is a divisive issue and, though the commercial cultivation of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" GM crops does not take place in Ireland, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Irish Farmers' Association has said it supports biotechnology that has proven to be scientifically sound.
Fine Gael MEP Mairéad McGuinness welcomed the decision, saying that “to allow one member state to ban the use of animal feed containing HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" GM ingredients... would disadvantage farmers and seriously disrupt the livestock sector”.
On first reading, this seems an unacceptable championing of the commercial ambitions of one relatively small sector of society, while ignoring the implications of introducing greater quantities of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" GM food. This issue is rooted in our need to feed growing populations. It is a challenge exacerbated by our enthusiasm for eating meat, a product coming under more rigorous environmental scrutiny. If we did not have that appetite, would we need HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" GM crops?
Landmark Digital Limited
India opposes proposed European Trademark rules
Asit Ranjan Mishra
14 October 2015
Mint
New Delhi, Oct. 14 -- India has opposed the proposed European Trademark rules that will allow HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union (EU) customs officials to seize goods in transit on grounds of suspected trademark violations. India fears the provision will be used, like in the past, to seize low-cost generic medicines headed for African and Latin American countries at EU ports.
In April this year, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Commission, the executive body of the EU, reached an agreement on the trademark reform package which needs to be put to a final vote in the European parliament and could come into force in the beginning of 2016.
This will lead to major changes in the trademark law of the EU and its member states when it is implemented. It aims to protect businesses in the bloc from counterfeit goods and encourage innovation.
A government official said India has written to the EC, however, it is yet to receive a reply. "The notification of the commission is not clear. We are protesting because trademarks can be confused with patents by customs officials which could lead to confiscation of generic medicines," the official added.
India and the EU have a history of tussles over generic drugs. In 2008, there were 17 cases of medicine seizure in the Netherlands alone, according to a response from Dutch authorities to Health Action International, a non-profit organization, under a freedom of information request. Of these, 16 were shipped from India and one from China.
India initiated dispute settlement consultations in May 2010 at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization with the EU on the issue of detention of Indian generic medicines while in transit.
The dispute was triggered by repeated instances of seizure at EU ports, particularly in the Netherlands, of Indian generic drugs meant for export to Latin American and other countries in 2008. However, both sides reached a settlement in 2011 and the EU agreed not to seize generic drug consignments in transit through its territory.
Helle Aagaard, EU policy adviser with non-profit HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Medecins Sans Frontieres' Access Campaign, said these new rules will increase the risk of abuse by intellectual property rights holders, which could result in harmful delays, seizures or even the destruction of legitimate generic medicines in transit through Europe on their way to people in developing countries. "Any wrongful seizure and detention of generic medicines in transit can lead to harmful, and even fatal, delays for people who need access to life-saving medicines," she added.
The tussle with EU over generic drugs took an ugly turn recently when India indefinitely deferred a meeting between chief negotiators of both sides to revive talks on the long-delayed free trade negotiations, stating it was "disappointed and concerned by the action of EU in imposing a legally binding ban on the sale of around 700 pharma products clinically tested by GVK Biosciences, Hyderabad," on 16 July.
EU defended its action saying the ban was based on scientific and not trade considerations and in keeping with the advice of the scientific committee of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Medicines Agency(EMA), according to Cesare Onestini, acting head of the delegation of the EU to India.
India could lose about $1-1.2 billion worth of drug exports because of the decision taken by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Commission to ban the drugs, according to lobby group HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Pharmaceuticals Export Promotion Council (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Pharmexcil).
The country exported $15.4 billion worth of pharmaceutical products in 2014-15, with Europe accounting for $3 billion. Out of the $3 billion, exports of generic medicines constituted about $1 billion and drug ingredients accounted for the rest, according to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Pharmexcil.
In a joint statement during the visit of German Chancellor HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Angela Merkel earlier this month, both sides expressed their "strong commitment to the EU-India Broad Based Trade and Investment Agreement and to bring about a resumption of the negotiations as soon as possible".
Leena Menghaney, head-South Asia, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Medecins Sans Frontieres' Access Campaign, said before rushing into negotiations with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Commission, India should take into consideration the outcome of the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) agreement negotiations that concluded last week. "The big losers in the TPP are patients and treatment providers in developing countries who will face increased levels of IP (intellectual property) barriers in procuring affordable generics, largely produced by India. The negative impact of the TPP on public health will be enormous, and will be felt for years to come and it will not be limited to the current 12 TPP countries, as it is a dangerous blueprint for future agreements," she added.
India and the EU have missed at least four deadlines to clinch a free-trade accord, called Broad Based Trade and Investment Agreement, even after 15 rounds of talks.
A prolonged recession in the EU, and its focus on concluding the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership agreement with the US also delayed progress.
HT Media Limited
TPP still gives the US excessive IP protections
Brian Toohey
14 October 2015
The Australian Financial Review
The new agreement means protectionist rules for IP and foreign investors that we have not given away before.
Highly protectionist rules for intellectual property in last week's Trans-Pacific Partnership agreement are the antithesis of free trade. But the traditional free trade component of the agreement signed by Australia and 11 other signatory countries looks fine, except for the drawback that the TPP is a preferential deal displacing trade with non-members. For those who care about the rule of law, fundamental flaws remain in the TPP's procedures for settling investment disputes.
Trade Minister Andrew Robb rightly claims credit for helping reduce barriers to trade in services and rural commodities. Despite Australian cane growers' whingeing, their exports to the heavily protected US sugar market will almost double. John Howard's government failed to get an extra spoonful in the 2005 US-Australia FTA.
A study by the well-regarded HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Peterson Institute for International Economics found the gains from the TPP would be tiny. The TPP excludes three fast growing Asian economies - China, India and Indonesia - that are expected to account for a bigger share of trade with Australia than entire TPP group by 2030. But it is not possible to assess the net gains from the TPP for Australia until after the full text is released.
Summaries show the TPP will extend the US' unduly protectionist rules on intellectual property to all signatories. This means net importers of IP with lower protection levels, such as New Zealand, will suffer by being forced to pay more. Because Australia is also a net IP importer, Howard initially opposed extending Australia's copyright protection from 50 years after the death of an author, composer, software inventor etc to match the US' 70 years. Australian trade negotiators describe the subsequent back down as their biggest loss.
Few dispute that some copyright and patent protection provides an incentive to create artistic works and technologies. But protection far beyond the life of creators hurts consumers and blocks firms from using a patented component in an innovative new product. Howard did not allow a contentious Investor State Dispute Settlement clause in 2005 because it would infringe Australian sovereignty. But the TPP will include ISDS procedures that allow investors to seek compensation for the loss of future profits due to policy and administrative changes, or even judicial decisions, in host countries. Existing ISDS tribunals are not courts, don't follow court rules or case law and operate in secret. The TPP will improve transparency, but foreign investors will still be able to use a tribunal to overrule a host country's highest court.
Robb says there will be safeguards for public policy decisions on health and the environment. "On top of that, we were successful in getting a total blanket ban on tobacco companies being able to use the ISDS," he says.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Australian National University research fellow Kyla Tienhaara says the official US summary of the investment chapter makes it clear that other health and environmental policies are not explicitly exempted from the ISDS mechanism. She says, "By the very act of including the tobacco carve-out, the TPP parties are indicating that the 'safeguards' alone would be insufficient to prevent tobacco control measures from being challenged under ISDS".
Foreign and local firms can use Australian courts against Australian governments that allegedly cause them unlawful damage. Australian firms can no longer appeal a High Court loss in the Privy Council, let alone in an overseas tribunal lacking jurists and normal court rules. But foreign investors, in effect, can do so.
Former IMF chief economist HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Simon Johnson says the ISDS provisions favour foreign investors over domestic investors in "direct contradiction to the usual principles of FTAs emphasising non-discrimination across types of investors". The US usually won't tolerate interference from foreign tribunals. If a TPP tribunal awards a foreign investor large damages against a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" US government, its chances of getting paid would not be high.
Fairfax Media Management Pty Limited
Destruction of WTO-created system by sanctions to harm everyone, including Europe - Putin
13 October 2015
ITAR-TASS World Service
Destruction of WTO-created system by sanctions to harm everyone, including Europe - Putin
MOSCOW, October 13. /TASS/. Destruction of a WTO-created system by sanctions will harm everyone, including Europe, Russian President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Vladimir Putin said Tuesday.
"Issues connected with restriction and destruction of this system through sanctions are first of all considered by us as a tool of unfair competition. I believe this could be bad for all. I’m not even speaking about losses, for example, the losses of our European partners, which equal dozens of billions of dollars from our response countersanctions," Putin said at VTB Capital’s investment forum Russia Calling.
He added that "this is just a display of negative consequences of such an economic management means on the international arena."
Putin admitted that at first the Russian Federation believed that the rules of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization are unshakable and are not connected with politics in any way.
"It turned out that it was not true. It turned out that these economic tools are used to achieve specific advantages in the economy and to attain political goals," he said. "I believe that it is very harmful for everyone."
Putin suggested giving up such practice in future.
ITAR-TASS Information Telegraph Agency of Russia
UK economy: A long-overdue focus on infrastructure
13 October 2015
Economist Intelligence Unit - ViewsWire
* Since the Conservative Party's victory in May the chancellor, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" George Osborne, has repeatedly stressed the importance of improving the UK's infrastructure, which lags its developed-country peers.
* A new National Infrastructure Commission will inject some welcome objectivity into assessments of the UK's infrastructure needs.
* However, the commission is unlikely to be a game-changer-decisions will still be taken by politicians focused on the electoral cycle, and this will continue to make private-sector investors wary.
* During a visit to Beijing in September Mr Osborne outlined plans for China to take a leading role in the development and construction of nuclear-power reactors in the UK.
* The UK has always been more relaxed than most of its European peers about permitting foreign involvement in the economy, but concerns have been raised about the security implications of this decision.
* One of the UK's most pressing infrastructure problems is a chronic mismatch of housing supply and demand. However, the economy's heavy reliance on buoyant house prices is likely to limit the extent of any push to ramp up construction sharply.
Freed from the moderating confines of coalition government, the politically astute Mr Osborne has made clear his intentions for this new parliamentary term on three related fronts: to weaken further an ailing and divided main opposition Labour Party; to shift the emphasis of policy debate away from post-crisis recovery to a forward-looking reform agenda offering a vision of longer-term economic prosperity and stability; and to fortify his push to succeed David Cameron in 2020 as the next leader of the Conservative Party and, he will hope, the next UK prime minister.
The government's overriding policy focus remains one of fiscal consolidation, as recently highlighted by the numerous (if stealthy) tax-raising measures announced in the 2015 budget and by contentious cuts to the Labour-introduced tax credit regime as part of an ongoing assault on the welfare budget-albeit while avoiding any erosion of (mostly Tory-voting) pensioner benefits, which comprise by far the largest share of the UK's annual welfare bill. This approach still implies some vulnerability to the chancellor should the economy take an unexpected turn for the worse. However, the emboldened Mr Osborne has his sights firmly set on delivering an aspirational message for his party, one that has seen him increasingly reach across traditional political boundaries to plunder a range of Labour policies, such as the introduction of a so-called "national living wage".
A belated focus on infrastructure, but delivery will be key
One area in which the chancellor has made a concerted push in recent weeks is that of infrastructure. In September, during a visit to Beijing, Mr Osborne outlined plans for China to take a leading role in the development and construction of a new generation of UK nuclear-power reactors, and a theme of the chancellor's speech at the Conservative Party's annual conference in early October was a series of (rehashed) policy announcements relating to planning, housing and transport.
Many voters and businesses would welcome a greater focus by the government on the UK's creaking infrastructure, the overall quality of which is moderate by developed-country standards. Major shortcomings include highly congested road and urban rail networks, airport capacity constraints in the south of England and a distorted housing market suffering from chronic undersupply-all long-standing issues that successive governments, including the previous Conservative-led coalition, have done little to address. Levels of UK infrastructure investment in recent decades have remained below the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD average, with public infrastructure spending having been cut back sharply since the 2008-09 global downturn and private-sector participation hampered by policy uncertainty and the lack of a coherent longer-term infrastructure strategy.
As is often the case with official policy announcements related to infrastructure, the reality in terms of the delivery of new "shovel ready" projects over the coming years is likely to fall well short of the step-change Mr Osborne has hinted at. Back in late 2010 the chancellor unveiled to much fanfare a £250bn "national infrastructure plan" detailing some 500 new road, rail and energy projects. But delivery since then has been patchy at best and progress on most major schemes has stalled, with private investors reluctant to provide the necessary bulk of financing. As things stand, UK economy growth is now too reliant on wealth effects stemming from its highly leveraged property market for the government to encourage house-building on a scale that would risk triggering a broad-based decline in property prices. Moreover, the chancellor's eagerness to deepen commercial ties with China, including in such a strategically sensitive area as nuclear power, has raised some security concerns at home and also ruffled feathers in the US, which has previously questioned the UK's "mild" diplomatic stance towards China and its "constant accommodation" of Beijing.
New independent body will struggle to de-politicise infrastructure planning
One of the main announcements in Mr Osborne's conference speech was the creation of a new National Infrastructure Commission, described by the Treasury as a non-political body that will advise (and hold to account) the government on prioritising major new infrastructure projects. Originally proposed by the Labour Party, the new commission will be headed by Andrew Adonis, a former Labour transport secretary and a high-profile figure in the party-the latest example of the chancellor's political strategising and his drive for the Conservatives to be seen dominating the centre ground of UK politics. Mr Adonis is known to be a supporter of high-speed rail and of a third runway at Heathrow, both of which are highly contentious issues.
Modelled on the UK's independent fiscal watchdog, the independent HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR), the new commission will in theory be better positioned to provide a non-partisan and objective assessment of the UK's long-term infrastructure planning. That said, decisions on projects will still ultimately be taken by government ministers and are therefore likely to remain a hostage to the political cycle.
The commission has been tasked initially with presenting draft plans for three major infrastructure projects in time for the 2016 budget -a proposed east-west High Speed 3 rail line connecting Liverpool to Hull, a north-south Crossrail 2 rail line linking Surrey and Hertfordshire, and an expansion of UK energy-generation and storage. In terms of prospects for actual delivery, much will depend on whether the new infrastructure body is successful in being able to attract private capital to invest in new infrastructure schemes across the UK. The protracted period of depressed bond market yields means that sovereign wealth reserves, investment vehicles and pension funds around the world are actively looking for suitable projects, but for the most part their preference has been to invest in existing infrastructure that offer known and steady income streams and limited risk. Recent examples include Canadian pension funds' decision to invest £2.1bn in the High Speed 1 rail link across Kent to the Channel Tunnel in 2010, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" China Investment Corporation's acquisition of a 10% stake in Heathrow Airport in 2012 and the £1.1bn purchase of Eversholt Rail (owner of almost one-third of the UK's passenger train fleet) by Hong Kong-based HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Cheung Kong Infrastructure Holdings in January 2015.
Against this backdrop, Mr Osborne also announced plans in his speech for the pension funds of 89 local authorities in England and Wales to be pooled into six "British Wealth Funds", each with assets of around £25bn. The idea is that consolidating resources will give the funds the scale to invest in infrastructure schemes, as is commonplace in other countries (at present, less than 1% of UK local-authority pension funds are invested in infrastructure). However, they will not be compelled to invest in anything, and the question remains as to whether the funds would be prepared to take on the considerable risk involved in new, domestic large-scale projects, rather than seek a safer, regular return from existing schemes across the world.
The Economist Intelligence Unit, N.A., Inc. 
Forget NAFTA, the TPP is new 'gold standard'
Gordon Isfeld
Financial Post
13 October 2015
Vancouver Sun
It will take years before the benefits of the Trans-Pacific Partnership, and its possible drawbacks, find their way into the Canadian economy.
One thing for sure is that much of what we gained from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" North American Free Trade Agreement, which came into effect in 1995, will be superseded by the new 12-nation TPP - whenever member nations finally sign off on the pact.
That could still be a least a couple of years down the road, according to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Canadian government.
But if other international trade deals are any indication, don't hold your breath - timing isn't always everything when it comes to multinational agreements. Nor are the details of these international negotiations usually readily accessible at the time they are inked.
After all, the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement, unveiled in September 2014 by Canada and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union, remains a work in progress, awaiting member ratification. And we're still waiting for the influence of Canada's free-trade pact with South Korea - this country's first major foray into the Asia-Pacific market - to be felt, even though it officially took effect in January.
But the TPP represents a huge rewrite of international trade engagement for Canada. Business and industry groups - such as the Canadian Chamber of Commerce and Canadian
Manufacturers Exporters - were quick to endorse the deal announced at the start of last week, despite few details on how their members would actually benefit from the TPP.
The full agreement is still under wraps, although Trade Minister Ed Fast promised last week to release a provisional copy of the deal in the next few days.
But some of the more contentious issues - lower thresholds for Canadian content rules in the auto industry and government concessions on financial assistance to the dairy and poultry sectors - had been telegraphed during previous TPP sessions.
Even so, the broad strokes delivered in Atlanta last week did little to calm concerns of many at the centre of the trade debate.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Jerry Dias, president of Unifor, the Canadian labour union, said "the TPP poses a significant threat to Canada's auto industry."
Federal negotiators "had their chance to champion the auto industry and failed," he said in a statement.
Few others have openly balked at joining the new fold, which is nothing short of being the world's biggest deal on exports - which includes the increased exchange of intellectual property and services of all kinds.
"Unifor aside, criticism has been muted," acknowledged a government official close to the final talks this week in Atlanta.
"I think people recognize how important this deal is for Canada and that, at the end of the day, TPP strengthens our trading relationship with HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" NAFTA partners and beyond," the official said.
The TPP "is a major deal for Canada. And not something that we should turn our back on by any means. I think we should embrace it," said Lawrence Herman, an expert in international trade law.
Next to agreements under the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization, "I would suggest this is the biggest deal on the planet."
"The TTP will supersede all bilateral agreements we have, where there's a conflict. We'll retain our rights under the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" NAFTA where any HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" NAFTA agreements are superior to the TPP provisions. And they haven't set those out in any detail," Herman said.
"But I think that most of the provisions in the TPP will be superior."
For one, access to the U.S. procurement process will exceed the levels agreed to in HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" NAFTA. "Canadian companies will obviously get additional preferential bidding opportunities for U.S. procurements," Herman said.
Forget HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO, Herman added, TPP will become the "gold standard" of global trade.
David Watt, chief economist at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" HSBC Bank Canada, said the TPP represents "the next generation of trade deals that cover more than just trade."
"HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" NAFTA was a trade deal. It basically dealt largely with merchandise and trade. Now we're seeing these trade deals evolve into issues of services, skills recognition, migration trends and things like intellectual property - which might not have been serious concerns in the past," he said.
Ryan Remiorz, The Canadian Press Files / Jerry Dias, president of Unifor, the Canadian labour union, says, "the TPP poses a significant threat to Canada's auto industry." Federal negotiators "had their chance to champion the auto industry and failed."; Ryan Remiorz, The Canadian Press Files / Jerry Dias, president of Unifor, the Canadian labour union, says, "the TPP poses a significant threat to Canada's auto industry." Federal negotiators "had their chance to champion the auto industry and failed."  Vancouver Sun
