DG Azevêdo - A Package of Issues for Nairobi May Be Within Reach
Trade Policy to Come Under WTO Review 
US may not give India time to lift ban on poultry imports 
Volkswagen Emissions Scandal Puts European Rivals on Offensive 
Russia Completely Bans GMOs in Food Production
Chinese censorship costing U.S. tech firms billions in revenue 
Removing restrictions, addressing concerns 
Trans Pacific deal good for health 
Swiss NGO report ‘very misleading,’ Cotton Council CEO says 
China's economic slowdown: Media reactions highly exaggerated, says IMF
UK food recycling cafes go global in fight against waste 
 
DG Azevêdo - A Package of Issues for Nairobi May Be Within Reach 
All Africa, 22 September 2015 17:03, (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization/All Africa Global Media via COMTEX) -- Director-General HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Roberto Azevedo convened a meeting of all HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members in Geneva today to report on the current state of play in negotiations on the remaining issues of the Doha Development Agenda. Members are working towards delivering negotiated outcomes at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's 10th Ministerial Conference which will be held in Nairobi from 15-18 December this year. Director-General Azevedo reported in detail to members on a range of discussions which he had had with different members, and groups of members, over recent weeks. DG Azevedo said: "The significant difficulties that we detected in the first semester are still in evidence. Returning to Geneva after consulting with capitals over the summer, it seems to me that we have not yet found solutions which can bridge the gaps in the most problematic areas. For many months, we have been focusing on the most challenging areas of the negotiations in an effort to find possible solutions, even though the chance of finding such solutions appears to be diminishing. While continuing those efforts, I think it is time for us to start working more intensely on the more promising issues which may be potential deliverables for the Nairobi Ministerial Conference. "The view emerging from many of the meetings in which I have participated is that a set of deliverables is within reach which has the potential to make the ministerial a success and to help us move our work forward. And, crucially, there is the common view that those deliverables should have development and LDC issues at their heart. "I am confident that all members want to seize the opportunity that Nairobi represents. We all want to make it a meaningful Ministerial Conference which delivers substantive support for growth and development. So members must now decide on shape and scope of the outcome that they want to achieve in Nairobi. Time is short. It is essential that we have an answer to this question within the next month. Once we have a clear picture of what the Nairobi outcomes might look like, then we can work hard to deliver them." The potential emerging deliverables for Nairobi to which the Director-General referred could include LDC and development outcomes, outcomes on export competition in agriculture, and a number of provisions to improve transparency in several issues being negotiated. Negotiations will continue in the coming weeks through the formal negotiating groups. The Director-General's consultations will complement those discussions. He will also be interacting with ministers at forthcoming meetings of the G20, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" African Union, the African, Caribbean, Pacific Group of States and of Arab Trade Ministers. In addition, he will be attending the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN General Assembly next week to discuss the role that trade can play in the new Sustainable Development Goals - starting with outcomes in Nairobi. 
 
Trade Policy to Come Under WTO Review 
All Africa, 22 September 2015 20:34, Geneva, (Angola Press Agency/All Africa Global Media via COMTEX) -- Angola's trade practices are being reviewed on Tuesday in Geneva (Switzerland) within the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO). Angola will thus submit a report on its national policies perspective and measures linked to the country's trade with the world, whereas the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO will release its report on Angola's trade and investment systems. An Angolan multi-sector delegation headed by the Commerce minister, Rosa Pacavira, is currently in Geneva to attend the 2nd Angola's trade policy review, which is a mechanism that consists in examining the practical commercial measures in the country as a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO member, subject to periodical review. Since attaining peace in 2002, Angola has been adopting changes, marking an era of progress and development in various sectors. Angola is also credited with making a great effort to transform the country and improve the living of the citizens, with huge investments in education, health, agriculture and industry. The advances scored in the Angolan economy, including the new Government's strategy to diversify the economy, the new Private Investment Law, as well as the incentives for the creation of a business friendly environment are also part of the reports that will be released to all HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO member countries during the event. The Trade Policy Review Mechanism is intended to contribute to a better application of the rules, disciplines and commitments to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO accords. The mechanism enables a collective and regular analysis and evaluation of the trade policy of each member country, its impact on the functioning of the multi-lateral commercial system. It improves the functioning of the multilateral trade system, through major transparency and comprehension of member countries' policies and practices. Angola as a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO member since 1996 reaffirms its commitment to the multi-lateral trade system and liberalisation of trade it considers to be beneficial to growth, development and wellbeing of the population, but also considers it urgent to share the benefits among all countries of the world. The Republic of Angola considers that the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO can play a relevant role in the process of liberalisation of trade, improvement of organisation, diversification and flexibility, including the implementation of a basis frameworks based on world trade rules. 
 
US may not give India time to lift ban on poultry imports 
Amiti Sen, Business Line (The Hindu), 23 September 2015 -- Matter may go for arbitration if the two can’t agree on the period of time to implement HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO verdict India is finding it difficult to convince the US to grant it a year and a half — the maximum time allowed for implementation of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) panel verdicts — to remove restrictions on the import of poultry from the country.  Earlier this month, in a meeting between officials from the two countries in Geneva, agreement over a reasonable duration could not be reached, a Commerce Ministry official told BusinessLine . If both the nations fail to reach a consensus, the matter will be referred for arbitration, following which the arbiter will determine the period of implementation. The US has been insisting that the ruling should be implemented immediately since it required a single notification from the Indian government, the official said. It is important for India to postpone implementation as long as possible as cheap chicken legs from the US are likely to make a big dent in the business of the local poultry industry. India’s four lakh-plus poultry farmers, who produce an estimated 3.5 million tonnes every year, could lose up to 40 per cent of their domestic market once US products start flowing in, according to industry estimates. A delay would also give the Centre time to come up with more valid import restrictions on US poultry, which the local industry has been working on for some time. The Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries, together with poultry associations, is examining US practices that may not be acceptable in India, such as giving genetically modified feed to chicken or keeping meat frozen for long periods, to see if these could be used for restricting imports on health grounds. “We have explained to the poultry industry that any restrictions to be imposed on imported chicken on health grounds need to be backed by credible international organisations so that they can’t be challenged easily at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO,” the official said. Last November, a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO panel had ruled that India’s ban on US poultry product imports flouted global norms. India appealed against the verdict in January. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO Appellate Body, however, upheld the panel’s findings that India’s avian influenza measures were neither based on, nor conformed to, the relevant international standards.
US to decide
It is now up to the US to decide how much time India should be given to remove the ban. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO allows a maximum of 15 months for implementation of verdicts and up to 18 months in case of ‘exceptional circumstances’. New Delhi had allowed Washington 18 months to implement the verdict against countervailing duties imposed by the US on steel imports from India. “It is not strictly a case of quid pro quo as all cases differ in their character. But, we hope that as a sign of courtesy and goodwill, we too are allowed the maximum period for implementing the decision on poultry,” the official said. 
 
Volkswagen Emissions Scandal Puts European Rivals on Offensive
Jason Chow, Dow Jones Institutional News PARIS, 22 Sep 2015--The U.S. emissions scandal engulfing HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Volkswagen AG has put European rivals on the offensive, as they scramble to show their own diesel engines meet standards in Europe. A growing backlash against diesel-powered vehicles could spell an end to the long love affair with the fuel in Europe, the region where diesel is most widely adopted and developed.
"Does this signal the end of diesel? Yes, it probably does," said Max Warburton, an auto analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein. On Tuesday, the French government and British transport officials called for a European probe into car makers and diesel emissions, following the accusations that HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Volkswagen cheated on U.S. emissions tests. French Environment Minister Ségolène Royal said her ministry is also launching an investigation.
France's Comité des Constructeurs Français d'Automobiles, the country's car manufacturing association, quickly supported the call for a European inquest so it could "confirm that the French makers respect the approval procedures with vigor in all the countries it operates in." For European car giants, a lot is at stake from any retreat from diesel. The European auto makers have plowed billions of euros into developing so-called clean diesel engines, which are increasingly popular among drivers in Europe who like the cost savings offered by filling up on cheaper fuel. French auto makers HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Renault SA and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" PSA Peugeot Citroën are reliant on diesel car sales--they make up about half of their total new car sales--though neither sell in the U.S. Both companies said that they are in compliance with the laws and regulations of the markets they serve. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Fiat Chrysler Automobiles said it also abides by the rules. The Italian-American auto maker sold about the same number of diesel and gasoline cars in Italy in 2014. In the U.S., sales of diesel-powered vehicles are negligible. Still, their shares were pummeled in Tuesday trading, with Renault falling 7.1% to EUR66.55 per share and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Peugeot sliding 8.8% to EUR13.86, highlighting investor concern that the emissions scandal could have repercussions beyond HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Volkswagen. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" FCA shares declined 6.2% in Milan trading to EUR11.93. After over two decades of European governments and car manufacturers touting diesel engines as a clean alternative, tighter regulation and testing standards could definitively turn the tide, industry experts say.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" General Motors Co. on Tuesday said it would continue to push a plan to popularize diesels in the U.S. through its Chevrolet brand. Currently, the No. 1 U.S. auto maker offers bigger diesel engines in large pickup trucks, such as heavy-duty GMC Sierras, but sees an opportunity to use diesel engines built in Europe in smaller products. Chevrolet's Cruze, a smaller car competing with HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Volkswagen's Jetta and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Ford Motor Co.'s Focus, can be bought with an optional "clean turbo diesel" engine rated at 46 miles per gallon. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" GM says the engine emits 90% less nitrogen oxide and particulates compared with previous generation diesels and can take a driver 717 miles on a single tank. The company says it outperforms HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Volkswagen's Jetta TDI in several performance categories. The next generation Cruze, due in 2016, will carry an updated version of the diesel engine, and the company's midsize trucks--the Chevy Colorado and GMC Canyon--will soon be fitted with new diesels. "HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" GM is transparent in discussions with HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EPA [the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Environmental Protection Agency] and CARB [HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" California Air Resources Board] and discloses all our control strategies during certification," a spokesman said Tuesday. "HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" GM is 100% committed to emissions compliance with all its vehicles, including diesel powered vehicles." Though diesel cars remain a curiosity in the U.S., they are mainstream in Europe with cheap fuel as the major selling point--diesel is between 10% to 20% cheaper at the pump in major markets such as France, Italy and Germany as it is taxed significantly less than gasoline.
In 2014, diesel motors powered two of every five passenger cars on the road in Europe. Diesel cars also made up 44% of all new car sales in the region in 2014. The growth of diesel in Europe began in the early 1990s, when car makers started to heavily promote it as a clean, cheaper alternative to gasoline. At the time, diesel cars made up just 10% of Europe's total fleet and were dogged by a reputation for poor acceleration, loud chugging engines and difficulties starting in cold weather. However, a series of innovations closed the performance gap between gasoline-powered cars, and consumers became increasingly drawn to them, especially when oil prices soared in the 2000s. European governments also applauded diesel engines since they were more fuel-efficient compared with gasoline-powered cars, and less burned fuel meant fewer carbon dioxide emissions. Policy makers handed out incentives, sometimes in the form of cash bonuses back to consumers, for diesel-powered cars. However, the love for diesel has begun to wane in recent years. Diesel-powered cars are blamed for worsening air quality in Europe's biggest cities because of their emissions in nitrous oxide and particulate matter. In France, Paris Mayor Anne Hidalgo earlier this year spurred controversy calling for an outright ban on diesel within the borders of the capital. Car companies are also facing stricter emissions standards and testing regimes, which could close the competitive advantage of diesel over gasoline. Europe's latest emissions standards, known as Euro 6, will be subject to "real world" tests--as opposed to testing performed in controlled laboratory conditions. A spokeswoman for the European Automobile Manufacturing Association said the organization is asking for clarification on new testing standards based on everyday driving conditions so its members can enforce them accordingly on their cars. Stuart Pearson, an analyst at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Exane BNP Paribas, said many car makers will face much higher costs if their models are to comply with the new standards. "HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Volkswagen's U.S. headache is only the latest setback for diesel," he said. "Popular, and hence political, opinion is leaning away from diesel, and compliance costs rising." Analysts say a drop in diesel-powered cars would be matched by an increase in use of gasoline, hybrid and electric cars, though that would be a sharp challenge for European firms. Jos Dings, director at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Transport & Environment, a Belgium-based think tank, says the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Volkswagen scandal will spur increasing scrutiny and a harsher look at what was once seen as Europe's favored fuel. "The U.S. is calling out a European technology," said Mr. Dings. "The industry here has many reasons to be ashamed, and so do European regulators." 
 
Russia Completely Bans GMOs in Food Production
By HYPERLINK "http://www.globalresearch.ca/author/anthony-gucciardi" Anthony Gucciardi, Global Research, September 22, 2015 -- Russia has just announced a game-changing move in the fight against Monsanto’s GMOs, completely banning the use of genetically modified ingredients in any and all food production.In other words, Russia just blazed way past the issue of GMO labeling and shut down the use of any and all GMOs that would have otherwise entered the food supply through the creation of packaged foods (and the cultivation of GMO crops). “As far as genetically-modified organisms are concerned, we have made decision not to use any GMO in food productions,” Deputy PM Arkady Dvorkovich revealed during an international conference on biotechnology. This is a bold move by the Russian government, and it sits in unison with the newly-ignited global debate on GMOs and the presence of Monsanto in the food supply. It also follows the highly-HYPERLINK "http://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/23/herbicide-24-d-possibly-causes-cancer-world-health-organisation-study-finds" debated ruling by the World Health Organization that Monsanto’s glyphosate-based Roundup is a ‘probable carcinogen.’ But I also want to put it into perspective for you. If this announcement were to be made in the United States, for example, it would mean a total transformation of the food manufacturing industry. But in Russia, the integration of GMOs is not close to the same level as in the U.S. We know that, in the United States, 90 plus percent of staple crops like corn are genetically modified, along with 94 percent of soybeans and 94 percent of cotton. A ban on GMOs in food production would radically change the entire food supply. In Russia, however, the country is much more poised for a GMO food revolution. 
As RT HYPERLINK "http://www.rt.com/politics/315844-government-decides-to-ban-gmo/" reports:
“According to official statistics the share of GMO in the Russian food industry has declined from 12 percent to just 0.01 percent over the past 10 years, and currently there are just 57 registered food products containing GMO in the country. The law ordering obligatory state registration of GMO products that might contact with the environment will come into force in mid-2017.” President Vladimir Putin believes that he can HYPERLINK "http://naturalsociety.com/vladimir-putin-says-russia-must-protect-citizens-gmos-stand-wto/" keep GMOs out of the country, even while staying in compliance with the World Trade Organization’s (WTO) commandments. In a past meeting addressing the members of the Board of the Russian Federation Council he stated: “We need to properly construct our work so that it is not contrary to our obligations under the WTO. But even with this in mind, we nevertheless have legitimate methods and instruments to protect our own market, and above all citizens.”
 
Chinese censorship costing U.S. tech firms billions in revenue 
Julie Makinen, From the Los Angeles Times , 22 September 2015 -- With Apple selling $13.2 billion worth of iPhones in China last quarter, and Alibaba raising nearly twice that on the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" New York Stock Exchange, it's no wonder Chinese officials want to showcase technology as a bright spot of cooperation when President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xi Jinping travels to the United States this week. Xi will visit the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Microsoft campus near Seattle for a forum of tech titans from both countries, but the discussion almost certainly will paper over an uncomfortable fact: Chinese government censorship is costing U.S. tech companies billions of dollars in revenue — and the "Great Firewall" isn't likely to come down soon. Although the Great Firewall's free-speech ramifications are often discussed, its financial impact has received scant analysis. The economic repercussions of this protectionism could be most severe in California, home to the biggest U.S. companies that have been cut off from China's netizens. The censorship shuts out the state's tech giants — HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Google, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Facebook, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Twitter — along with upstarts such as Snapchat, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Dropbox, Ustream and Wordpress.
How much the Communist Party's Great Firewall costs California companies is difficult to estimate, because the companies have not disclosed how much they believe they have lost. No industry trade association has put forth comprehensive figures. But basic number-crunching puts the forfeited sums and missed opportunities at billions of dollars a year as the number of Internet users in China has exploded to 668 million. "I don't think in general there's that much awareness, at least outside of Silicon Valley, about the impact of some of the restrictions, the Great Firewall, and what the financial consequences are and what that might translate into" for California, said HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Jock O'Connell, a Sacramento-based trade expert. "How many jobs would there be for people in California were those restrictions removed?" American tech giants are under pressure from China to turn user data and intellectual property over to the government and to transfer technology to Chinese partners. Companies including San Diego chip maker HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Qualcomm have come in for massive antitrust fines in China. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Dell, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Intel and others recently struck technology-sharing and joint investment deals in China that some outside observers say could weaken them long term. "They do it with a gun to their head. They say either you're going to make these investments or you're not going to get access to the market," said Robert D. Atkinson, president of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Information Technology & Innovation Foundation. The blockages represent the most in-your-face form of market denial for U.S. players, yet companies see few effective options. China, for its part, says it welcomes foreign tech companies — so long as they're on board with China's censorship regulations. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Google, Snapchat, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Dropbox and other blocked California firms declined to discuss costs to their business. One executive, who asked not to be named to avoid antagonizing Chinese authorities, said, "I'm not sure we've added it up fully, because it would probably be too cruel." Industry lobbyists and analysts say the time may be ripe for a fuller accounting of the costs as a precursor to action. China now is "too big for us to ignore it when they break the rules," said James Lewis, director of the Strategic Technologies Program at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Center for Strategic and International Studies. Putting a hard number on lost business is subjective and difficult. But consider some figures: By revenue, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Google had a 36% share of search advertising in China when it shut down mainland search in early 2010, after repeated disputes over censorship, blockages and hacker intrusions. At the time, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Google pulled in roughly $300 million a year in China — barely more than 1% of its total global revenue. Since then, total search ad spending in China has ballooned 545%. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Google keeps about 500 people in China, most to sell ads to Chinese companies that promote themselves abroad. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Google has hung on to about 10% of the ad market, iResearch estimates, about $1 billion in 2014. If HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Google had maintained the same share in China it held in early 2010, it would have taken in $3.5 billion on the mainland last year — nearly 5% of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Google's total revenue. "We certainly see how important China is to Apple," said Clayton Dube, head of the U.S.-China Institute at USC. Although there's no guarantee that all American tech companies would succeed in China if free to operate, "it's not unreasonable to assume they would have done well." HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Google doesn't make money in China from its mobile-phone app store, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Google Play, nor its ad-supported video-streaming site HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" YouTube, because they're blocked. And other services face knock-on effects: Foreign exchange students whose home campuses in the U.S. normally share files via HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Google Docs can't download assignments. Employees of foreign companies on HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Google's Gmail encounter maddening blockages. Going forward, such issues may make HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Google services less attractive for individual consumers as well as multinational corporations, nonprofits and even educational institutions that need to work with people in China.
The problems fester as California Internet companies look overseas for growth. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Facebook, for example, has substantial room to grow in Asia — less than 16% of its global revenue comes from the fast-growing region. Its rival in China, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WeChat, a messaging app and social media platform created by Tencent in 2011, has 600 million customers. If HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Facebook could sign up 100 million of those customers and monetize them at the same rate as it does its other Asian users, it could add half a billion dollars to its revenue annually. If it could monetize those 100 million at the same rate it does European users, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Facebook's yearly revenue would increase 10%, or $1.3 billion.
For HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Facebook, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Twitter and others, obstacles in China will at some point pose a major challenge to continued growth, said O'Connell, the trade expert. "Once they've saturated the rest of the world, suddenly there's a market of 1.3 billion … and they're cut off from that." "It is likely to surface as a major financial and diplomatic issue between U.S. and China," he added. Some are urging action now. On Thursday the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Information Technology & Innovation Foundation held a meeting with Rep. J. Randy Forbes (R-Va.) in which panelists called for "constructive confrontation" with China, saying it was failing to live up to commitments it made when it joined the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization in 2001. "If you compare the U.S. tech company attitudes now to four years ago, it's radically different. Four years ago they still drank the Kool-Aid that this was all going to work out," Atkinson, the foundation's president, said in an interview. "Now they don't buy that anymore." Rather than mount a time-consuming HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO case, Atkinson's group recommends that the U.S. prioritize fighting China's "innovation mercantilism" above such issues as climate change, human rights or North Korean belligerence and that the White House create a National Industrial Intelligence Council to develop responses to other nations' economic policies.
Those might include curtailing scientific cooperation with China, denying firms that steal intellectual property access to the U.S. banking system, and requiring Chinese entities that license technology in the U.S. to meet the same terms that American entities face in China. Matt Schruers, vice president for law and policy at the Computer & Communications Industry Assn., has warned lawmakers that because the U.S. has largely acquiesced to digital trade barriers in China, "other governments have been emboldened to follow this lead." The risk is that Beijing could react to U.S. pressure with even more rigid controls over technology and information security, said Samm Sacks, China analyst at the Eurasia Group. American officials should refrain from "provoking Beijing to dig in deeper and leave U.S. companies with limited options for operating in China's market," she cautioned.
The U.S. should align with other countries like Japan and Germany to increase bargaining power, Sacks said. The blockages have led to difficult internal discussions in Silicon Valley about core values. Some companies, like LinkedIn, have set up Chinese services that censor politically sensitive speech. Tech companies could benefit from more unity, some say. "When the tech companies band together and get HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" U.S. government support — and hopefully some foreign support too — the Chinese will be flexible if there's enough pressure," said Lewis of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Center for Strategic and International Studies. One option, said Hosuk Lee-Makiyama, a former trade negotiator for Sweden and coauthor of a 2009 paper suggesting that U.S. Internet companies had a good argument for a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO trade case against China's Internet blocking: Use the carrot of a trade deal like the Trans-Pacific Partnership to lure China to change its ways. "We have to arrange a grand bargain. We've done it before — on HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO. China is saying now they want into TPP," which is likely, he said, to contain hard language on open and proprietary information and data localization.
"Compare China before and after HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO entry, and after, there's a huge difference in terms of economic openness," Lee-Makiyama said. "You can't even compare it. You've got to do a few deals like that. That's how you get your economic objectives implemented." 
 
Removing restrictions, addressing concerns 
James Zimmerman, China Daily-Hong Kong Edition, 23 September 2015 -- Service sector can be well served by a high-quality bilateral investment treaty
As Chinese President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xi Jinping visits the US, the members of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" American Chamber of Commerce in China will be hoping that the bilateral investment treaty will be high on the agenda.
This is because a high-quality treaty would unlock the potential of services - in the financial sector, healthcare, education, logistics - and bring immense benefits to Chinese people and the companies they work for.
We need look no further than manufacturing to see the potential. For many years during the past 10 years, foreign-invested companies produced more than half of China's exports, bringing much-needed capital, designs and know-how to a sector that catapulted the country to middle-income status. But now extra added-value is increasingly difficult to obtain. Since the start of the decade, manufacturing output growth has halved to below 7 percent and more than one in five AmCham China members involved in the resources and industrial sectors have moved or are planning to move capacity outside of China due to rising costs. Some actions have been taken to boost the service sector. At its third Plenary Session in 2013, the 18th Central Committee of the Communist Party of China discussed some major issues concerning comprehensively deepening reform, and decided that market should play a bigger role in the economy and set the stage for reform. Since then free-trade zones have been introduced and the State Council published opinions promoting an increase in the quantity and quality of foreign investment in the service sector. New regulations on bank-card clearing seem set to end the domestic monopoly in this area, and Beijing is working on a pilot program to develop several important service industries. On the face of it, the service sector seems to be doing well. In the first half of 2015, China's service sector grew 8.4 percent, outpacing overall economic growth.  However, it still accounts for just 49.5 percent of GDP, whereas, in the United States, for example, it accounts for 80 percent. Services jobs - including those in the financial, insurance, education, engineering, legal, media and entertainment, telecommunications, retail, real estate, travel, healthcare, information and computer technology sectors - also account for more than 80 percent of US private-sector employment. Indeed, governments around the world recognize the importance of integrating and supporting services in other sectors of the economy - especially for economies in transition or seeking to move up the value chain, as growth of the service sector helps drive an innovation-based economy given that many key service jobs have significant knowledge content. In addition to being an important component of the US domestic economy, the export of US services is helping develop the sector around the world through the exchange of information and ideas, the application of technological advances in the workplace, and through training and development of skill sets. Hence, one of the best ways that China can drive its own domestic service sector is to attract and encourage foreign services providers to invest in the market.
Investment challenges
US services companies have struggled with the challenges that impact their ability and willingness to invest in the market. The Service Trade Restrictiveness Index, from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, rates China as more restrictive than the global average in every single service sector. The most restrictive are courier services, broadcasting and air transport.
In a survey we conducted last year, 72 percent of our service member companies expressed optimism about growth in the domestic market, but only 25 percent were optimistic about the regulatory environment.
Restrictions on US service companies could potentially put China and Chinese companies at a significant disadvantage in the global marketplace by isolating China technologically from the rest of the world, and the end result of that may be to limit the country's access to cutting-edge technology, innovation and ideas. Yet with its 13th Five-Year Plan (2016-2020) and the evolution of the free-trade zones, China has a chance to provide a much-needed boost to the service sector and accelerate its contribution to economic development. We also hope that a bilateral investment treaty between the US and China can be agreed quickly. As most of the sectors closed to foreign investment are in services, it is here that the treaty can make the most difference. From AmCham China's point of view, services have no place on the negative list of exceptions to the opening up that the treaty represents. With a short negative list, this treaty promises to be the most significant development in China's economy since it joined the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization. But to achieve this, the treaty needs to go much further.
As well as removing restrictions on investment, it needs to address the concerns of many of our members. These include transparency and due process in the way regulations are enforced, data localization, government support for State-owned enterprises and licensing regimes that cater to domestic companies. We also note what appear to be overly broad definitions of national security in the recently passed National Security Law.
So during Xi's US visit, we hope that both sides will see the benefit of cooperation in getting a high-quality bilateral investment treaty signed as soon as possible. As the example of the manufacturing sector shows, an open, dynamic and innovative service sector has the potential to transform China's economy. What we're seeking is ambitious, but no less than what China needs to overcome its current problems. The author is the Chairman of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" American Chamber of Commerce China and has lived and worked in Beijing for 17 years. 
 
Trans Pacific deal good for health 
Business Times, 23 September 2015 -- MINISTERS are meeting in Atlanta, United States, at the end of this month to put the finishing touches to the Trans Pacific Partnership (TPP), a key new free trade deal that will open markets and level the playing field for businesses, farmers and workers in Malaysia, the US, Japan and other large and growing markets that are home to 800 million consumers and constitute 40 per cent of the global economy.
Yet, despite the economic potential of the TPP, some commentators fear that the intellectual property (IP) components of the deal will harm human health in middle income signatories such as Malaysia, Vietnam and Peru by raising the cost of medicines. This is certainly an alarming vision. But to what extent are such fears justified? The first point to recognise is that the vast majority of drugs prescribed in middle-income countries are off-patent, including those for conditions such as heart disease, diabetes and chronic lung problems. Therefore, these drugs are outside of the scope of the TPP or indeed all trade agreements. Second, the US - the negotiating country with the most clout - has stated that the TPP will respect the flexibilities agreed in HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation talks in 2003 that allow countries to ignore international IP rules in a range of circumstances, including health emergencies. In previous bilateral Free Trade Agreements (FTAs), the US signed binding "side letters" to this effect. This means that generic drugs underpinning successful government AIDS programmes in TPP countries like Vietnam, Malaysia and Peru will be largely unaffected. Third, provisions within the TPP that have attracted much of the criticisms relate to the protection of clinical trial data of new and highly specialised biologic drugs. This is irrelevant to the vast majority of drugs in the market either now or in the immediate future. Extending the period of protection of clinical trial data is likely to make little difference to public health budgets. Canada and Japan did this in the mid-2000s and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development data shows the proportion of health spending taken up by medicines did not increase. But beyond these narrow IP concerns that affect only a small proportion of medicines, what are the wider implications for the TPP and health? It may well be that the stronger IP rights required by TPP will actually make it possible for patients to gain access to new medicines more rapidly. A major study completed last year showed that longer and more extensive patent protection within a country accelerated the speed with which companies launch innovative medicines there. Why might this be so? The process of launching a new medicine in a country other than the country of origin is expensive, requiring investment in additional clinical trials to meet local requirements, obtaining regulatory approval, setting up local distribution and marketing networks, and educating healthcare providers. These fixed costs must be incurred in every country in which a drug is launched. Without sufficient protection of IP, the investments will not be made because competitors would be able to instantly freeride on the innovation. The IP provisions contained within FTAs such as the TPP give companies the assurance that these investments in local infrastructure and marketing will be protected for a period sufficient for them to make a return on their investment. For patients, IP can, therefore, make the difference between having access to an innovative therapy at home, or being forced to fly overseas for treatment. This is not an option for most people in developing countries like Malaysia or Vietnam and patients may end up not getting the treatment at all. A successful TPP could also have a positive impact on health outcomes, overall. Several academic studies - such as the Economic Freedom of the World Annual Report produced by a global network of more than 80 think tanks - show that as nations open their borders to world trade, life expectancy rises and infant mortality rates decrease, with the relationship particularly pronounced for lower-income countries. The TPP could yield annual global income gains of USD295 billion (RM1.3 trillion). These income gains will have considerable benefits for individuals' health as well as providing additional revenue for public health systems. Increased levels of trade will also provide new pathways for the diffusion of health-related goods and knowledge. This is the real story behind the TPP and health. It is positive for health and it will help this region's nations grow even further, healthily. The writer is fellow at the Southeast Asia Network for Development and director of the Geneva Network. 
 
Swiss NGO report ‘very misleading,’ Cotton Council CEO says 
By Forrest Laws,  Delta Farm Press, 22 September 2015 -- The cotton industry has had to move on from the days when the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" U.S. government provided subsidies that helped make sure producers could continue to produce no matter how low cotton prices dropped. Unfortunately, some of the rest of the world has not, as evidenced by the release of a paper by The International Centre for Trade and Sustainable Development entitled, “The 2014 Farm Bill and its Effects on the World Market.” The ICTSD paper prompted the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" National Cotton Council, the organization representing all seven segments of the cotton industry, to release a statement citing numerous invalid assumptions that it said “severely limit the credibility” of the Geneva, Switzerland-based, non-profit, non-governmental organization. While the ICTSD described its paper – which includes a significant focus on crop insurance, including the Stacked Income Protection Plan – as an “impartial, evidence-based assessment,” NCC President Gary Adams said the paper is very misleading and “does not capture the realities of today’s cotton market or global cotton policies. Cotton growers in the United States respond to market signals, not government programs, when making planting decisions.”
Dr. Adams said that the ICTSD report: 1) fails to accurately model current cotton policies; 2) imposes crop insurance purchase decisions on the model that are not in line with historical experience; and 3) inflates impacts by overestimating expected benefits from insurance. The ICTSD report is in contrast to a 2014 HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Congressional Research Service report that said “total indemnity payments under both STAX and any other cotton-specific crop insurance are prohibited from exceeding the value of the insured crop, thus further minimizing any potential production incentive.” Another evaluation of the 2014 farm law’s cotton provisions conducted by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" United Nations Conference on Trade and Development concluded that “… the incentives to produce cotton in the United States will be weaker than they were during previous decades.” The report also found that “… expenditures under STAX are estimated at about one eighth of the cotton subsidies paid under the 2002 Farm Bill and about one third of the subsidies paid under the 2008 Farm Bill.” Adams said the ICTSD paper also misrepresented the marketing loan program by failing to incorporate the modifications of the upland cotton marketing loan included in the 2014 farm law. “Under low price scenarios, the report does not allow the marketing loan rate to adjust lower as dictated in current legislation,” Adams said.
Adams said the ICTSD report exaggerates crop insurance usage and inflates crop insurance benefits. “For example, for the 2015 crop year, approximately 25 percent of cotton acreage is covered with a STAX policy – far below the author’s 100 percent assumption. The authors also calculate expected net indemnities of $734 million for STAX (with a $0.70 per pound futures price) – which is 2.4 times larger than the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Congressional Budget Office’s estimate of $300 million. The ICTSD report also attempts to dismiss the findings of a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization panel that rejected Brazil’s attempt to assign production and price effects to the presence of crop insurance products. They overstate the changes in crop insurance products, Adams said, when in reality premium subsidy rates for individual coverage policies did not change between the 2008 and 2014 farm bills. 
 
China's economic slowdown: Media reactions highly exaggerated, says IMF
The Financial Express, Sayed Kamaluddin, 23 Sep, 2015 —Chinese Prime Minister Li Keqiang told the World Economic Forum in Dalian, China on September 15, 2015 that China would "not see a hard landing". 
China's devaluation, followed by knock-out in the stock market in the midst of its economic slowdown, became a global hot topic for free-for-all talk shows and news analyses that have apparently confounded the confusion. The contradictory conclusions drawn by different analysts and experts in the East and West from the same ongoing episode, however, have shown that what has been happening in China for quite sometimes now cannot be ignored as its economy has grown really big and being the so-called 'world factory' has, willy-nilly, integrated itself with the global economic systems.There is no question of undermining what has been lately happening in China. China's currency devaluation and stock market 'meltdown' had wide ramifications in all corners of the world bringing down share markets in major economies, promptly creating an environment of 'global gloom" pushing the panic button. Perhaps, it was inevitable. On August 21, Dow Jones industrial average suffered its worst loss in five years and the index dropped 5.8 per cent in the week. Analysts quoted asset managers and market operators as saying: "Right now there is a feeling of fear in the marketplace and all news is interpreted negatively and it's interpreted indiscriminately." On August 23, the Wall Street Journal complained of China's "wobbly crisis management."
There is a thin line between discretion and indiscretion and analysts sometimes tend to forget the maxim: 'Discretion is the better part of valour.' Some analysts in the face of panic allowed themselves to be swayed while interpreting the situation. BBC's Economics Editor Robert Peston opined: "Investors are in effect shouting that the era of so-called Chinese exceptionalism - that China can grow faster for longer than any other economy in history - is over, having become a dependent on recent years on debt-fuelled investment." On the other hand, Russian TV reported on August 25 the "biggest collapse in 20 years" of the Shanghai Stock Exchange Composite Exchange and quoted Bloomberg News analysts and Chinese officials: "It's panic selling and an issue of confidence" and then commented "The government won't step in to rescue the market again, as it's a global selloff and it's spreading everywhere now. It's not going to work now." Likewise, BBC's China Editor Carrie Gracie on August 27 smugly ridiculed the Chinese government's intention of allowing market corrections to set "new normal". She sceptically suggested: "China's top political leaders have made no mention of the crisis, flagship mainstream media avoided touching on it and the government censors constrained discussion on social media within firm boundaries… The government has loudly committed itself to a 'new normal' which necessitates a range of painful but unavoidable market reforms." She commented in her punch line: "But no large authoritarian country has ever managed the move to high income status. So if China did achieve such a feat, it would be setting a precedent and making history." However, in between the same period, International Monetary Fund's Managing Director and other IMF analysts separately offered to say that it was indeed a trying time (for China) but the media reactions were "highly exaggerated" and called for patience. IMF emphasised on reform measures for facing the situation. Meanwhile, on September 10, Chinese Prime Minister Li Keqiang while addressing the Summer Davos Forum in Dalian, China elaborated the country's economic situation and attempted to remove Western misgivings about the health and direction of China's economy. He said, "the ups and downs" in the economy may have firmed the shape of a curving wave, but asserted that the underlying trend remained to be positive. Despite slowdown in global growth, the seven per cent growth Chin achieved in the first half of the year was not at all easy. China's economic structure is rapidly improving and new economic growth areas are rapidly taking shape. China's economic development has benefited the world and its actual imports of commodities grew steadily. Outward investment has increased and over 100 million Chinese travelled last year and the number of visitors rose by 10 per cent in the first six months of the year. This has demonstrated the strong purchasing power of the Chinese people abroad. In this context, Li said that China contributed about 30 per cent to global growth and that world's second largest economy will not take a "hard landing." A more encouraging sign, Li pointed out, is that the Chinese economy is changing gears. Its vast manufacturing sector is upgrading and the economy is changing from relying heavily on investment to coordinated growth from both investment and consumption. Now the country's economy is more oriented toward consumption, which accounts for half of China's economic output and 60 per cent of growth. While economic growth moderated to 7.0 per cent in the first half, retail growth in China has risen more than 10 per cent so far this year. Household disposable income has also outstripped economic growth. In addition, employment growth exceeded 7.18 million during the first half of this year, or 72 per cent of the 10 million target set for the whole year. Besides, the central government's fiscal deficit, set at 1.12 trillion yuan ($175.5 billion) for this year, is low compared with other major world economies and there is great potential for the country's financial markets. Li told his Dalian audience: "China still has a lot of tools to use in its innovative macro-economic adjustment policies and will continue to roll out targeted measures to counter downward pressures. I have repeatedly said that as long as there is adequate employment, a steady rise in incomes and an improving environment, slower or faster growth is acceptable." British Finance Minister George Osborne, who was visiting China, expressed his confidence in China's economy and said on September 20 in Beijing that the country (China) was going through a necessary transformation and was "still a driver of global growth." News agency Reuters quoted him as saying at the beginning of his five-day China trip: "China is going through a very necessary and challenging transformation which is essential so that China's economy can go on creating good careers and good jobs and higher living standards for (its) 1.3 billion people. I think the message I would say to China is, carry on with the reform, carry on with the change you are making." While talking to Chinese technology executives in Beijing, Osborne said: "Of course there have been ups and downs. We've seen that through the summer. In our estimation the spillover effects, the impact of that on other financial markets has been relatively limited."The Chinese PM's comments seemed to have created some impact in outside world as well. For example, Arancha Gonzalez, the Executive Director of the International Trade Centre, a joint agency of the World Trade Organisation and the United Nations, spoke highly of Li's speech. She said: "He (Li) acknowledged challenges and gave solutions. We can feel his confidence."Likewise, Megan Walters, international director and head of research at Asia Pacific Capital Markets, said the (Chinese) government has sufficient tools in place to ensure a gentle transition from investment to consumption inside the economy. "So there is and will continue to be a rebalancing of the economy, and it will not be a hard landing," Walters added. Chinese experts have also pointed out that China's economy is not a source of risk but a source of confidence, growth and opportunity, and an indispensable partner for global prosperity. Yang Tao, assistant director of the Institute of Finance and Banking under the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, said the biggest risk in the global economy stems from the imbalance in development of different countries. Expectations over a rise in interest rates in the United States will reverse global capital flow, helping developed countries that are already in sound recovery but exacerbating conditions in emerging economies struggling to keep afloat, Yang said. On China's economic restructuring, he said that after temporary pains, it will not only improve the quality of the country's growth, but ease global imbalance, facilitate recovery and boost confidence.Li Daokui, a well-known economist at Tsinghua University, commenting on Li's speech said that it highlighted the government's determination to keep the RMB stable, noting the recent adjustment will not lead to the export advantages predicted by some analysts. He said China has no need to rely on a cheaper RMB to boost growth as it has plenty of policy tools, such as financial innovation, untapped fiscal resources and other expanding measures.Chen Fengying, director of the Institute of World Economic Studies at the China Institutes of Contemporary International Relations, said industrial cooperation satisfies the demands of countries in different stages of industrialisation. "Cooperation is in line with current globalisation trends and will be a major boon to world economic growth in the future," Chen said.
 
UK food recycling cafes go global in fight against waste 
Ruth Holmes, Agence France Presse, 23 September 2015 05:20 -- When former chef Adam Smith opened a small cafe in Britain's industrial North two years ago, serving up dishes with food destined for the scrap heap, he had big aspirations -- to fight global food waste. "From day one I set out to feed the world and I intend to do that," the Yorkshireman said ambitiously, as he charted the growth of his ethical empire -- the Real Junk Food Project (RJFP). From its humble roots in a community centre in the deprived Armley district of Leeds, northern England, the project now has around 120 affiliated cafes worldwide, including Australia, France, South Korea, the US and, most recently, Nigeria. "People are beginning to realise we are a serious organisation," said Smith, having just returned from an awareness-raising event feeding MPs at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Britain's parliament with food saved from garbage bins. The simple concept involves collecting food that would otherwise have been thrown away -- usually because it is "out-of-date" and unsellable under trading rules -- and turning it into perfectly edible meals. Since the project began in December 2013, almost 200 tonnes of food has been "intercepted", Smith said. Roughly one third of the food produced in the world for human consumption every year -- approximately 1.3 billion tonnes -- gets lost or wasted, according to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN. By offering meals on a "pay-as-you-feel" basis RJFP cafes sidestep food regulations since it is against the law in Britain to actually "sell" food past its use-by date. Smith's formulation is tantamount to a voluntary donation, with the amount up to the customer, which keeps all on the legal side of matters, he said. The team, meanwhile, is discriminating, not all food is accepted. "We make our own judgement, by tasting and smelling, as to whether food is fit for consumption." Smith is clear that his vision was not about feeding poor people, but for many communities it is a way of reaching those on low incomes or none. Helped by around 90 volunteers, retiree Shena Cooper runs "Elsie's" cafe in the town of Northampton, central England, as part of the RJFP network. "We want to create a mixed society within the cafe," she said. "Some people come in for coffee and cake and give a few pounds. But there are people who cannot give anything." Volunteers face the challenge of creating tasty dishes from whatever food is available, but this is "part of the joy for them", said Cooper. At Elsie's "binner" event this month, a guest chef transformed discarded local produce into a three-course feast of gourmet crostini with pear salsa, sausage plait with polenta cake, and a chocolate fig dessert. "You can actually have a conscience about eating cake," joked Heike Mapstone, a call centre worker, after the dinner. "I think it is a great idea. Why should we waste all this food?" Cooper knows her cafe is only "scraping the tip of the iceberg" but hopes collective efforts will "expose the food system for what it is". "There is so much wrong with it," she said. "The fact that we can fly bananas half way around the world and then throw them into landfill is ridiculous." Adam Buckingham feeds some 200 people a week at a church-based RJFP cafe in Brighton, where food donations have included legs of cured serrano ham and huge stockpiles of chocolate. "It shocks people that all this food would have gone in the bin," he said, adding that a change in attitudes and legislation is needed. "Unfortunately we have got to a point where we think it is ok to throw away food and buy more. We're blinded by convenience."
In north London, a pair of entrepreneurs have harnessed what they believe is a growing aversion to this mindset. Tessa Cook and her American business partner Saasha Celestial-One launched a new app -- "Olio" -- to connect consumers with sources of surplus food. The app allows donors to upload pictures of items that may be nearing their sell-by-date and users can browse for food and arrange a pick-up via private messaging. "We did some market research and found that one third of people were 'physically pained' throwing away food. To me that was mind blowing," said Cook. So far the pair have signed up 15 "founding merchants" -- individuals and businesses willing to share produce. Although currently focussed on London, Cook hopes the app will eventually go global. "The more we looked into it the more we were overwhelmed by the sheer enormity of the food being wasted. It seems totally wasteful, irresponsible and immoral," she said. 
 
END


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.