The two hot topics in Brussels last week were the US free trade deal (TTIP)
WTO ruling may not affect India’ poultry industry
WTO: India cutting back on anti-dumping action
India, others reject recalibration approach
Kenya: WTO negotiations should benefit all, urges Kenya
U.S. CONDITIONS CUTS OF ITS SUBSIDY PROGRAMS TO AGRICULTURAL TARIFF CUTS
FROMAN SKIPS WTO MINISTERIAL ON SIDELINES OF OECD, PUNKE ATTENDS
CONFIDENTIAL LAC REPORT SAYS TPP FALLS SHORT ON AUTOMOTIVE, SOE RULES
WTO Negotiations Should Benefit All Countries, Says CS Amina
(AE) TRADE: Malmströ sets out her requirements for environmental goods
Economy Ministry Expects To Complete All Formalities For Ukraine's Accession To WTO Public Procurement Agreement By December
Indications gégraphiques : " un pas important dans la bonne direction ", selon l'INAO; Déeloppement éonomique







The two hot topics in Brussels last week were the US free trade deal (TTIP)
6 juin 2015
The Press and Journal
 
The two hot topics in Brussels last week were the US free trade deal (TTIP) and re-nationalisation of GM feed and food.
 
In the US TTIP had already received a substantial boost as the Senate voted to give President Obama fast-track powers allowing him to sign off a trade deal with the EU quickly.
 
In the European Parliament TTIP received a similar boost as the trade committee voted by a large majority to back the deal.
 
From an agriculture perspective the final text voted through demanded guarantees that high-quality products such as Scotch Beef were protected.
 
They also wanted to ensure that there was no watering down of EU standards and that there should be mutual recognition of food and plant health laws.
 
In addition they asked for a list of sensitive agricultural products to be drawn up that would either be exempt from trade liberalisation or be given a long lead-in time to allow the industry to adjust.
 
The text will now be voted on next week in Strasbourg by the full plenary and provided the political majority in the committee does not fall apart, the EU negotiators should get the green light to go full steam ahead.
 
Commission plans for handing powers back to countries to ban GM imports of feed and food have certainly set the cat amongst the pigeons.
 
The green NGOs, member states, industry and MEPs are all running around like headless chickens wondering how to respond to the proposal.
 
In parliament last week the initial gut reaction from many MEPs was to throw it out, claiming it would wreck the single market, be incompatible with World Trade Organisation (WTO) obligations and unworkable.
 
The anti-GM countries and the anti-GM MEPs who have been demanding greater democratic control over GM decisions, however, are now caught between a rock and a hard place by the commission proposal.
 
If they reject the powers being offered to member states to block GM imports the commission has made it crystal clear that it will now authorise new GM crops at EU level which up until now it has been reluctant to do.
 
Any objections from countries opposed to GM and the commission will say we offered you the democratic power to block it and you said No.
 
Indeed, on the back of announcing the new proposal the commission has already authorised 19 new GM crops that had been stuck in the system for 10 years.
 
That is great news of course for Scottish and UK livestock farmers as it was becoming almost impossible to bring in boat loads of soya to the EU without the risk of finding contamination from non EU authorised GM crops which led to the whole shipment being turned back at the docks.
 
With that threat now likely to diminish the price premium that hard-pressed Scottish and UK livestock farmers are having to pay for soya should start to reduce.
 
Meanwhile, MEPs have decided to summon Health Commissioner Vytenis Andruikaitis to appear before them to explain how the proposal will work while they ponder what to do next.
 
George Lyon is a former Liberal Democrat MEP and an ex-member of the EU agriculture committee and a former vice-president of the budget committee. He currently works as a senior consultant for Hume Brophy and sits on the board of levy body organisation AHDB.
 
WTO ruling may not affect India’ poultry industry
 
Shruti Srivastava   
6 juin 2015
Financial Express
 
Almost 96% of consumption in India is of live birds and just 4% of frozen meat. (Reuters)
 
Even though the US has won the poultry ban case against India, potentially getting access to a sizable portion in the market of 1.2 billion people, the industry does not seem to be too worried about its immediate impact.
 
On Thursday, the World Trade Organization (WTO) ruled that the Indian ban on import of poultry meat, eggs and live pigs from the US was "inconsistent" with the international norms, giving New Delhi 12-18 months to implement the ruling. Thishas opened the doors of the Indian market for US poultry.
 
However, "there is no immediate threat to the industry," GB Sundararajan, managing director, Suguna Foods Ltd, told The Indian Express. The consumer market in India is largely driven by "whole chicken and I don't see any immediate impact on the industry. It is only may be two years later that we may see an impact," he said, adding that currently in India almost 96 per cent of retail consumption is of live birds and hardly 4-5 per cent of frozen chicken meat.
 
India had placed a ban on US poultry in 2007 raising concerns of avian influenza. Following the ban, in 2012 the US trade representative dragged the country to the WTO, which in October last year ruled that the ban was discriminatory and lacked scientific evidence. It held the US had seen no outbreak of high pathogenic avian flu since 2004, while India, despite not allowing US imports, had recorded over 90 such outbreaks. On January 26, India appealed the ruling. However, the WTO appellate body said that India's avian influenza measures are inconsistent because they are not based on a risk assessment.
 
India is a big market for the US, which is one of the world's largest exporters of chicken meat. The ruling comes at a time when the US's poultry exports have declined sharply to $1.76 billion in 2014 from $2.013 billion in 2013 due to trade ban with Russia effective August 2014. While, simultaneously India's broiler meat consumption has been consistently increasing and is estimated to have touched 3.72 million tonnes in 2014, from 3.45 million tonnes in 2013. Trade experts said that a huge surge in import of chicken legs is expected and tariff may not be the effective tool to curb it. However, its only chicken legs which is likely to be imported from the US. While in the US, consumer preference is for chicken breasts, there is practically no domestic market for legs. The bulk of it is frozen for exporting to other countries.
 
The US Department of Agriculture sees India's poultry meat consumption growing to 6.4 mt by 2023. India's chicken industry is around Rs 80,000 crore. According to a joint statement by the US Poultry and Egg Export Council and National Chicken Council, once the restrictions are lifted, export to India from US is estimated to be $300 million a year.
 
WTO: India cutting back on anti-dumping action
6 juin 2015
Business Line (The Hindu)
 
India appears to be facing fewer dumping threats. The World Trade Organisation in a review said India initiated about 80 anti-dumping investigations against 23 trading partners in the past four years, but did not impose any anti-dumping measures on any of them.
 
In contrast, India imposed 207 anti-dumping measures during the previous four-year review period between 2007 and 2011. In the 2007-2011 period, India also initiated a higher number of 209 anti-dumping investigations against 34 trading partners.
 
In its sixth and the latest review of India’ policy actions on the international trade front, WTO said India remained one of the most active users of anti-dumping measures among its members.
 
However, the WTO data suggested a gradual fall in India’ anti-dumping actions.
 
The sixth review of India’ trade policies and practices is currently under way (from June 2 to 4). The basis for the review is a report by the WTO Secretariat and a report by the Government of India. During 2011-2015, India made significant changes in its anti-dumping legislation including new rules defining situations that are considered to represent the circumvention of anti-dumping duties, and providing for anti-circumvention investigations.
 
Countervailing probe
 
India initiated one countervailing investigation during the period between 2011 and 2015. Since its last review, India has also initiated 18 safeguard investigations, the WTO noted in its latest review report.
 
Average MFN rate up
 
India’ simple average tariff rate for most favoured nations (MFN status allowed to all WTO members) rose to 13 per cent in 2014-15, up from 12 per cent in 2010-11. “his reflects a rise in tariffs in agriculture, particularly for cereals and preparations, oilseeds and fats, and sugars and confectionary” WTO noted.
 
WTO said India remained one of the most active users of anti-dumping measures among its members.
 
India, others reject recalibration approach
D. Ravi Kanth   
6 juin 2015
Mint
 
Paris, June 6 -- An informal meeting of trade officials in Paris on Thursday failed to agree on the broad contours of the post-Bali work programme to conclude the World Trade Organization's (WTO) Doha Development Agenda (DDA) negotiations by the end of the year.
 
India, along with China, Brazil, and South Africa, rejected calls from developed nations to adopt a so-called "recalibration approach" to conclude the Doha Round, said an official who took part in the meeting but did not want to be identified. Such an approach will help the US, the European Union, Japan, Canada, Norway and Switzerland, among others, to discuss only those issues with which they are comfortable in the Doha agenda and bury all difficult issues.
 
Australia, which hosted the meeting, asked the participants what outcomes ought to be included in the post-Bali work programme; what outcomes must be achieved by the 10th ministerial conference later this year; and what needs to be done between now and the Nairobi ministerial meeting in December.
 
Trade ministers and officials from 29 countries took part in the meeting held on the margins of the annual Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) meeting.
 
India's commerce minister Nirmala Sitharaman set the tone for the meeting, delivering the country's strongest statement yet on what needs to be done to conclude the Doha negotiations.
 
Sitharaman said India will not allow attempts to divert attention from the development dimension of the Doha Round. She emphasized that special and differential flexibilities must guide the post-Bali work programme. "To conclude the Doha Round on the basis of market access is unacceptable (to India)," the minister told her counterparts, according to an official aware of the meeting's proceedings.
 
Ambition in agriculture, she said, hinges on the reform of the trade-distorting domestic subsidies for which the so-called landing zones are spelt out in the 2008 revised draft modalities. Without taking names, she criticized major industrialized countries for diverting attention from their trade-distorting domestic subsidy reduction commitments by pointing a finger at farm subsidies provided by developing countries for their resource-poor farmers.
 
The Doha Development Agenda negotiations were launched in 2001 to address global inequities in the international trading system and enable the poorest and developing countries to integrate into the global trading system.
 
But the negotiations remained paralysed because of intransigent positions adopted by some major industrialized countries to reduce their trade-distorting domestic farm subsidies running into billions of dollars in the last several decades.
 
The US has repeatedly maintained that it will undertake commitments to reduce its most trade-distorting domestic subsidies only when the emerging countries such as China and India accept commensurate obligations to reduce their subsidies.
 
For India, issues such as the special safeguard mechanism for curbing unforeseen surges in imports of agricultural products, the special products with zero tariff, the permanent solution for public stockholding programmes for food security, and a special package of concessions for the poorest countries are must-haves in the post-Bali work programme, the commerce minister said.
 
India wants a comprehensive post-Bali work programme that would address all the outstanding issues in all areas of the Doha package without fail, Sitharaman emphasized.
 
China, Indonesia, Brazil, South Africa and Argentina, among others, have joined India by demanding a comprehensive post-Bali work programme that would deliver the results promised in all the existing Doha mandates.
 
The mandates include the Doha Ministerial Declaration of 2001, the 2004 July Framework Agreement, the 2005 Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration, and the unsettled 2008 revised draft modalities that suggested the landing zones for reducing trade-distorting subsidies and tariff cuts for agriculture and industrial products.
 
South Africa's trade minister Rob Davies said efforts to bring about a recalibration have led to uneven outcomes in which the level of ambition in agriculture is drastically reduced while it is increased in the market access for industrial goods. Davies argued that African countries need policy space for carrying out their industrial policies.
 
Brazil criticized the slow progress made in agriculture. While work in the industrial goods and services are proceeding at a brisk pace, laggards such as agriculture are further left behind, Brazil charged.
 
According to a trade minister present at the meeting, the US, however, issued an inflexible message saying there are only two options: Either pursue a recalibration approach for lowering the overall level of ambition in the Doha negotiations or face a failure of the Doha Development Agenda negotiations at the 10th ministerial meeting in Nairobi in Kenya beginning on 12 December.
 
The US deputy trade representative Ambassador Michael Punke who took part in the meeting suggested that "red lines" of India, China, and the US don't overlap, meaning the three countries will find it difficult to reduce their farm subsidies, said a participant who asked not to be quoted.
 
The US official also admitted that there is little evidence of convergence on any issue at this juncture, the participant argued.
 
EU trade commissioner Cecilia Malmstrom defended the US stance to lower the level of ambition based on the recalibration approach.
 
"There is no realistic assessment on issues among ministers at this juncture," an EU official told Mint.
 
In his concluding remarks at the end of the meeting, World Trade Organization director general Roberto Azevedo expressed concern about countries sticking to their old positions. Azevedo said he has not heard anything new from the participants.
 
As of today, there is no deal, the WTO chief told the participants.
 
Kenya's foreign minister Amina Mohammed agreed with the director general that there is no common ground among participants at this juncture.
 
 
Kenya: WTO negotiations should benefit all, urges Kenya
5 juin 2015
PANAPRESS - Pan African News Agency
 
Nairobi, Kenya (PANA) - Kenya has urged negotiators in the ongoing World Trade Organisation (WTO) negotiations in Paris, France, to be pragmatic and transparent in order to ensure that the outcome of the main Conference in Nairobi contains benefits for all WTO members.
 
Kenya's Cabinet Secretary for Foreign Affairs and International Trade Amina Mohamed said there is the need to establish a process that inspires confidence, with the clear understanding that the outcome of the 10th WTO Ministerial Conference (MC10) in Nairobi must reflect pragmatism and realism and not anyone’ wish list.
 
She made the remarks on Thursday when she co-chaired the informal meeting of WTO Trade Ministers with Australian Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Minister for Trade and Investment, Hon. Stephen Ciobo.
 
The meeting took place on the sidelines of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) Ministerial Council meeting.
 
Mohammed urged African countries to be actively involved in the ongoing negotiations and to support trade multilateralism in order to ensure the success of the first WTO Ministerial Conference to be held in Africa.
 
Africa must accept and share the responsibility of multi-lateralism and own MC10. They must not find themselves on the outside looking in,”ohamed said.
 
She stressed Africa’ fundamental commitment to trade multi-lateralism, saying the Nairobi preparatory process should be used to advance multi-lateralism and strengthen the WTO as the engine of the rules-based multilateral trading system.
 
For Africa, for us, it is multi-lateralism first and last. We want to see the WTO more relevant, stronger and the first point of reference in writing non-discriminatory multilateral trade rules,”he Cabinet Secretary said.
 
She said a successful outcome in the Conference, to be held in Nairobi in December, should include a post-Bali/Nairobi work programme that is realistic, balanced and which modernizes the WTO negotiating agenda and puts the WTO back in centre field.
 
The work programme should be substantively robust, reflect the fundamentals in the Doha agenda as well as issues that will ensure that the WTO is relevant and adaptable,”aid Mohamed.
 
 
U.S. CONDITIONS CUTS OF ITS SUBSIDY PROGRAMS TO AGRICULTURAL TARIFF CUTS
5 juin 2015
Inside U.S. Trade
 
The United States is demanding ambitious cuts on agricultural tariffs and reciprocal cuts to the domestic subsidy programs of major economies as a condition for reducing its own domestic agriculture subsidies programs in the negotiations to conclude the Doha round at the World Trade Organization.
 
The explicit link to an ambitious market access outcome does not negate the U.S. demand that major economies that have enough agricultural production capacity to distort the global market also reduce their subsidies, according to Geneva sources. This includes China, India and the European Union, they said.
 
If WTO members are only able to agree on lower tariff cuts, the U.S. would not have anything to gain by cutting its domestic support programs, according to one informed source. So far, informal talks among key members to decide on a methodology for cutting tariffs have not made much progress (see related story).
 
Members shifted to agriculture market access because the effort on deciding how to cut agricultural subsidies has been stalled. China and India have not budged on their refusal to make more concessions and the U.S. has insisted it will not unilaterally disarm on agriculture subsidies.
 
However, any agreement on a work program to conclude the Doha round, which WTO members have until July 31 to complete, will still have to include a path forward on domestic support programs, several sources said. This is because many members, including most members of the Cairns group, have said that they will not agree to a deal if there is no agreement on how to cut domestic agriculture programs, according to one informed source.
 
One Geneva source said there are at least two ways China and the U.S. could reach an agreement on domestic support programs, one of which is by agreeing to cuts but delay the date at which they would take effect. The other is agreeing to cuts that would immediately take effect but be small enough that they would not require changes in domestic policy.
 
According to China's most recent WTO domestic support notification, which covers 2009 and 2010, its product and non-product specific aggregate measures of support (AMS) are well below its maximum limit. China's reported non-product specific AMS was 1.55 percent of production in 2010 and its highest product-specific AMS was 2.46 percent of production for wheat. As per its accession agreement to the WTO, China's de minimis level for both product and non-product specific AMS is 8.5 percent the value of production.
 
U.S. commodity groups claim that China incorrectly calculates its AMS and therefore exceeds its de minimis level by up to almost $110 billion. Because of this claim, these groups would be opposed to the idea of a minimal cut to China's domestic support program that would not require it to change its policy, a U.S. agriculture source said.
 
According to a November 2014 update to a study conducted by DTB Associates on behalf of U.S. commodity groups, China calculates its product-specific aggregate support by multiplying the difference between the world market price and applied support price by the quantity the government purchases at the support price.
 
By using quantity purchased by the government instead of the total value of production as a part of its calculation, China is arriving at a substantially lower subsidies number because it is multiplying by a smaller factor. This is because the amount of commodities the government typically buys is a fraction of the total production, according to the DTB report.
 
According to the report, the correct way to calculate the level of subsidies is by multiplying the difference between the world market price and applied support price by the total value of production of a given product. This is methodology that is set out by the Uruguay Round agriculture agreement.
 
The latest U.S. WTO notifications on its domestic support program report that the U.S. has $6.83 billion in total AMS which is a fraction of the $19.1 billion it could spend under WTO rules.
 
FROMAN SKIPS WTO MINISTERIAL ON SIDELINES OF OECD, PUNKE ATTENDS
5 juin 2015
Inside U.S. Trade
 
U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman did not attend the annual Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) ministerial nor the informal World Trade Organization trade ministers meeting on the margins of that June 3-4 session, according to a USTR spokesman.
 
The day before these meetings in Paris, Froman was in Germany for meetings on the U.S.-EU trade talks and participated in a forum with European Union Trade Commissioner Cecilia Malmstrom, according to a media advisory from USTR.
 
Instead of Froman, Deputy USTR Michael Punke, who is also the U.S. ambassador to the WTO, attended the OECD meeting on June 4, the same day of the informal WTO ministerial.
 
The WTO meeting is part of members' efforts to find a way forward in the stalled Doha round by July 31 or at least by the December WTO ministerial meeting. Ministers discussed the ongoing negotiations to conclude the Doha round, but did not offer any new insights on their positions, an official at the meeting said (see related story).
 
"Our gathering in Paris will be an opportunity for a frank discussion on how we can take forward the negotiating agenda in the WTO," a May 7 invitation by Australian Minister for Trade and Investment Andrew Robb to Malmstrom said. "This sort of exchange will be vital if Members are to reach agreement by July on a post-Bali work program to address the outstanding issues in the Doha Round of negotiations and to prepare the ground for a successful [tenth WTO ministerial]."
 
Co-chairing the meeting were Steve Ciobo, Australia's parliamentary secretary for Foreign Affairs, Trade and Investment, and Kenya's Cabinet Secretary for Foreign Affairs and International Trade Amina Mohamed, who will also chair the tenth WTO ministerial. The tenth WTO ministerial is set to take place in Nairobi, Kenya from Dec. 15-18. Robb was unable to attend due to illness.
 
The July 31 deadline is to complete a work program for the conclusion of the Doha round, which WTO members are unlikely to meet, according to Geneva sources. Negotiations in Geneva have stalled over a standoff between the U.S. and China on how much Beijing will be required to cut its domestic agricultural subsidies by the agriculture negotiating modalities. The U.S. has been adamant that China must do more than it would be required to do by 2008 draft modalities for the agriculture negotiations, but China has refused to budge (Inside U.S. Trade, May 8).
 
The OECD ministerial itself will focus on strengthening the multilateral trading system and supporting the post-2015 development agenda as two of its priorities, according to the OECD website. Other priorities include promoting investment, enhancing innovation, fostering education and skills and improving the business climate, the website said. 
 
CONFIDENTIAL LAC REPORT SAYS TPP FALLS SHORT ON AUTOMOTIVE, SOE RULES
5 juin 2015
Inside U.S. Trade
 
A confidential assessment of the Trans Pacific Partnership (TPP) prepared by the Labor Advisory Committee (LAC) in September 2014 and reprinted below charges that the automotive rules of origin as they are emerging in the negotiations are so weak they will result in the migration of U.S. and North American auto sector jobs to Malaysia, Vietnam, and other TPP partners, and provide benefits for third countries not part of the agreement.
 
The 11-page assessment, in which LAC members in their official capacity detail their specific recommendations for TPP that have been rejected by the U.S. government, was part of a 16-page "interim report" on the TPP negotiations that the AFL-CIO had sought clearance from the administration to release to members of Congress.
 
The other five pages consisted of an April 13 analysis signed by AFL-CIO President Richard Trumka explaining in more general terms how the administration has ignored labor's recommendations for TPP and has failed to provide effective briefings on developments in those talks.
 
The Office of the U.S. Trade Representative ultimately gave clearance for the AFL-CIO to publish the April 13 analysis, with a paragraph relating to the auto rule of origin redacted, but not the September 2014 assessment. Unredacted copies of both documents were obtained by Inside U.S. Trade.
 
The September 2014 assessment charges USTR has not heeded LAC recommendations for strong rules of origin in the auto sector, although it does not disclose what the regional value content requirement will likely be.
 
However, the unredacted version of the April 13 analysis states that "based on proposals shared with cleared advisers [the TPP regional value content requirement would be] 55 percent at best and we understand that it will probably be lower as a result of objections by other parties."
 
This analysis notes the TPP will coexist with existing FTAs and that companies will be able to choose which of them will provide them with the most benefits. In the case of cars, the TPP therefore "could result in the immediate reduction in content requirements for vehicles sold in the U.S.", implying firms would mostly likely choose the more lenient TPP rules in contrast to those under the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).
 
According to the analysis, USTR has denied this is the case and that the rule in TPP will be effectively as stringent as the origin requirements under NAFTA, but has not substantiated this claim. "While USTR staff have indicated that their intention is that the new rule would be as strict as the existing NAFTA rule, as there are certain methodological differences to date, after numerous meetings with interested [labor union staff], no data has been provided that would support this contention," the analysis says.
 
This part of the analysis was blacked out at the insistence of USTR, according to Trumka. The only part of the paragraph that was left unredacted in the public version stated that "to date, after numerous meetings with interested [labor union staff], no data has been provided that would support this contention."
 
The September 2014 document notes that individual unions made a proposal that would have started with the current 62.5 percent regional value standard set in NAFTA and increase it over time to 75 percent using a similar formula to NAFTA. This proposal is justified to retain automotive jobs in the United States, the document says.
 
Critics of the TPP, such as Sen. Sherrod Brown (D-OH), have charged that failure to set strong automotive rules of origin in TPP will have a ripple effect on the health of the steel industry and other suppliers to auto companies.
 
Labor advocates have expressed anger over USTR's withholding approval to release the September 2014 document and pressure to censor the AFL-CIO-released analysis part of it, which the administration also insisted could only be released if it was published in LAC members' personal capacity and not as a "LAC product." They have also accused the administration of purposely delaying authorization of the analysis until the vote on Trade Promotion Authority (TPA) in the Senate had passed by throwing up procedural hurdles.
 
A U.S. official sidestepped a request to respond to these specific charges, and instead said only that the September 2014 document was out of date and inaccurate, while stressing the lengths the administration has gone to in order to garner feedback from labor unions.
 
"The document released today is inaccurate, incomplete, and out of date. It does not reflect the text of the agreement or the conversations labor representatives have had with the Administration in the course of hundreds of hours of consultations," said the official. "As with any other stakeholder, labor has achieved many of their priorities in the negotiation, but not all of them. We are proud of the impact labor input has had on our negotiations and their positive contribution to trade policy over the years."
 
The confidential Sept. 3, 2014, assessment by the LAC also expresses alarm on the issue of disciplines for state-owned enterprises (SOEs) -- an area of TPP that the administration has frequently touted as going beyond any previous free trade deal. By contrast, the LAC report rattles off a litany of areas where the proposed SOE text falls short.
 
The document says that among its "greatest concerns" about the SOE chapter are a lack of coverage for mergers and acquisitions, an adverse effects test that it too limited and will leave too many workers without remedy, and a lack of coverage for sovereign wealth funds.
 
It also says there is a "lack of clarity regarding the ability to address SOE activities in our domestic market that may have an anti-competitive impact on production and jobs, and whether the definition of an SOE is broad enough to cover necessary foreign commercial entities while also providing definite assurances for public services in each country and U.S. public institutions."
 
In its rebuttal to the analysis part of the report, USTR emphasized that it had included SOE disciplines at the request of the labor union, though the issue has been a priority for major trade associations such as the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.
 
The document also takes issue with the structure of the TPP, and specifically that it will allow other countries to dock on at a later stage. It says that the LAC has repeatedly urged the administration "to include standards for new entrants regarding labor rights, democratic governance, open markets, and other readiness criteria."
 
But the LAC says it has seen no U.S. proposal to include such a provisions in the TPP. "We therefore remain concerned that future administrations would commence negotiations with inappropriate trading partners and without adequate Congressional consultations and approval."
 
The document also notes that LAC members have been assured that Congress will have an opportunity for an up or down vote for each new entrant to the TPP, but have seen nothing in writing. "We are reluctant to trust such oral assurances and would prefer to see the legislative text that would ensure that, unlike for the WTO, Congress must vote in the affirmative before any new party may join the TPP," the document said.
 
In the congressional debate over TPA, Brown offered an amendment that would require congressional approval prior to any new entrants joining the TPP. It was defeated 47-52 in the Senate.
 
This notion of the living agreement to which other countries can dock has also been flagged by Sen. Jeff Sessions (R-AL), who complained in a public memo that TPP's "living agreement" provisions could allow China to accede to the deal without congressional approval.
 
In 2012, Assistant U.S. Trade Representative Barbara Weisel, the chief negotiator in the TPP talks for the U.S., said that the subsequent entry of another country after conclusion of the deal would likely require an additional vote in Congress. She said this would also be the case if TPP parties themselves reopened the agreement to change its obligations (Inside U.S. Trade, July 6, 2012).
 
According to Trumka, the administration has refused to allow the release of the interim report in full on the grounds that it had not been discussed at a LAC meeting and therefore has not been drafted or submitted in a manner that complies with the Federal Advisory Committee Act. The administration has set June 22 as the date for the next LAC meeting -- past the date when House Republicans have said they may seek a vote on TPA.
 
Trumka rejected USTR's argument by pointing out that the Sept. 3, 2014 document was discussed at a Sept. 4 LAC meeting. He also repeatedly criticized the administration for dealing with the LAC request for the release of the entire interim report to Congress so slowly, noting that it was first sent to USTR on April 16.
 
Both the April 13 analysis and the September 2014 document say the U.S. has failed to take up LAC recommendations in the TPP negotiations to curb foreign countries' policies that force U.S. companies to transfer technology, production and jobs in return for market access and government procurement opportunities. These policies are incentives for U.S. companies to move U.S. jobs offshore, they charge.
 
It also charges that USTR has not heeded LAC advice in these and almost all other areas of the TPP negotiations, has failed to provide "full and on-going access" to negotiating texts, which it says severely undermines the ability of the LAC to fulfill its statutory mandate.
 
A USTR spokesman issued a lengthy rebuttal of the April 13 analysis before it was published by the labor federation on June 2. USTR did not share these comments ahead of time with labor unions, according to AFL-CIO sources.
 
The USTR rebuttal insisted that the "latest U.S proposals, in their entirety, have been and continue to be provided to the LAC and all advisory committees." It notes that there are many areas where negotiations are still underway and where negotiators cannot report more than that they are "making progress towards meeting our objectives."
 
In countering the LAC charge that USTR has largely ignored the recommendations made by the LAC, USTR insisted that "the labor community has had a demonstrable and significant impact on individual trade agreements and the evolution of American trade policy as a whole over the last two decades."
 
It notes that since the early 1990s, labor has advocated for enforceable labor and environmental obligations in trade agreements subject to the same dispute settlement mechanism than other obligations. "We have made this a bedrock principle in our negotiations," USTR said.
 
The cover letter by LAC Chairman R. Thomas Buffenbarger to the September 2014 report notes that while there have been some important improvements on labor and environment in the past 20 years, "these changes have fallen significantly short of what is needed to guarantee that workers are able to exercise their basic rights and that the environment is protected."
 
As an example, Buffenbarger says that the "reality" in Colombia -- a U.S. FTA partner since 2012 -- is that workers cannot exercise their fundamental rights to organize and bargain collectively without fear for their lives, despite the strong FTA provisions on labor rights. 
 
WTO Negotiations Should Benefit All Countries, Says CS Amina
by Edwin Limo   
5 juin 2015
All Africa
 
Paris, Jun 05, 2015 (Capital FM/All Africa Global Media via COMTEX) -- Foreign Affairs and International Trade Cabinet Secretary Amina Mohamed has urged negotiators in the ongoing World Trade Organisation (WTO) talks to maintain pragmatism and transparency in order to ensure the outcome of the main conference in Nairobi contains benefits for all WTO members.
 
The Cabinet Secretary was speaking on Thursday in Paris, France, where she co-chaired the informal meeting of WTO Trade Ministers with Australian Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Minister for Trade and Investment Stephen Ciobo.
 
The meeting took place on the sidelines of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) Ministerial Council meeting.
 
"We need to establish a process that inspires confidence with the clear understanding that the outcome of the 10th WTO Ministerial Conference (MC10) in Nairobi must reflect pragmatism and realism and not anyone's wish list," said Mohamed.
 
The Cabinet Secretary urged African countries to be actively involved in the ongoing negotiations and to support trade multilateralism in order to ensure the success of the first WTO Ministerial Conference to be held in Africa.
 
"Africa must accept and share the responsibility of multilateralism and own MC10. They must not find themselves on the outside looking in," she said.
 
The CS stressed Africa's fundamental commitment to trade multilateralism saying that the Nairobi preparatory process should be used to advance multilateralism and strengthen the WTO as the engine of the rules-based multilateral trading system.
 
"For Africa, for us, it is multilateralism first and last. We want to see the WTO more relevant, stronger and the first point of reference in writing non-discriminatory multilateral trade rules," added Mohamed.
 
The Cabinet Secretary said a successful outcome in the Conference to be held in Nairobi in December should include a post-Bali/Nairobi work programme that is realistic, balanced and which modernizes the WTO negotiating agenda and puts the WTO back in centre field.
 
"The work programme should be substantively robust, reflect the fundamentals in the Doha agenda as well as issues that will ensure that the WTO is relevant and adaptable," said Mohamed.
 
"The outcome of MC10 should include an outcome on cotton and an understanding on food security; services; NAMA; trade and environment; fishery subsidies; an expanded information technology agreement and a package for LDCs," added the CS.
 
The Cabinet Secretary further stressed the need for countries to mobilize in order to meet the 2/3 membership threshold required to ratify the Trade Facilitation Agreement by end of November this year.
 
The CS who is chair of the 10th WTO Ministerial Conference by virtue of being the host assured Ministers of the safety and the well-being of all participants once in Nairobi in December. 
 
(AE) TRADE: Malmströ sets out her requirements for environmental goods
5 juin 2015
Bulletin Quotidien Europe
 
Brussels, 04/06/2015 (Agence Europe) - On Wednesday 3 June, European Commissioner for Trade Cecilia Malmströ underlined the EU's commitment to the climate through the EU's trade policy - and especially through the negotiations for an ambitious international agreement on the liberalisation of green goods.
 
“he need to act is urgent. That's why EU free trade agreements front-load the liberalisation of environmentally friendly goods so their tariffs are cut right away. It's also why our deals have sustainable development chapters (… It is also why we advocate for a green technology chapter/annex in our latest negotiations and we want to put special emphasis on renewable energy and energy efficiency in the energy chapter with TTIP. And it's why the European Union is playing a leading role, along with 16 other partners, in the negotiations for a trade agreement on environmental technologies goods” Malmströ stated at a round table discussion in Brussels.
 
The EU is the top exporter and importer of environmental goods and services in the world, and its exports in this sector represent 10-15% of its total exports, Malmströ said, adding that the global market could increase from $900 billion to $2 trillion by 2020.
 
Malmströ wants to conclude an ambitious agreement on liberalising trade in green products - an agreement that the EU has been negotiating with 16 other WTO members since July 2014 (see EUROPE 11320). Ambitious on tariffs, because the global average bound tariff on these goods stands at nearly 9%, with peaks of over 20% in South Asia and of over 40% in Latin America, Malmströ said. This agreement will have to be easy to implement at customs level, and “over as many environment products as possible” she added, in particular equipment that can be used to control air pollution and goods that support better waste management. The EU also wants an ambitious result for technologies to produce renewable energies and improve energy efficiency. “he talks started from a baseline of 54 products. Members aim to double, triple or even quadruple this number” she said. The EU furthermore wants the agreement to cover services linked to the goods sold, and to lift regulatory barriers “y finding common approaches for green industries” In addition, the future agreement should also address issues linked to public procurement and focus on subsidies, Malmströ stated, adding that “here should be a clear revision mechanism. It should allow us to update the text as needed to add new products and set a programme for future work on the whole range of non-tariff barriers” (Emmanuel Hagry)
 
Economy Ministry Expects To Complete All Formalities For Ukraine's Accession To WTO Public Procurement Agreement By December
Svitlana Uhnyva   
5 juin 2015
Ukrainian News
 
The Ministry of Economic Development and Trade expects to complete all formalities for Ukraine's accession to the World Trade Organization's public procurement agreement by December, the ministry said in the press-release.
 
"All GPA member countries have expressed readiness to make every effort and complete the internal approval procedures as quickly as possible for a preliminary decision on Ukraine's joining to the WTO agreement in the next Ministerium meeting in December," the press-release noted.
 
Joining the revised Government Procurement Agreement, (GPA) will allow Ukrainian entrepreneurs to participate in international tenders, the press-release said.
 
"The access of 43 countries participating in the public procurement agreement (the market volume is about USD 1.7 trillion) opens up huge opportunities for the Ukrainian companies," the press-release said.
 
In early June, Ukraine had a number of bilateral meetings with other countries within the accession to the agreement.
 
As Ukrainian News reported, the Ministry of Economic Development and Trade had decided to stop the trade dispute over cigarette packs with Australia arisen since 2012 within the framework of World Trade Organization.
 
Indications gégraphiques : " un pas important dans la bonne direction ", selon l'INAO; Déeloppement éonomique
Brigitte Menguy; Hugo Soutra   
5 juin 2015
LaGazette.fr
 
Pays membre de l'Arrangement de Lisbonne, la France a entéinévec 27 autres dééations l'extension du systèe international de protection et d'enregistrement des appellations d'origine aux indications gégraphiques, fin mai àenèe. Le préident de l'Institut national des appellations d'origine (INAO), Jean-Luc Dairien, revient sur les retombés en matièe de déeloppement local qu'aura cette protection accrue des produits posséant certaines qualité du fait de leurs origines gégraphiques, à'heure de la mondialisation. Que va permettre l'extension du systèe international de protection des appellations d'origine contrôés aux indications gégraphiques ?
 
Déireux de conforter le dispositif des indications gégraphiques (IG), les néociateurs françis mais aussi espagnols ont obtenu la réision de l'Arrangement de Lisbonne, le 21 mai dernier. Aprè six ans de tractations, le systèe international de protection et d'enregistrement des appellations d'origine est ainsi éendu aux indications gégraphiques.
 
Concrèement, cela assurera aux produits disposant d'une origine gégraphique préise et posséant une notoriééue àe lieu d'origine, dans lequel se déoule au moins sa production ou sa transformation, une meilleure protection et visibilitéur le plan international. C'est un pas important qui va dans la bonne direction, d'autant plus que le péimère des IG déasse aujourd'hui le secteur agroalimentaire et concerne éalement des produits àaractèe artisanal, ndustriel et déormais manufacturé.
 
En quoi cette déision concerne-t-elle les collectivité territoriales ?
 
Les indications gégraphiques font partie du terroir, cette déision aura donc un impact éonomique éident pour les collectivité. Leur protection permet de déelopper sereinement une activitéon-déocalisable, sans risques d'usurpation ou de concurrence déoyale. Les IG confortent ainsi les politiques de cohéion, d'améagement et d'éuilibre du territoire que portent et soutiennent les collectivité locales.
 
Ces dernièes ont d'autant plus compris la néessitée les protéer lors de l'affaire " Laguiole " qui a abouti àn changement léislatif –àravers la loi Hamon –t a éendu aux produits manufacturé la protection des indications gégraphiques. En harmonisant la protection de toutes les appellations et de tous les produits, la réision de l'Arrangement de Lisbonne offre un cadre international aux modifications françises.
 
Que va changer cette éolution dans la perspective des néations internationales en cours ?
 
Comme les néociations multilatéales ne progressent pas à'Organisation mondiale du Commerce (OMC), notre idé a éé'utiliser un outil ancien –'Arrangement de Lisbonne date de 1958 –our parvenir àa crétion de ce cadre international harmonisé
 
Dans cette optique, nous avons par exemple tentée prendre en compte les préccupations des Etats-Unis pour qu'ils puissent éentuellement adhéer àéhénce 3, 10 ou 40 ans si jamais ils souhaitent protéer leurs producteurs embléatiques de pomme de terre. Idem pour la Chine, qui possèe des vins de qualitéêe s'ils ne pourront jamais le commercialiser sous le nom de "Bordeaux" !
 
Au cours des dernièes annés, la multiplication des accords bilatéaux est toutefois compliqué àéer pour l'INAO puisqu'ils s'entrechoquent entre eux. S'ls sont finalement conclus, le chapitre sur les IG de l'accord de partenariat transpacifique (TPP) ne sera probablement pas érit de la mêe manièe que celui du traitéransatlantique. L'idé de la réision de l'Arrangement de Lisbonne l'idé est d'êre dans un cadre international plus cohéent, et de permettre aux producteurs de se faire une vision cohéente et globale des rèles de protection, alors qu'elles sont aujourd'hui àémérie variable.
 
Sachant que ni les Etats-Unis ni l'Union europénne ne sont signataires de l'Arrangement de Lisbonne, sa réision permettra-t-elle réllement de mieux protéer les IG dans les néociations du traitéransatlantique ?
 
Concernant les accords bilatéaux tels que le traitéransatlantique entre les Etats-Unis et l'Union europénne, les indications gégraphiques ne repréentent qu'une partie de la branche "Propriééntellectuelle" qui n'est elle-mêe qu'un volet parmi d'autres dans un méanisme gigantesque de néociations. Les IG peuvent donc pâir autant que repréenter une prioritées néociations...
 
Mais la réision de l'Arrangement de Lisbonne a aussi un intéê politique : il va peser dans les néociations bilatéales en cours et ainsi montrer que la protection des appellations d'origines et des indications gégraphiques est primordiale. Mêe s'il doit déanger le confort actuel des néociateurs, notre déision donne des outils suppléentaires.
 
Le systèe d'appellations d'origine et d'indications gégraphiques n'est-il pas menacéar la mondialisation 
 
Quoi que l'on en dise, la concurrence est devenue mondiale. Problèe : il existe encore des divergences internationales. Un certain nombre de pays àulture anglo-saxonne ne se retrouvent pas dans ce systèe de protection des appellations d'origine et d'indications gégraphiques. Considéant que leur logique industrielle de marques n'est pas incompatible avec notre logique territoriale, nous cherchons déormais àxpliciter ce cadre pour nouer des partenariats.
 
Rien qu'en France, la protection des indications gégraphiques est utile au Pays d'Oc pour maintenir une activitééonomique et éiter la déertification du massif des Corbièes... mais aussi àernard Arnault pour protéer les champagnes de LVMH et les exporter partout dans le monde. Il n'y a pas d'incohéence de principes entre les deux logiques, simplement des objectifs difféents. Pour aller plus loin
 
Le tissu éonomique local est-il menacéar le Tafta ?Le Comitées Réions souhaite déendre les indications gégraphiques europénnesLes collectivité déormais armés contre l'utilisation abusive de leur nomProjet de loi consommation : un dispositif d'alerte pour protéer le nom des collectivitéLaguiole : le maire " rè content  de la déision du Tribunal de l'UELe village de Laguiole, déosséée son nom, en appelle au préident Hollande
 
