HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO's Azevedo still optimistic about Doha work program
·         HYPERLINK \l "India working with WTO members for solution on food security
·         HYPERLINK \l "Anonymous hacks WTO, leaks personal info
·         HYPERLINK \l "Tajikistan ratifies WTO agreement on trade facilitation
·         HYPERLINK \l "Mauritius: WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement workshop opens in Mauritius
·         HYPERLINK \l "Sudan Calls for more Support from the WTO
·         HYPERLINK \l "China pledges 500,000 USD to support WTO accession of least-developed countries
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S. Tech Giants Set to Fight EU Proposal for New Tech Regulation
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S. steel companies want Russian trade deal axed
·         HYPERLINK \l "China Solar Falls On EU Review Of Solar Panel Pricing -- Barron's Blog
·         HYPERLINK \l "Customs Bills Give Boost To U.S. Producers Seeking Unpaid AD Duties
·         HYPERLINK \l "Indonesia president signs palm export levy to fund biodiesel
·         HYPERLINK \l "China's rising wages drive T-shirt maker to tap rich seam in Africa; Rwanda
·         HYPERLINK \l "The Green War on Trade
 
WTO's Azevedo still optimistic about Doha work program
POLITICO
5/6/15 2:17 PM EDT
 
World Trade Organization Director-General Roberto Azevedo remains optimistic about charting a path forward for the Doha round by the end of July despite limited progress in negotiating sessions, he said Tuesday.
Azevedo is talking to member economies at higher political levels and speaking with countries individually, giving him a greater perspective on the prospect, WTO spokesman Keith Rockwell said.
 
But diplomatic sources in Geneva continue to point to the trade promotion authority hold-up in the United States as a drag on the Doha talks. They argue the U.S. is unlikely to propose anything ambitious that would register politically in Washington, which is dampening the leadership role Washington usually takes in multilateral talks.
 
Negotiators are also likely waiting to see what comes out of two ministers’ meetings, one with Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation countries in the Philippines in late May and the other with Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development nations in Paris in early June, sources said.
 
After those meetings it will be more clear whether the work program can be completed by the end of July, a source said.
 
Azevedo said in a speech to WTO ambassadors on Tuesday that the work program must be "substantive and meaningful," "provide clear guidance on how to conclude the negotiations" and "be a springboard to a successful" ministerial in Kenya at the end of the year, reflecting the lack of clarity about what the work program mandated by WTO ministers in 2013 should look like.
— Victoria Guida
 
 
India working with WTO members for solution on food security 
PTI 
6 May 2015
The Hans India
 
India is working with WTO members to ensure a permanent solution at the "earliest" on the issue of food security, Parliament was informed on May 6. Ending months-long deadlock, the WTO in November last year acceded to India's demand to remove constraints on the food stockpiling issue.

"India is working with the WTO members to ensure a permanent solution at the earliest," said Commerce and Industry Minister Nirmala Sitharaman in a written reply to the Rajya Sabha. She said the General Council decision includes a firm commitment to engage in negotiations for a permanent solution through an intensified programme of work.

The WTO's General Council, the highest decision making has accepted India's demand for extending the peace clause till a permanent solution is found for its food stockpiling issue. This enables India to continue procurement and stocking of foodgrain for distribution to poor under its food security programme without attracting any kind of action from WTO members even if it breaches the 10 per cent subsidy cap as prescribed by the multilateral trade body.

For a permanent solution to the food security issue, India had proposed either amending the formula to calculate the food subsidy cap of 10 per cent or allowing such schemes outside the purview of subsidy caps. In a separate reply, the minister said at present there is no restriction on cotton exports. "So far as the border countries are concerned China, Bangladesh and Pakistan are among the top five importers of cotton from India," she said.

During April-February 2014-15, India exported cotton worth USD 696.5 million to China, USD 510.26 million (Bangladesh), USD 214.46 million (Vietnam), USD 79.15 million (Pakistan) and USD 39.59 million (Taiwan). During the period, India has exported cotton worth USD 1.70 billion. It was USD 3.63 billion in the 2013-14 fiscal and USD 3.74 billion in 2012-13.

 
Anonymous hacks WTO, leaks personal info
By Elise Viebeck - 05/04/15 12:57 PM EDT
The Hill
 
A hacker claiming affiliation with Anonymous broke into databases maintained by the World Trade Organization and leaked personal information for thousands of officials, according to reports. 
 
The individual behind the cyberattack injected malicious code into the vulnerable ecampus.wto.org domain, which provides online course in trade matters. 
 
The hacker, whose identity has not been disclosed, discovered email addresses, phone numbers, IP addresses and other details for more than 2,100 WTO officials and staff around the world, according to Hack Read, which interviewed him or her. 
 
The breach also resulted in the exposure of login credentials for 58 administrators and information on 80 apparent job candidates. 
 
Much of the information was posted on PasteBin, a message board site that allows users to remain anonymous. 
 
The motive for the attack was not apparent. 
 
“We are here to hack and destroy your all [sic] systems,” a post read. “We will not stop. We will not give up … Expec [sic] us.” 
 
While it did not appear to reveal Social Security numbers or financial information, the breach is considered serious because it could prompt spear phishing attacks against powerful officials with the WTO. 
 
Those attacks, delivered via fraudulent emails, could give hackers around the world a way to break further into WTO systems as well as the networks of governments with which the group’s officials are connected. 
 
The hacker responsible was apparently also behind cyberattacks on major Israeli arms dealer FAB Defense. 
 
Anonymous is a loosely affiliated group of anarchist hackers located around the world.
 
 
Tajikistan ratifies WTO agreement on trade facilitation 
 
DUSHANBE, May 6, 2015, Asia-Plus -- Tajikistan’s lower house (Majlisi Namoyandagon) of parliament has ratified the World Trade Organization (WTO) Agreement on Trade Facilitation.

A regular sitting of the first session of the Majlisi Namoyandagon of the fifth convocation, presided over by its head, Shukurjon Zuhurov, took place on May 6.

Speaking at the session, First Deputy Minister of Economic Development and Trade, Sayrahmon Nazriyev, said, “The Agreement provides for simplification of the procedure of drawing up of documents for transportation of exported, imported and transit goods.”

According to him, expenses of exporters and importers will decrease by 13-15 percent and this measure will lead to the fall of prices for imported goods in the WTO member nations.

WTO members concluded negotiations on a Trade Facilitation Agreement at the Bali Ministerial Conference in December 2013.

The Trade Facilitation Agreement contains provisions for expediting the movement, release and clearance of goods, including goods in transit. It also sets out measures for effective cooperation between customs and other appropriate authorities on trade facilitation and customs compliance issues. It further contains provisions for technical assistance and capacity building in this area.

We will recall that Tajikistan applied for WTO membership on May 29, 2001 and the Working Party on the accession of Tajikistan was established by the General Council on 18 July 2001. Tajikistan's negotiations to join the WTO lasted for 11 years and Tajikistan concluded its membership negotiations on October 26 2012, when the Working Party adopted the accession package.

As a result of the negotiations, Tajikistan has agreed to undertake a series of important commitments to further liberalize its trade regime and accelerate its integration in the world economy.

The WTO paved the way for Tajikistan’s membership by approving its accession package on December 10, 2012. At a ceremony in Geneva on December 10, WTO Director-General Pascal Lamy and Tajik President Emomali Rahmon signed the protocol on Tajikistan's admission to the international organization.

The program of adaptation of Tajikistan’s economy to the post WTO accession conditions was adopted on October 31, 2014. The main objective of this program is in creating favorable conditions for development of small and medium-size enterprises in the country, attraction of foreign investments, and expansion of bilateral and multilateral cooperation with the WTO member nations.

 
Mauritius: WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement workshop opens in Mauritius 
6 May 2015
PANAPRESS - Pan African News Agency
 
Port-Louis, Mauritius (PANA) - A regional workshop to sensitizse African Parliamentarians on the implementation of the World Trade Organization (WTO) Trade Facilitation Agreement and the negotiations of the Doha Development Agenda opened Tuesday in Mauritius.

Some 22 African Parliamentarians, members of the Indian Ocean Commission and the East African Community are attending the workshop.

Addressing the delegates, Mauritian Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade Minister Etienne Sinatambou said the emergence of the WTO implies the enshrining of the rule of law in international economic and trade relations, thus setting universal rules and disciplines over the temptations of unilateralism and the law of the jungle.

However, he said the present picture does not suggest that the emergence of the WTO has actually brought out the enshrining of the rule of law in international economic and trade relations in Africa.

''Africa’s share in global trade is revolving around 3%. It does not appear, unfortunately, that the desired effects have been brought to Africa since the emergence of the WTO 20 years back,''

the Minister pointed out.

He said the WTO, with 160 members, accounts for some 98% of the world trade.

''Phenomenal increase in world exports has been recorded with figures reaching 364% since the advent of the WTO, that is mainly two and a half times more than the world GDP over the past 20 years.

''Yet, Africa has only 3% of that share and this is what we have to change by getting to grips with the rules and regulations, learning about the state of play and getting to see how others are taking advantage of the rules and regulations of the mechanisms of the WTO,'' Sinatambou said.

Citing the 2015 Report of the World Heritage Foundation, which ranked Mauritius 9th globally in trade freedom (with a score of 88.4), surpassing many countries of the European Union and even the US, the Minister said Mauritius had been engaged in continued reforms since its accession to the WTO.

''The island is not solely interested in ranking high in indices but rather believes that reform is one of the sine qua non conditions for its economy to thrive,'' he said, calling on the delegates as members of parliaments, senators and decision makers to ensure that the WTO benefits Africa.

The Trade Facilitation Agreement, concluded at the 9th WTO Ministerial Conference held in Bali, Indonesia, in December 2013, is the first Multilateral Agreement finalized since the creation of the WTO in 1995.

The Trade Facilitation Agreement contains provisions for expediting the movement, release and clearance of goods, including goods in transit.

It also sets out measures for effective cooperation between customs and other appropriate authorities on trade facilitation and customs compliance issues, and contains provisions for technical assistance and capacity building in this area.
 
 
Sudan Calls for more Support from the WTO 
Khalda Elyas 
Sudan Vision
7 May 2015
 
Khartoum – State Minister at the Ministry of Foreign Trade, Jihad Hamza said that the US unilateral sanctions imposed on Sudan could have no negative affect it Sudan is a member state in the World Trade Organization (WTO), emphasizing the importance of the regional blocs, adding that Sudan's joining the WTO will help in confronting the economical conditions and the sanctions imposed.
 
While addressing the WTO-ITC workshop on trade capacity for Sudan,  Hamza called on the International Trade Center (ITC) and the WTO to provide more assistance to Sudan to enable it join the organizations, affirming the importance of services sector describing it as a backbone of trade for its contribution in the national income.
 
Economic Expert, Mirghani Abu Ouf called for the formation a supreme council for services' policies, pointing out that the commission of Sudan's joining the WTO did not deliver much since 2006.
 
He urged the Ministry of Foreign Trade to adapt the outcomes of the workshop, assuring the continuation of cooperation with the WTO and coming out with a unified plan for the benefit of Sudan.
 
ITC expert, Mr. Dol affirmed that fulfilling the obligations will allow for Sudan's joining the WTO, adding that joining the WTO is a political process while its results are economical.
 
WTO expert, Ms Farolina, said that the workshop aimed at assisting the underdeveloped countries to join the WTO and generate confidence among the investors.

 
China pledges 500,000 USD to support WTO accession of least-developed countries 
 
GENEVA, May 6 (Xinhua) -- The World Trade Organization declared Wednesday the government of China pledged to contribute 500,000 U.S. dollars to the WTO's program aimed at least developed countries' accessions for 2015.

Initiated in July 2011 under the WTO's Aid for Trade initiative, the so-called China Program aims to enable the least-developed countries (LDCs) to better integrate into the global economy by strengthening their participation in WTO activities and helping those who are not yet members to join the organization.

"Through this program, China facilitates the accession of least-developed countries to the WTO and supports their integration into the global economy," declared WTO Director-General Roberto Azevedo.

For his part, Yu Jianhua, China's ambassador to the WTO, stated China has been a consistent supporter of the WTO's Aid for Trade initiative and has provided trade-related technical assistance to LDCs under the China Program over the past three years.

Yu said the program has played a positive and effective role in facilitating LDCs' integration into the multilateral trading system, and "demonstrated our strong support for the development of LDCs within the South-South cooperation framework."

According to WTO's statistics, since 2008, China has donated a total of 2.35 million U.S. dollars to various WTO trust funds.

 
U.S. Tech Giants Set to Fight EU Proposal for New Tech Regulation 
By Sam Schechner 
6 May 2015
Dow Jones Institutional News
 
U.S. tech firms are gearing up to fight a European Union plan to level the playing field for companies competing against Internet giants, arguing that the plan could push the bloc toward protectionism and censorship.

The EU's executive arm announced a swath of proposals on Wednesday aimed at boosting investment in European startups, as well as at harmonizing copyright rules and simplifying regulation for companies that sell goods or send data across European borders.

But the plan for a new European digital strategy also strikes at a pressure point for U.S. technology firms in Europe by proposing the EU study a new regulatory framework for big Internet companies such as Google Inc. and Facebook Inc. Under the blueprint, the EU is also opening an investigation into whether Internet commerce companies like Amazon.com Inc. are restricting cross-border trade.

While far from becoming law, the new proposals show how the legal landscape is already shifting in response to European fears that big U.S. tech firms have become too dominant. That's leading the firms to push back publicly and privately in an effort to defend one of their biggest markets.

"Imposing regulator barriers would be a grave mistake for Europe, and would have harmful effects on trans-Atlantic trade and investment," said Dean Garfield, head of the Information Technology Industry Council, a Washington, D.C.-based trade group that includes Google, Facebook and Microsoft Corp.

One U.S. technology executive added: "This is a regulatory agenda in search of a rationale."

The set of proposals is the latest salvo in Europe's push to rein in the power of a cadre of U.S.-based Internet superpowers. National regulators in the Netherlands, Spain and other countries are investigating Facebook's privacy practices. At the EU level, the antitrust regulator has filed formal charges against Google alleging that it has abused its dominance as a search engine to promote its own businesses.

France and Germany have been at the forefront in the push for regulation of so-called Internet platforms for the better part of two years. In France, government advisory bodies have sketched out new principles they describe as "platform neutrality" aimed at creating new obligations for big tech companies. Senior officials from both countries addressed a letter last week to Brussels officials to urge action.

In an internal position paper in February, the office of EU Digital Commissioner Günther Oettinger said that the bloc should as part of its deliberation consider creating an EU-wide regulator. But the proposal on Wednesday is only to launch a public consultation.

"Exploring these issues could be a good exercise," said Mario Mariniello, a research fellow who studies regulation and competition policy at Bruegel, a Brussels-based think tank. "But the danger is that it will descend into protectionism."

To be sure, technology companies say that they support many elements of the digital-single-market plan, such as harmonizing copyright rules, which would simplify their businesses. But they say that other elements of the plan, beyond platform regulation, could create new regulatory headaches, such as audiovisual rules to cover online-video services, they say.

"Some of these proposals take on real problems, but others also take on perceived problems where there is very little evidence base," said James Waterworth, head of the European office for the Computer & Communications Industry Association, a U.S.-based trade group.

In response, executives at the companies say that they plan a flurry of lobbying to explain their businesses to European officials, and to remind the general public how they contribute to the European economy. "This will kick off an intensive period of everybody lobbying the Commission madly," a U.S. tech executive said.

Amazon, for instance, says its European-based sellers earned more than EUR2.8 billion ($3.12 billion) in cross-border sales within Europe last year. Apple has highlighted its hiring and spending in Europe. In France, Google recently launched an advertising campaign dubbed "Engine of French Success" to highlight how the search engine helps French businesses.

"We have to make a better case," another U.S. tech executive said.

The proposal to better fight "illegal content on the Internet" is one of the most controversial. Under the EU's current rules, tech companies comply with valid take-down requests from governments and copyright holders, but they generally aren't liable for content to which they have not been alerted.

But in changes being considered as part of Wednesday's proposals, the EU could require "Internet intermediary services" to monitor their systems for illicit content--something tech executives say could have a chilling effect on free speech.

"You could just end up censoring everything because that's the easier thing to do," said Chris Sherwood, the head of public policy for Allegro Group, an online marketplace based in Europe.

Officials in France, the U.K. and Germany have in recent months repeatedly demanded faster and more effective removal of terrorist propaganda from online platforms. But while the companies say they are willing to cooperate, they have resisted calls for automated or pre-emptive filtering.

Instead they have sought ways to speed up the existing system, striking a deal last month with French officials.
 
 
U.S. steel companies want Russian trade deal axed 
 
WASHINGTON, May 5 (Reuters) - U.S. steel producers on Tuesday demanded the Department of Commerce scrap a trade deal sparing Russian producers of carbon steel plate from import duties.

Nucor Corp, SSAB Enterprises LLC and Arcelor Mittal USA said a flood of cheap cut-to-length (CTL) carbon steel plate was hurting the local industry.

Russian producers may have breached the terms of a suspension agreement, originally signed in 1997 and amended in 2003, that deferred anti-dumping duties on the products.

"The suspension agreement and its normal value pricing mechanism have failed to function as originally intended, and instead have facilitated Russian producers' exports of large and increasing volumes of low-priced CTL plate to the U.S. market," the companies said in the submission.

U.S. steelmakers last year succeeded in overturning a suspension agreement on Russian hot-rolled, flat-rolled, carbon quality steel, which had set a cap on imports and a minimum price.

If this second agreement is also revoked, Russia's Severstal will face anti-dumping duties of 53.81 percent and other Russian producers and exporters will face duties of 185.00 percent, a source close to the petitioners said.

Russian steel plate imports rose more than 2,800 percent in 2014 from 2013 to more than 55,000 metric tons, the companies said.

Last week, Nucor and SSAB Enterprises launched a separate action complaining Chinese producers were circumventing import duties on steel plate. (Reporting by Krista Hughes; editing by Simon Cameron-Moore) 
 
 
China Solar Falls On EU Review Of Solar Panel Pricing -- Barron's Blog 
By Shuli Ren 
6 May 2015
Dow Jones Institutional News
 
The European Union will consider excluding Chinese solar panel prices in a benchmark that determines which sales prices are considered dumping.

Bloomberg's Jonathan Stearns reported:

European industry group EU ProSun requested the benchmark review. The group said the number of Chinese companies reporting data to be included in the benchmark has "increased significantly" since early 2014 and the prices provided by these businesses "have historically been lower than prices reported by other companies," according to the commission.

"The sufficient evidence submitted by the applicant suggests that the existing benchmark is no longer representative of the development of the prices for crystalline silicon photovoltaic modules," said the commission, which has as long as 15 months to complete its review.

In other words, the benchmark solar panel prices are too low because of Chinese producers' large weighting.

Chinese solar stocks fell on Tuesday. JinkoSolar ( JKS) dropped 2.9%, Yingli Green Energy ( YGE) fell 2.7%, Trina Solar ( TSL) was down 1.7%, the Guggenheim Solar ETF ( TAN) retreated 1.6%.

But keep in mind the European Union is not Chinese solar companies' largest market. China and the US are the two growth drivers.

Solar names have done very well this year, with the Guggenheim ETF up 36.9% so far. First, the price of oil has recovered. Second, China is seen to be pushing aggressively into solar energy. JinkoSolar, which I recommended in my January 24 column " Why China's Solar Will Shine ", has risen by two-thirds since. 
 
Customs Bills Give Boost To U.S. Producers Seeking Unpaid AD Duties
World Trade Online
Posted: May 06, 2015 
A provision included in the customs bills passed by the congressional trade committees last month would force Customs and Border Protection (CBP) to disburse to U.S. producers of honey, crawfish, garlic and mushrooms a greater amount of the money it collects through litigation against bond companies to recover unpaid antidumping (AD) duties on these products.
 
Specifically, the language directs CBP to distribute all of the interest it collects on the unpaid duties to domestic producers, instead of just some of it as CBP has done in the past. The domestic producers are entitled to this money because the entries occurred between 2000 and 2006, when the now-repealed Byrd Amendment was in effect.
 
The language was pushed for by the domestic producers in response to CBP's decision to not disburse to them the full $6.1 million CBP was awarded by the Court of International Trade in March 2014, after it successfully sued Great American Insurance Company and Washington International Insurance Company over unpaid AD duties on crawfish. These two surety companies had issued bonds to importers of Chinese crawfish who never paid the duties.
 
CBP instead said it would distribute just $400,000 of the award to domestic producers, according to an April 2015 memo drafted by Kelley Drye & Warren on behalf of producers. The memo, a copy of which was obtained by Inside U.S. Trade, was submitted to congressional offices to make the case for the new language in the customs bills.
 
According to the memo, CBP claimed that domestic producers were only entitled to one type of interest on unpaid duties -- the interest that accrued between the time the good entered and when the entry was liquidated a year later. This interest will accrue, for instance, if the duty rate charged upon liquidation is higher than the one charged upon entry.
 
But CBP claimed that domestic producers were not entitled to so-called “delinquency interest,” which is the interest that accrued for non-payment of the duties since liquidation. That delinquency interest amounted to over $5.6 million over a 10-year period in the Chinese crawfish case that the CIT ruled on in March 2014. CBP instead paid this money into U.S. Treasury.
 
CBP gave two reasons for its decision, according to the memo. First, it said CBP is required by its regulations to pay off the delinquency interest before paying the principal. Second, CBP determined that the Byrd Amendment does not authorize it to distribute this “delinquency interest” to the domestic industry. Domestic producers disputed that assessment, saying that the Byrd amendment already requires “all interest” on unpaid to be distributed to the petitioners.
 
The new language included in the customs bills would clarify this by explicitly stating that the CBP shall include delinquency interest in its distribution of collected duties to domestic producers.
 
This provision was added as an amendment to the House customs bill, H.R. 1907, during an April 23 markup by the House Ways & Means Committee. The amendment, which was offered by Rep. Charles Boustany (R-LA), was approved by a voice vote and was the only successful amendment to the bill.
 
“This issue is simple: the federal government must abide by the law and pay back what it owes to our crawfish processing industry,” Boustany said in an April 24 statement following the markup. “This is an industry that is an important job creator in Louisiana with deep roots in our history and culture. This amendment ensures that future violations of the government’s obligation to pay back duties to this and other industries will be prevented.”
 
In the Senate, the provision was originally proposed in an amendment filed by Sens. John Thune (R-SD) and Chuck Grassley (R-IA) ahead of the Finance Committee's April 22 markup of the customs bill, S. 1015. The amendment was subsequently incorporated in the chairman's mark released prior to the markup.
 
The inclusion of the provision in both bills represents a victory for domestic producers, who have been fighting for years to get CBP to collect unpaid AD duties on imports from China of honey, crawfish, garlic and mushrooms in between the years of 2000 to 2006.
 
Domestic producers have charged that Chinese producers set up shell importing companies in the U.S. and took out so-called “new shipper” bonds to cover the AD duties. When these companies subsequently folded without paying the duties, domestic producers urged CBP to take the bond companies to court to recover the duties. Congress discontinued the use of new shipper bonds in 2006.
 
CBP is pursuing 28 other lawsuits against other bond companies who issued the new shipper bonds on imports of honey, canned mushrooms, garlic and crawfish from China. One congressional aide estimated that CBP's current practice of not distributing delinquency interest to domestic producers would rob them of $65.2 million to $72.5 million, the total amount the agency is suing for.
 
“Unless Congress instructs CBP to include collected delinquency in Byrd Amendment distributions, the agency will apply virtually all the awards in those lawsuits to accrued delinquency interest, and will withhold those funds from the domestic producers,” the Kelley Drye memo argues.
 
If the provision on delinquency interest in the customs bill ever becomes law, it would only apply to cases decided by the CIT after its enactment, sources said.
 
A House aide expressed confidence that the provision would eventually become law. But some congressional and business sources have held open the possibility that the customs bill was merely a tool that Senate Finance leaders used to funnel amendments away from Trade Promotion Authority and other bills, and that it will never become law.
 
This is in part because there are key differences between the House and Senate bills, meaning they would likely have to go to conference. Among these differences are the ways the two bills address the evasion of antidumping and countervailing duties, and the inclusion in the Senate bill of changes to trade remedy law that make it easier for petitioners to secure the affirmative determination necessary for duties to be imposed.
 
Finance Chairman Orrin Hatch (R-UT) told reporters on April 29 that he hoped the customs bill would become law, but did not provide strong assurances.
 
The Byrd Amendment, which was in effect from 2000 to 2007, required collected AD and countervailing duties to be returned to the injured domestic industry and was found to be in violation of World Trade Organization rules.
 
 
Indonesia president signs palm export levy to fund biodiesel 
By Wilda Asmarini

JAKARTA, May 6 (Reuters) - Indonesian President Joko Widodo has signed a regulation requiring exporters to pay a levy of $50 per tonne of crude palm oil (CPO) and $30 for processed palm oil product shipments, officials said on Wednesday.

Indonesia is the world's top producer of the edible oil. The regulation, announced in late March, will fund recently announced biodiesel subsidies and could underpin palm prices if biodiesel demand picks up.

"The CPO supporting fund was signed by the president last night," Rida Mulyana, director general of renewable energy at the energy ministry, told reporters. "The threshhold for export tax is unchanged."

Chief Economic Minister Sofyan Djalil told reporters the levy would generate $750 million a year and be implemented in the fourth week of May.

In neighbouring Malaysia, plantations and commodities minister Douglas Uggah Embas said government and industry officials would advise on any policy response.

Ong Keng Wee, an analyst at Affin Hwang Capital Research, told Reuters the policy "over time ... will increase consumption and reduce stocks, and that will help prices."

Benchmark Malaysian palm oil futures climbed to their highest level in a month. The benchmark, which fell nearly 15 percent last year, closed on Wednesday at 2,183 ringgit ($611) per tonne.

Indonesia will levy $50 on every tonne of CPO shipped at a zero export tax rate. When average prices drop below $750 a tonne, it cuts the monthly tax on exports to zero.

Indonesia has set the CPO export tax at zero since October 2014. The tax can rises to a maximum of 22.5 percent.

Indonesia hiked biodiesel subsidies and increased the minimum bio content in diesel fuel this year, which helps boost palm oil demand and reduce costly gasoline imports.

Biodiesel consumption this year is expected to be lower than targeted due to delay in implementing the new regulation. Consumption is expected at 3.5 million kilolitres in 2015, down from an initial target of 5.3 million, Mulyana said.

Before the recent changes, Indonesia's CPO production was seen rising 7 percent to 31.5 million tonnes, with exports falling 500,000 tonnes to 19.5 million, industry estimates show.

Major palm oil firms operating in Indonesia include PT Sinar Mas Agro Resources and Technology, Malaysia's Sime Darby and Singapore-based Wilmar International Ltd .

Indonesia also plans to reduce its CPO export tax to help offset the cost to companies of imposing the export levies, a senior Finance Ministry official has said. ($1 = 3.5700 ringgit) (Reporting by Wilda Asmarini and Hidayat Setiaji in JAKARTA; Additional reporting by Anuradha Raghu in KUALA LUMPUR; Writing by Michael Taylor and Fergus Jensen; Editing by Ed Davies/Ruth Pitchford) 
 
 
China's rising wages drive T-shirt maker to tap rich seam in Africa; Rwanda 
By Katrina Manson in Kigali 
7 May 2015
Financial Times
 
Rwanda may be landlocked in central Africa and saddled with prohibitive energy costs, but it has become the latest beneficiary of a quest by Chinese manufacturers to find competitive margins as wages rise at home.

Candy Ma, a 40 year-old Chinese industrialist, has hired 200 trainee workers at her government-built factory in the east African country, and this month she invited buyers from Walmart, H&M and Tesco to inspect the facility.

She plans to export 30,000 T-shirts a month - enough for an initial $10m in first-year sales - and expects to expand tenfold to 2,000 workers next year.

Her investment underscores a rising trend. The Chinese, often blamed for des-troying African industry by flooding the continent with cheap goods that undercut local markets, are now at the forefront of foreign manufacturers expanding their footprint in it. Chinese factory owners, driven by a strengthening renminbi and rising salaries at home, are relocating to secure more competitive margins.

The World Bank says China is set to lose 85m manufacturing jobs in the next decade. While most Chinese companies are looking closer to home in Southeast Asia, more far-flung countries are also beginning to benefit.

One of the main attractions of African countries is their preferential trade agreements with the US and Europe, which mean that finished products, such as textiles, avoid import duties of up to 30 per cent.

Chinese manufacturers such as Ms Ma have also been impressed by the example of Huajian Shoes, the first Chinese plant to relocate to Ethiopia in 2012 and which is to expand its workforce to 30,000 as part of a $2bn investment.

"Every country has its own comparative advantage; you just need to find it," says Helen Hai , the former factory executive who pioneered Huajian's move and who has since become a champion for industry in Africa.

The two are friends. Ms Ma met Ms Hai on a research trip to Addis Ababa, Ethiopia's capital, and last year visited Rwanda at her suggestion. Ms Ma even named her company C&H Garments after the two of them - Candy and Helen.

Ms Ma believes the advantages of Rwanda's business-savvy government, the cheap, disciplined labour force and ready-made factory space outweigh transport and other logistical challenges. "I feel this country is special . . . and I like a challenging job," says Ms Ma, who visited Rwanda for the first time last year.

Although Rwandan labour costs are about 10 per cent higher than in Ethiopia, they are still roughly half those of Kenya - where Ms Ma also has a textiles factory for higher-end products - and, crucially, she says it offers disciplined workers who are quick to learn.

"In two days these people [in Rwanda] are already understanding how to use the [sewing] machines . . . next week my standard can come to exporters' standard," she says, handling a freshly made khaki-coloured children's polo shirt.

Rwanda, which earns only $600m a year from exports and runs a 17.2 per cent trade deficit, offers hefty tax concessions and other support in an effort to boost foreign currency earnings.

"Rwanda has amazing leadership, otherwise I wouldn't take [Ms Ma] to Rwanda and also she would not make the decision," says Ms Hai of President Paul Kagame, who has faced criticism for his human rights record.

Ms Ma's light and airy factory, in Kigali, the capital, is located in a new government-backed special economic zone, which offers reliable power and water, good road links and land. These can be tough to access elsewhere. Only three exporters, including Ms Ma, have located to phase one of the zone, which houses 61 units. She does not expect to be alone for long. "More will come."
 
 
REVIEW & OUTLOOK (Editorial)
The Green War on Trade 
7 May 2015
The Wall Street Journal Europe
 
Europe's long-running battle against genetically modified food already increases prices for European consumers. Now the GMO war is threatening negotiations over the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP), the U.S.-EU trade pact that would boost European growth by an estimated 120 billion euros ($133.75 billion) per year.

The European Commission late last month proposed allowing any of the 28 member states to ban GMOs. The move throws a wrench into negotiations since a growing number of American agricultural exports contain these ingredients, and Brussels's proposal is widely and rightly viewed as backdoor protectionism.

The Commission admits this has nothing to do with science, noting in the preamble to its GMO proposal that government objections to such crops "are usually not based on science but on other considerations." Anne Glover, a Cambridge-educated microbiologist and until last year the European Commission's chief scientific adviser, concluded that there isn't "a single piece of scientific evidence" suggesting GMOs are unsafe.

The European Food Safety Authority continues to clear GMOs for human and animal consumption. Two days after Brussels published the opt-out proposal, Europe's food regulator authorized 17 GMOs, including species of maize, soybeans, cotton and carnation. This process is already too onerous: In 95% of GMO-approval applications, Europe's regulator asks for additional evidence, including data on a product's molecular characteristics, nutritional qualities, toxicity and adverse environmental impacts. A decision can take months.

This latest anti-GMO gambit represents another fusion of environmental and anti-American protectionism. Groups such as Greenpeace, Friends of the Earth Europe and the Sierra Club that have long opposed GMOs have lately made opposition to TTIP a top priority.

They're making common cause with anti-GMO countries, led by France, and the powerful center-left bloc in the European Parliament, which in theory supports TTIP but opposes the entry of "genetically modified meat from the USA," as one of the bloc's position papers puts it. For these activists, no amount of evidence will matter.

The mystery is why the supposed grown-ups in Brussels are willing to ignore science to help scuttle an agreement that would do so much good for Europe's anemic economy. END
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.