Headlines:
India's Government fixes red lines for WTO talks
No hitch in permanent solution on food security at WTO: Sitharaman
‘Developing nations must have a say in WTO’s Nairobi pact’
EU Climate Head Warns International Agreement Far From Certain
President-elect Macri promises to reboot Argentine economy
Brazil trade minister says new Argentina leader 'music to our ears'
New Argentine leader rallies Mercosur against Venezuela
Ukraine to impose counter food embargo against Russia from January 1 - Prime Minister
Official: Ukraine preparing new case against Russia to WTO
India's economy: Forging ahead?
Editorial: The Trans-Pacific Partnership has too many flaws
 
Details:
India's Government fixes red lines for WTO talks
Sidhartha
24 November 2015
The Times of India
NEW DELHI: With three weeks to go for the Nairobi ministerial meeting of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO, he government has begun internal negotiations to work out the red lines but has indicated that it is willing to move ahead on several issues, which were no-go areas in the past.
"We will move with a positive agenda as long as our interests are protected and we get a good deal in return. Just as we have moved ahead on trade facilitation after oning up our infrastructure, we will look at other areas where we are ready for negotiations," said an Indian negotiator.
The stance is a change from earlier meetings and the new position is meant to signal that India is not an "obstructionist". Although there has been chatter about getting India and China to undertake greater commitment, the noise has got louder in recent months, just as there is increased clamour from the developed countries to put Doha Round of negotiations on the backburner, if not end the talks altogether. While the US and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU were seen to be banking on African support on the issue, India has drawn comfort from the recent India-Africa Summit. Sources said the message from several trade ministers in Africa was clear: "Nairobi will not be the place where Doha will die."
Buoyed by the statement, the government is now working on how to prioritise issues. A deal on a permanent solution to the food subsidy cap is unlikely to come through at Nairobi. But the government is drawing comfort from the permanent peace clause that it has received in return for agreeing on a trade facilitation agreement.
The government is clear that it will not reduce farm tariffs, unless the developed world moves ahead with a cut in subsidies, and is unwilling to accept a formulation where countries such as India and China lose their "developing country" status and are clubbed either with the developed world or as emerging economies, where the concessions are lower.
"We have begun consultations on what is the bottom line for us and which are the areas where we can move forward," said a senior officer in the government. There are demand for new issues -such as climate, currency and labour -to be included, something that India believes do not belong to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO. But, instead of blocking negotiations, say , on currency , it is banking on China to thumb down the proposal.
What is worrying for the negotiators is the failure of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO to circulate what are the issues that will be taken up. "For any meaningful outcome to emerge, the agenda needs to be known," a negotiator said.
Bennett, Coleman & Co., Ltd.
No hitch in permanent solution on food security at WTO: Sitharaman
23 November 2015
Dion News Service
Commerce and Industry Minister Nirmala Sitharaman has said that members of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO will have to provide permanent solution to India's food security issue and the country does not see any “hitch” in that, reported PTI.
“Peace clause is with us and it's only natural that they (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) have to give a permanent solution. How it is going to be given... I do not see any hitch in that. Whether it is going to happen before Nairobi meet or not is yet to be seen,” Sitharaman told PTI.
Ending months-long deadlock, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization in November last year acceded to India's demand to remove constraints on the food stockpiling issue.
The WTO's General Council, the highest decision making body of the organisation, had accepted India's demand for extending the peace clause till a permanent solution is found for its food stockpiling issue.
This has enabled India to continue procurement and stocking of food grain for distribution to the poor under its food security programme without attracting any kind of action from HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members even if it breaches the 10 per cent subsidy cap as prescribed by the multilateral trade body.
For a permanent solution, India had proposed either amending the formula to calculate the food subsidy cap of 10 per cent, which is based on the reference price of 1986-88, or allowing such schemes outside the purview of subsidy caps.
If no solution is found by the agreed deadline of December 31 this year, the peace clause will continue till the time a solution is found.
"...The peace clause which we did last year, so that till the full-fledged permanent solution for the public stock holding is given, we at least have something in our hand in terms of providing support to our farmers," Sitharaman said.
The food security issue concerns several developing nations which provide subsidised food grains to their poor.
Dion Global Solutions Ltd.
‘Developing nations must have a say in WTO’s Nairobi pact’
24 November 2015
Business Line (The Hindu)
Developed countries may try to bring in new issues, warn experts Developing countries and least developed countries have to be taken on board to achieve a basic minimum agreement at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation’s (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) ministerial meet in Nairobi, Sudhanshu Pandey, Joint Secretary, Commerce Ministry, said.
“If inequalities are getting sharpened, they are not going to assure us a good tomorrow,” Pandey said at a seminar on issues for the Nairobi Ministerial, organised by research body RIS, Centre for WTO studies, CII and FICCI.
Trade Ministers from about 162 member-countries of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO will be in Nairobi during December 15-18, to take stock of the on-going Doha Development Round and try and agree on a small pact.
Trade experts pointed out at the possibility of some members such as the US trying to bring in new issues into the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO at Nairobi such as environment, e-commerce, labour standards and stricter rules for IPR.
Former Commerce Secretary Rajiv Kher, who steered the negotiations at the previous ministerial meet in Bali in 2013, said that it was important for India to stop some developed countries from their attempts at burying the on-going Doha round, as India needed the flexibility to keep doing what it wanted to do and not roped in by new rules and issues.
“I will stick my neck out and say that the US will try to bring in all issues that are there in the Trans Pacific Partnership (spearheaded by the US) at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO and we have to be prepared for that,” said Abhijit Sen from the Centre for WTO studies.
The statements that came out of the G-20 Summit and the APEC Summit have been disappointing, said Sachin Chaturvedi, Director-General, RIS. India and other members of the G-33 group of developing countries have insisted on changes in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO’s agriculture agreement to provide for a special safeguard measure to check import surges by raising duties and also a permanent solution to the problem of treating food procurement subsidies.
Developed countries such as the US and Australia, on the other hand, want an agreement on export competition to remove all farm export subsidies.
Kasturi & Sons Ltd
EU Climate Head Warns International Agreement Far From Certain
By Gabriele Steinhauser
23 November 2015
Dow Jones Top Energy Stories
BRUSSELS—Days before negotiations for a global deal to fight climate change kick off in Paris, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union's climate and energy czar warned that an agreement is far from certain.
Next Monday, world leaders will open two weeks of talks in the French capital on how to protect the planet from the potentially catastrophic consequences of global warming. If successful, the Paris climate conference, also known as COP 21, could, for the first time, bind developed and developing countries into cutting greenhouse-gas emissions.
But after four years of preparations, big gaps remain among the 195 governments that have to agree unanimously on any deal.
At a summit of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Group of 20 industrialized and developing nations this month, some governments questioned central elements of the deal—including the overall target of keeping global temperatures from rising more than two degrees Celsius—that many participants thought had long been agreed.
"It shows nothing can be taken for granted at the COP," said Miguel Arias Cañete, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU's climate and energy commissioner, who will represent the bloc's 28 member states at the Paris talks.
Although some side events have been cancelled in the aftermath of the recent terrorist attacks, heads of state and government have promised to turn up for the event's big opening.
The conference is meant to deliver a follow-up agreement to the 1997 Kyoto Protocol. Hopes of success in Paris had been rising after the U.S., which never ratified Kyoto, as well as emerging economies such as China and India that didn't have to cut emissions under that deal, submitted national targets for boosting renewable energy sources and reducing air pollution.
In contrast to Kyoto, which was ratified by 35 countries covering just 12% of global emissions, 167 governments, responsible for some 94% of emissions, have submitted national targets to cut emissions in the run-up to Paris.
Still, added together, these contributions would see global temperatures rising by around 3 degrees above preindustrial levels by the end of the century, according to HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU and United Nations officials. Scientists warn that such an increase would lead to the melting of the Greenland ice caps, sharp rises in sea levels and dramatic weather patterns, such as droughts and hurricanes, that could threaten human survival.
The commitments made so far are "positive, but it's not enough," Mr. Cañete said. "There's a gap of one degree Celsius."
That's why the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU and some other countries, including the U.S. and small-island states that risk drowning if temperatures rise more, have been banking on a regular review process to the Paris deal. Every five years, governments would check progress on the two-degree goal and if necessary, draw up new emission targets.
"They can resubmit the same or a new one, more ambitious," Mr.  Cañete said.
But at the G-20 summit in Antalya, Turkey, some countries, led by India and Saudi Arabia, blocked any reference to such a review process in the final statement—startling negotiators, including Mr. Cañete, who thought the plan had been widely accepted.
"In our [most recent] meetings...I didn't hear anybody raising" objections to the review process, said Mr. Cañete.
Beyond the review process, negotiators in Paris will have to nail down a host of other elements that will determine the effectiveness of any agreement. The U.S. has resisted making national emissions cuts legally binding, since that would require the deal to be ratified by Congress, where it would likely be blocked.
Mr. Cañete is nevertheless optimistic that the U.S., even under a Republican administration, would implement its promised cuts. "What I can say is that the United States is one of the countries that has ambitious climate-change policies already in force—as does the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union," he said.
Negotiators are now trying to come up with a format that would give legal force to some elements of the agreement, such as the review process and regular checks that governments are sticking to their promises. Here, divisions have emerged between developed and developing countries, with the latter arguing that the historical responsibility for climate change lies with countries that industrialized more than a century ago.
The big number of outstanding issues—and the challenge of getting 195 countries to agree to each of them—is the biggest threat to arriving at a credible deal, Mr. Cañete said. "A single country has the power, the ability or the capacity to block an agreement under a COP," he said. "The risk is that to accommodate everybody the agreement loses the level of ambition.
Money is another clash point between rich and poor countries. At the 2009 Copenhagen climate conference, developed nations promised to come up with $100 billion in annual financing by 2020 to help developing countries buy the technologies needed to reduce their emissions and adapt to the unavoidable impacts of global warming.
And while groups like the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development say that governments, along with private investors, are on track to meet that target, poorer states have questioned their accounting. They also want financial aid to be stepped up as part of the Paris deal.
"We will fulfil our commitments up to 2020 and we are ready to increase our climate-change support in the future," Mr.  Cañete said, but stopped short of citing a specific amount. "Whether there will be a target post-2020 is up to be discussed and will be one of the most complex things."
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" EU has been one of the parties most aggressively demanding a strict climate agreement. Mr.  Cañete said he'd push the bloc's members to block a deal that can't deliver the necessary emission cuts. "Just to sign an agreement for the sake of having a piece of paper on the table is not useful," he said. Dow Jones & Company, Inc. 
President-elect Macri promises to reboot Argentine economy
23 November 2015
Reuters News
By Sarah Marsh and Richard Lough
BUENOS AIRES, Nov 23 (Reuters) - President-elect Mauricio Macri vowed on Monday to get Argentina's stalled economy moving again but refrained from laying out specific measures until he gets to know the "real" state of the nation's accounts.
The day after winning the presidential run-off vote, the center-right leader was more incisive on other matters: He called on the Central Bank's top tier to step aside and said he wanted Venezuela suspended from the Mercosur trading bloc for human rights abuses.
The pro-business Macri campaigned on promises of sweeping economic reforms to tackle weak growth, high inflation and a yawning fiscal deficit after more than a decade of free-spending leftist populism.
But the challenges are enormous. At home, he lacks a majority in Congress and currency reserves are running perilously low. Abroad, the slowdown in China, weak commodity prices and a deepening recession in main trade partner Brazil all pose risks.
"Argentina's big problem today is that for four years there has been no growth, for four years no jobs have been created and now we have to get the country moving," Macri said.
He pledged to correct the errors of the outgoing leftist Peronist government. He called capital controls a mistake and said his government would restore the Central Bank's independence and overhaul national statistics.
Asked about his strategy for lifting currency controls, Macri urged patience saying he first needed to discover "what are the real economic numbers." He takes power Dec. 10 but said he needed more time before naming his cabinet.
Macri won 51.40 percent of votes while his ruling party rival Daniel Scioli drew 48.60 percent. The narrower-than-expected margin underlines the risks voters felt Macri's reform push will entail.
In ending more than a decade of Peronist party rule, Macri becomes only the third non-Peronist leader since the end of military rule in 1983. The other two failed to finish their terms, a reminder of the difficulties that Peronist labor unions, state governors and opponents in Congress could cause Macri if he is unable to get the economy growing quickly.
Macri's "Let's Change" coalition only has 91 of the 257 seats in the lower house of Congress, yet he will need congressional approval to push through some reforms - including an eventual deal with U.S. creditors over unpaid debt.
His success will lie in his ability to secure ad hoc alliances with lawmakers loyal to another defeated presidential candidate, Sergio Massa.
Massa, a dissident Peronist who split with outgoing President Cristina Fernandez two years ago, welcomed Macri's win and signalled his willingness to back policies on which they were aligned.
"We'll support those measures that are good and we'll signal those we think are bad," Massa said on HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Twitter on Sunday night.
Fernandez's Front for Victory party also lacks a majority and would need to seek alliances itself to block Macri in the lower chamber.
PRESSURE ON CENTRAL BANKER
Argentine bonds inched up on Monday on expectations of a more investor-friendly government, with a Macri win largely priced into the market before the run-off vote, while stocks broadly fell on profit-taking.
Foreign investors are waiting for details on how and when Macri will tackle debt default negotiations with U.S. creditors, remove capital controls, devalue the peso currency and replenish hard currency reserves.
Even so, they cheered Macri's victory.
"Macri understands what the country needs to do to regain the confidence of international investors and get the economy back on its feet," said Andrew Stanners, investment manager at Aberdeen Asset Management.
Macri will be able to eliminate export taxes and quotas on corn and wheat shipments without having to ask Congress first. Lifting capital controls lies with the Central Bank.
Macri promises to restore the Central Bank's independence and on Monday made clear he expected President Alejandro Vanoli, who is a trusted ally of Fernandez, to resign.
"We hope they have the dignity and generosity to allow the new government to choose its path by letting us choose people in which I and all my team hold trust," Macri told reporters in what he promises will be the first in a series of press conferences.
Vanoli's term runs until 2019. Last week he opened the door to quitting early if Macri presses ahead with plans to unwind capital controls. Macri would need congressional approval to remove him from office, though he can sack him by presidential decree if a congressional chamber cites wrongdoing.
Macri's win marks a decisive shift to the center-right and is likely to send shockwaves through South America's left-leaning governments. Venezuela's conservative opposition was quick to paint his success as a good omen for their own bid to win legislative elections in December.
Macri said he would seek Venezuela's suspension from Mercosur because of accusations of rights abuses by President Nicolas Maduro's socialist government.
On the other hand a Macri presidency raises the prospect of improved ties with the United States and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union, although Macri has said his first trip abroad will be to recession-hit Brazil.
(Additional reporting by Karin Strohecker in London; Writing by Richard Lough; Editing by Kieran Murray and Mary Milliken)
Thomson Reuters (Markets) LLC
Brazil trade minister says new Argentina leader 'music to our ears'
By Anthony Esposito
23 November 2015
Reuters News
SANTIAGO, Nov 23 (Reuters) - Brazil's trade minister said on Monday that the election of pro-business candidate Mauricio Macri as Argentina's next president is good news for trade relations between the South American neighbours.
Macri, the center-right mayor of Buenos Aires, ended more than a decade of leftist Peronist rule in Sunday's election after promising to overturn the free-spending populism of outgoing President Cristina Fernandez.
"All the signs are positive. (Macri) reaffirms the vision that Brazil is a strategic partner, he backs the position that Mercosur be more open to other international networks," Trade Minister Armando Monteiro told Reuters while on an official trip to Chile's capital Santiago.
"So for us, this is music to our ears."
Mercosur is a customs union comprising Brazil, Argentina, Uruguay, Paraguay and Venezuela.
In his inaugural press conference as president-elect, Macri said he plans to seek Venezuela's suspension from South America's Mercosur trade bloc because of accusations of rights abuses by President Nicolas Maduro's socialist government.
Traditional rivals in many areas beyond soccer, Brazil and Argentina are the economic powerhouses of South America, but trade flows between the two have slowed sharply as both economies struggle following the collapse of a global commodities boom.
"We have trade, that despite having fallen, is still very important, with trade flows of $30 billion. So it is a fundamental relationship," said Monteiro, a businessman-turned-politician in the left-leaning government of President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Dilma Rousseff said.
Despite the fact that both Brazil and Argentina have been run by leftists for more than a decade, Brazil has been frustrated by a wall of protectionist policies erected by Fernandez, designed to shield local manufacturers from foreign competitors and defend foreign exchange reserves.
"President-elect Macri has taken a very pro-trade position, more liberal in terms of trade," said Monteiro.
The minister added that Brazil agrees with Macri's position of greater integration between the two large trade blocs in Latin America - Mercosur and the Pacific Alliance, which brings together Mexico, Colombia, Peru and Chile.
Thomson Reuters (Markets) LLC
New Argentine leader rallies Mercosur against Venezuela
23 November 2015
Agence France Presse
Argentina's president-elect Mauricio Macri said Monday he would call for Venezuela to be suspended from the South American trade bloc Mercosur over its government's alleged rights abuses against political opponents.
"We are going to invoke the democratic clause against Venezuela," Macri told reporters.
That protocol allows a Mercosur member to be suspended with the agreement of all the others if it is seen to have violated democratic principles.
Macri added: "It is appropriate because of the abuses and the persecution of the opposition" in Venezuela, where right-wing rivals of President Nicolas Maduro have been imprisoned and barred from elections.
The market-friendly conservative forced a political shift in Argentina by winning a runoff election on Sunday, ending 12 years of leftist government.
Argentina's outgoing President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Cristina Kirchner is a Maduro ally.
Venezuela holds legislative elections on December 6 that opinion polls show the opposition could win, raising the prospect of a broader rightward trend in Latin American politics.
Mercosur's full members are Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, Uruguay and Venezuela.
Venezuela's opposition MUD coalition hailed Macri's victory as an encouraging sign that change could follow in their country too.
Macri's win "goes hand in hand with the imminent victory of the Venezuelan people on December 6," it said in a statement.
Agence France-Presse
Ukraine to impose counter food embargo against Russia from January 1 - Prime Minister
23 November 2015
ITAR-TASS World Service
KIEV, November 23. /TASS/. Russia’s introduction of food embargo against Ukraine from January 1 will get a mirror-like response, the country’s Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk said on Monday.
"I want to make it clear that Russia’s threats of food embargo on Ukrainian commodities from January 1 will get similar mirror-like response from Ukraine’s authorities. Each decision made by Russia on embargo will cause a similar decision by Ukraine on embargo against Russia," he said.
Prime Minister delivered it into the charge of the ministry of economy, ministry of finance, state fiscal service, ministry of internal affairs, frontier service to take steps to implement those decisions.
Starting from January 1, 2016 regulations of the agreement on Ukraine-EU association regarding creation of a free trade zone will come into force.
On October 30, Russian Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Dmitry Medvedev said Ukraine could not be a member of two free trade zones - with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union and with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Commonwealth of Independent States /CIS/ - concurrently. "It may create a threat of re-export of goods from third [European] countries under the disguise of Ukrainian-made ones," he said. Russian PM said certain measures were needed to remove such risks. "The level of customs tariff protection in respect of Ukraine will be enhanced from January 1, 2016," he said. "Ukraine will enjoy the most favoured nation regime instead of zero customs taxes. Our response economic measures will be extended to Ukraine as a country joining the anti-Russian sanctions," he said. "It is done in conformity with the norms of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization /WTO/ and the CIS Free Trade Zone Agreement."
On November 18, Russian government took a decision to impose food embargo against Ukraine starting from January 1. "Since Ukraine joined anti-Russia sanctions - economic, financial - we’ve decided to impose … protective measures in the form of food embargo," Russia’s Economic Development Minister Alexey Ulyukayev said, adding that the decision is "postponed till January 1." "Most likely we’ll have to protect our market on a unilateral basis from unattended access of goods through Ukraine’s customs territory, those being goods from third countries, first of all from the states of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union. The protection will mainly concern introduction of most favored nation regime. In a situation like that we won’t have reasons for keeping zero rate of customs tariff with Ukraine," the Minister said.
Earlier Ukraine’s PM said the country estimated potential losses of Russia’s food embargo at $600 mln. "We are preparing for Russia’s introduction of trade restrictions against Ukraine. Ukraine performed its assessment of potential losses from embargo, at least for 2016. We will lose about $600 mln of export to Russia," he said. Ukraine’s dependence on Russia declined threefold, Yatsenyuk added. "If our dependence was 35 percent earlier, it is at the level of 12.5 percent now," he said.
ITAR-TASS Information Telegraph Agency of Russia
Official: Ukraine preparing new case against Russia to WTO
23 November 2015
Prime News
KIEV, Nov 23 (PRIME) -- Ukraine is preparing a second case against Moscow to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO), Deputy Economic Development and Trade Minister Natalia Mikolskaya said in a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Facebook post on Monday without disclosing the matter of the claim.
“We will prepare for consultations in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO on solution of trade disputes with Russia and materials for a new dispute during the next business week. We will hold a meeting of a working group for promotion of exports, for implementation of full and all-encompassing free-trade zone with the E.U.,” Mikolskaya said.
Ukraine filed a claim over Russia’s restrictions on railcar and railroad switch imports to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO in October.
ZAO PRIME
India's economy: Forging ahead?
Dr B K Mukhopadhyay
24 November 2015
The Sentinel
The Reserve Bank of India Governor, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Raghuram Rajan, is correct in his assessment that a drop in public and private investments was the main concern about the country's economic growth. Weak capital investment has been a key factor behind India's struggle to realize its growth potential and with factories running 30 percent below capacity; private companies are in a little rush to make fresh investments.
Incidentally, it may be mentioned here that the RBI has already cut its growth forecast for the current fiscal year to 7.4 percent from 7.6 percent previously, well below the Government's target of 8 to 8.5 percent (still faster than China).
Side by side, the fact remains that despite the slowdown in growth and investments, strong foreign direct investment and some traction in infrastructure development may encourage private investments. The central bank cut the benchmark policy rate by a half percentage point to 6.75 percent in September, 2015. But to what extent the target of 6 percent for retail inflation - which the RBI tracks to set interest rates - for January 2016 and thereafter focusing on its 5 percent target for March 2017, would be the reality remain a point to see.
The Government's ambitious target of improving by 2017 India's national ranking from a woeful 142 of 189 (below Pakistan and Iran), to the top 50, would also be tested. It will not be out of the context to mention that last year, India slipped two spots in the report, and was ranked lower than Brazil, Russia, China and South Africa - mainly because of delays in approvals for starting a business, tax payments, getting bank loans and property registration. Projected to grow at more than 7.5 percent in the 2015/16 fiscal year, India obviously sees an opportunity to attract more investments, especially with economic growth slowing in China.
On this score Onno Ruhl, the World Bank's India director observed clearly that ".The growth of business in India requires concerted action on several fronts - infrastructure, capital markets, trade facilitation and skills. The stark reality is that India remains a difficult place to do business."
Whatever it is, the silver lining should not be lost sight of. States including the top five- Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh - had implemented reforms in online tax payments, construction, permits, electricity connections and environmental clearances in a specified time.
Others are also coming up so far as 'ease of doing businesses' is concerned- Rajasthan was ranked sixth among 29 states. Several pro-business steps, such as rolling back plans to tax foreign companies and allowing them to invest more in insurance, defence, banks and other sectors, have reasons to be termed as positives. Still, it is needless to mention that India's decision to drop a plan for goods and service tax because it lacks political support, and to roll back business-friendly amendments in the land bill, have annoyed many domestic and foreign investors.
Again, total foreign direct investment inflows into Asia's third largest economy touched $44.3 billion in the 2014/15 fiscal year ending March, up 23 per cent compared with the previous year. It is pertinent to mention here that HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Temasek Holdings - the investment arm of the Singapore government - opined that with the focus on revival of investor-led growth in the country, India over the past year has been one of their "most active" areas of investment with potential for long-term returns. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Ravi Lambah, co-head of India, Africa and the Middle East region at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Temasekpins hope - the government has been focusing on reviving investor-led growth. To quote him: "We have been very active in India last year, and it was probably one of our most active areas of investment. We've been seeing potential in investing in the country on a long-term perspective. We remain optimistic that India will deliver returns over the long-term." India currently accounts for about four per cent of the Singapore investor's portfolio.
As per the latest report of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" International Monetary Fund (IMF) India is set to decisively outpace China in economic growth this year, and emerge not just as the fastest-expanding economy but also as just a handful of countries to show some acceleration. The IMF has projected India's growth at 7.5 percent this year, against 6.8 percent for China. While the growth outlook on India for 2016 has been retained at 7.5 percent, for China it is pegged 50 basis points lower at 6.3 percent.
The IMF's World Economic Outlook states "Global growth is projected at 3.3 percent in 2015, marginally lower than in 2014, with a gradual pickup in advanced economies and a slowdown in emerging market and developing economies. In 2016, growth is expected to strengthen to 3.8 percent. In emerging market economies, the continued growth slowdown reflects several factors, including lower commodity prices and tighter external financial conditions, structural bottlenecks, rebalancing in China, and economic distress related to geopolitical factors." But in advanced economies, it said, the growth was projected to increase from 1.8 percent in 2014 to 2.1 percent in 2015 and 2.4 percent in 2016 - which was a more gradual pickup than what was forecast in the April, 2015 scenario.
Indian economy is witnessing "stable growth momentum" and mixed trends are seen in other parts of the world including China and the US, according to Paris-based think tank HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD (a grouping of 34 countries). The assessment is based on the grouping's Composite Leading Indicators (CLIs) that are designed to anticipate turning points in economic activity relative to trend. "The CLIs continue to point to stable growth momentum in India and to easing growth in China.
Pegging the growth rate at 7.4 per cent for 2016, the grouping had said that decline in oil prices would reduce pressures on the current account deficit, inflation and subsidies. India has surpassed China to become the world's fastest growing economy by clocking 7.5 per cent GDP for the March quarter. In 2014-15, economy grew by 7.3 per cent, accordingly.
'Housing for All by 2022' scheme is another prominent one so far as building durable and quality houses in rural areas is concerned . The government's ambitious scheme aims to construct two crore affordable houses in urban areas and three crore in rural sector. Under the 'Housing for All by 2022' scheme, about 40 lakh houses in rural areas will be built every year. Of course the target should not be confined to build just three crore houses in the next seven years in rural areas, rather good houses should be built which would last at least 40 or 50 years." It has been alleged that under the Indira Abas Yojana (IAY), 3.37 crore houses had been built, but these houses could not last more than 10 years as poor materials were used for construction.
The Chief Economic Advisor's assessment definitely carries weight - "There are some signs that it's picking up. But it's really important that in the short-run, the economy needs policy support to boost consumption through cheaper financing, through public investment, implementation of what we have in the budget and measures to boost private investment and kick-start all these stalled projects. So, if these things happen over the next few months, I think you can reasonably expect economic activity and growth to pick up even more."
But it is high time that the crucial aspects are given due importance in as much as during the last 11 months exports have been going down and down, agriculture growth rate target of 4 percent still seems to be not achievable, fiscal deficit challenges still remain. Full benefits of cheaper oil prices must be reaped. Regional imbalance aspects are to be seen so as to narrow down the incidence. To summarize some silver lining should not make us complacent. There are many more miles to go before we catch up with the developed world!! The entire world has been keenly watching to what extent India can forge ahead.
Omega Printers & Publishers Pvt. Ltd.
Editorial: The Trans-Pacific Partnership has too many flaws
By the Editorial Board
23 November 2015
St. Louis Post-Dispatch
Secrecy rarely produces sound public policy, nor does it foster public trust, as the recently completed Trans-Pacific Partnership demonstrates. After shutting the doors on labor unions, environmental groups, privacy advocates and others with a stake in the discussions, President Barack Obama wants Congress to approve a regional trade deal that sacrifices too much.
In fairness, there’s a lot to like in the deal, but not enough.
Mr. Obama stresses that the partnership, involving the United States and 11 other nations, streamlines and formalizes trade in a part of the world where greater predictability is desirable. That’s the good part.
The administration’s sales pitch so far has focused on the elimination of 18,000 tariffs that Pacific Rim nations place on U.S. goods, a move that’s expected to strengthen the standing of beleaguered American workers and generate much-needed economic growth here. Easier access to markets means greater opportunity for exporting American goods.
“When it comes to Asia, one of the world’s fastest-growing regions, the rule book is up for grabs,” Mr. Obama said. “And if we don’t pass this agreement — if America doesn’t write those rules — then countries like China will. And that would only threaten American jobs and workers and undermine American leadership around the world.”
There’s little disputing the risk of letting China set the course, but critics of TPP are building a persuasive case that the deal still leaves far too much to chance, or to deliberate deception, in the name of free trade.
A major point of contention is the inclusion of an Investor-State Dispute Settlement, or ISDS, a process that enables foreign corporations to challenge a nation’s laws before an international court if they think they impinge too much on shareholder value.
Although the mechanism exists in other agreements in which the United States already participates, TPP critics — such as Sen. Elizabeth Warren, D-Mass. — point to a spike in such challenges in recent years. A French company is battling a minimum-wage increase in Egypt, a Swedish company is fighting Germany over limits on nuclear power, and America’s HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Philip Morris is challenging stricter tobacco regulations in Uruguay.
Those courts are skewed toward corporations to the detriment of individuals and workers. Making them a cornerstone of trade in the Pacific is a mistake.
Other parts of the deal also are drawing opposition. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Human Rights Watch and others contend that bilateral agreements with Vietnam, Brunei and Malaysia over human rights and workers’ rights are toothless. Environmental groups such as HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" the Sierra Club are incensed that the words “climate change” appear nowhere in the document and that fossil-fuel companies could use ISDS to undermine efforts to address global warming.
Two aspects of TPP — involving privacy rights and intellectual property rights — are particularly worrisome.
The deal seeks to strengthen the ability of countries to crack down on commercial digital espionage, but privacy advocates are sceptical of provisions that encourage TPP’s participating countries to allow a freer flow of data between borders.
If governments are limited in their ability to require local data storage, critics say, digital information may be end up being more vulnerable to hackers and to surveillance by other countries, including U.S. intelligence agencies. “Trade agreements are not the place to decide digital policy,” says Maira Sutton, global policy analyst at the Electronic Frontier Foundation.
Pharmaceutical companies are at the center of a debate in the partnership over intellectual property rights. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Doctors Without Borders and others oppose patent protections that would impede the growth of lower-cost generic drugs. TPP would give companies eight years of protection, which is four fewer than now, but it would ease the extension of patents through “new uses.”
The common thread in all of these complaints is that the criticism emanates from public interest groups prevented from stating their case to TPP negotiators as the deal was put together. If they had been involved in the negotiations, the problems might have been avoided or at least tempered.
Instead, negotiators chose secrecy. The Obama administration contends that was necessary to coax reluctant nations to compromise and put their best proposals on the table, but the tradeoff obviously generated distrust and left TPP open to accusations that corporations drove the details.
Mr. Obama, who won a hard-fought battle to win “fast-track approval” of trade deals, now faces a straight up-or-down vote by Congress. Lawmakers should demand better.
Congress’ role in trade deals is to represent the American people, to serve as a check on the White House. The president deserves some deference in negotiating, but not unilateral authority.
This administration was not tough enough and gave up too many protections that Americans deserve in a trade deal. Missouri’s senators and representatives should work with their colleagues to reject this TPP so that the next administration can negotiate something better.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch
END
 
Josep Bosch, Information Officer
Information and External Relations Division
+41227395681
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.