HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO Chief Urges Ratification of Trade Facilitation, Public Health Agreements
·         HYPERLINK \l "Azevedo Solicits Lawmakers’ Help
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO Offers Preference On Services Export to Developing Economies
·         HYPERLINK \l "Implementation of agreements to be ensured for sustainable trade development: MNA
·         HYPERLINK \l "EU Opens New Chapter In Civil Aircraft Dispute By Seeking WTO Panel
·         HYPERLINK \l "Ecuador politics: Quick View - Ecuador threatens to leave the CAN
·         HYPERLINK \l "Thailand starts second round of rubber buying via $180 mln fund
·         HYPERLINK \l "Obama OKs drone exports, with many caveats
·         HYPERLINK \l "Congressional Research Service Reissues Report on Industry-Specific Patent Laws
·         HYPERLINK \l "China wants to write the rules for commerce in Asia: Obama
·         HYPERLINK \l "World trade rules within next 15 years to be regulated by regional agreements instead of WTO standards - Chairman of Eurasian Commission Khristenko
·         HYPERLINK \l "Swiss prosecutor raids HSBC’s Geneva premises
 
WTO Chief Urges Ratification of Trade Facilitation, Public Health Agreements
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, February 19, 2015
 
Feb. 18 — During a Feb. 17 Parliamentary Conference in Geneva, the director-general of the World Trade Organization outlined a shortlist of actionable items that international lawmakers can advance before year's end.
 
Roberto Azevedo urged international lawmakers in attendance to deliver on their promises to ratify the Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA) and the Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) Agreement on Public Health.
 
Meanwhile, Azevedo acknowledged that WTO rules remain stuck in the past and that members have not changed their positions regarding some of the trickiest issues of the Doha Development Agenda.
 
There is a need to make progress on the 2001 Doha Round of multilateral trade negotiations, he said. “The reality is that our legal texts are yet to properly enter the 21st century.”
 
Trade Facilitation Agreement
 
Azevedo urged attendees to return to their capitals and seek ratification of the TFA to simplify customs procedures valued at nearly $1 trillion in projected efficiencies.
 
To date, three WTO members have ratified the TFA—the U.S., Singapore and Hong Kong. After two-thirds of the members submit their instruments of acceptance, the TFA will be ratified and enter into force.
 
“Kenya's Minister Amina Mohamed has urged WTO members to ensure that this threshold is reached by the time of the 10th Ministerial Conference in Nairobi this December,” Azevedo said.
 
“So I think that puts the ball in your court. Your support as parliamentarians is vital to ensure that your domestic processes are completed,” he said.
 
Such a goal is considered lofty by some U.S. and European Union officials, who have previously said that it could take up to five years to reach the two-thirds threshold.
 
Public Health Agreement
 
Azevedo said that it's “high time” to ratify the TRIPS Agreement on Public Health, which provides developing countries with increased access to certain patent-protected medicines.
 
Though the agreement was originally adopted in 2003, it requires ratification from two-thirds of the WTO's 160 members to go into effect.
 
Azevedo noted that the agreement needs only 27 more acceptances to enter into force and urged members to submit the remaining acceptance letters before the end of the year.
 
“I am convinced it is an eminently achievable goal to secure these acceptances this year,” Azevedo said. “To build momentum, I have written to ministers of all WTO members concerned asking them to consider taking this step.”
 
Doha Goals
 
WTO members have made “some good progress” in their negotiations towards producing a detailed work program to resolve the remaining Bali Ministerial issues by July 31, Azevedo said.
 
Over the past two months members have engaged the historically challenging goals of modernizing the WTO's agriculture rules regarding market access, export subsidies and public stockholding for food security purposes.
 
“While the broad positions have not changed a great deal since last time these issues were discussed, it is clear to me that the tone of the discussion has changed,” Azevedo said. “And, significantly, from my conversations with ministers, I have a sense that there has been a big increase in the political will behind our work. This is invaluable.”
 
“We need to redouble our efforts and complete this work—and we need you to help keep governments engaged, to keep the focus on these negotiations, and to build and maintain the political will which is so essential,” he said.
 
LDC Issues
 
Azevedo separately asked members of the WTO's least-developed countries (LDCs) to define their positions on the items of the July 31 work program “as early as possible,” during a Feb. 18 speech at the LDC Group Ambassadors and Experts Retreat.
 
Azevedo urged LDC members to avoid repeating their old positions and endeavor to break new ground in the Doha negotiations.
 
“Think about what you really want and need—think about what would make the biggest difference to your interests,” he said. “Be specific. If you can do that I am very confident that members will respond positively.”
 
Azevedo said that he has a “clear sense” from his conversations with members that the flexibilities for LDCs will remain intact in the negotiations. “I haven't heard anything which would suggest that this is not the case,” he said. “But, of course, this doesn't mean you should just sit back, relax and not engage.”
 
General Council Meeting
 
Azevedo is expected to address the state of the WTO's trade negotiations at the Feb. 20 General Council meeting.
 
The WTO heads of delegations will next convene for an informal General Council meeting scheduled for Feb. 19 in Geneva.
 
Members are expected to discuss the appointments of new officers to chair the WTO's various committees.
 
 
Azevedo Solicits Lawmakers’ Help
By Adam Behsudi | 2/18/15 5:47 AM EST
POLITICO
 
World Trade Organization Director-General Roberto Azevêdo in a speech on Tuesday called on legislators from around the world to ratify the Trade Facilitation Agreement as well as a public health amendment agreed to by the organization in 2005.
 
Azevêdo argued that parliaments play a crucial role in updating global trade rules. “You support us through approving and ratifying what we agree here,” he said. “You do it through your advocacy for the WTO — and the pressure that you apply to your governments to engage on the key issues. But, most importantly, you do it by connecting the WTO to your constituents. Everything we do here is for their benefit.”
 
In addition to securing ratification of the TFA by two-thirds of the WTO's membership — which would allow the agreement to take effect — Azevêdo also called on the lawmakers to help achieve full implementation of the package of decisions agreed to by ministers in Bali at the end of 2013. He also emphasized the need for political will in order to bring the long-stalled Doha round of negotiations to a conclusion. Read more here: http://bit.ly/1Joxa5G
 
 
WTO Offers Preference On Services Export to Developing Economies 
by Femi Adekoya 
18 February 2015
All Africa
 
Feb 18, 2015 (The Guardian/All Africa Global Media via COMTEX) -- AS part of efforts to aid the realization of its Bali Package, the World Trade Organisation (WTO), has unveiled plans to support the growth of services trade in least-developed countries (LDCs) by providing their services exports with preferential treatment.

According to the WTO Services Council, the measures would aid the implementation of a key Bali decision in support of LDCs, which aims to enhance their participation in world services trade.

Indeed, some preferences would include, expanding access for the temporary movement of businesspeople (Mode 4) from LDCs for a range of services professions and occupations; waiving fees for business and employment visas for LDC persons; not imposing economic needs and labour market tests for LDC members; and extending the duration of stay of LDC professionals in the markets of preference granting members.

These preferences will be implemented once these members have completed their domestic processes and have notified the WTO.

At the meeting, over 25 members indicated services sectors and modes of supply" from LDCs1 to which they would give preferential treatment.

In a video message to open the meeting, Director-General Roberto Azevedo said: "It is vital that we implement all the elements of the Bali Package without delay -- and particularly the decisions on LDC issues. The decision on Operationalising the LDC Services Waiver is one of these, and is extremely important. Services exports from LDCs are increasing rapidly, though of course they are starting from a very low base.

We have a duty to support the growth of this sector. I urge potential preference-granting members to indicate where they intend to provide preferential treatment to LDC services and service suppliers. "

Chairperson Choi Seokyoung of the Republic of Korea reported a "very high level of engagement " from developed and developing countries in a position to do so who considered treating services exports from LDCs more favourably than those of other WTO members. In their indications, members addressed most of the 74 services sectors in which LDCs have requested preferences.

Members based their announcements on a collective request that the WTO Group of LDCs submitted on 21 July 2014, in which they indicated services sectors and modes of supply of interest to them.

The WTO services agreement, the General Agreement on Trade in Services, specifies that each member shall provide non-discriminatory treatment to services and service suppliers of other WTO members (Most-Favoured Nation principle).

The LDC Services Waiver, adopted at the WTO Eighth Ministerial Conference (MC8) in 2011, allows non-LDC members to grant preferences to provide all LDCs greater access to their markets. For the first time, this decision allows WTO members to deviate from their Most-Favoured Nation obligation under the services agreement.

Furthermore, many WTO members mentioned various technical assistance initiatives to improve LDC services export capacity.

The initiatives include training programmes for LDC service suppliers and support to upgrade infrastructure. Some members announced new initiatives and measures.

In his concluding remarks, the chairperson noted that this meeting was "one important stepping stone towards the operationalization of the waiver, but not the final concluding step. Today's indications show that we are firmly on the way of a joint journey ".

Bangladesh's Minister for Commerce, Tofail Ahmed MP, spoke about the potential of services to support growth in his country. 
 
 
Implementation of agreements to be ensured for sustainable trade development: MNA
18 February 2015
Daily Balochistan Express
 
Trade was an enabler of peace and better living conditions and it had a direct impact on the day to day lives of the people, Dr Zulfiqar Ali Bhatti, MNA said in the Annual 2015 session of the Parliamentary Conference at the World Trade Organisation (WTO) in Geneva.

According to a press release, issued here Tuesday, a 2Member delegation from the National Assembly was in Geneva for participation in the conference.

During the deliberations of the Conference, he stressed the importance of implementation and institutionalization of International Trade Agreements that guaranteed sustainable trade development.

Trade promotion was also the best measure to help resolve conflicts through peaceful means. It was also one of the development tools at the disposal of all for improving living conditions of the people.

The parliamentarians were people's representatives, they reflected the will of the people and thus there was a strong need to make the best possible use of the potential of trade as a driver for peace and prosperity, he said.

The Pakistan delegation highlighted the importance of such parliamentary activities and said that the WTO required ensuring that the TF agreement and the public stockholding for food security should be the common denominator for all, rather than a few.

Pakistan was afraid that the mechanism for food security might distort trade if there were inadequate checks and balances. "How will the WTO ensure that food security, does not become a threat to peace and better living conditions for other members", was the question that the Members asked the Organizers while thanking them for organizing the event.
 
 
EU Opens New Chapter In Civil Aircraft Dispute By Seeking WTO Panel
Posted: February 18, 2015 
World Trade Online
 
The European Union has opened a new chapter in the long-standing fight with the United States over subsidies each side provides to its respective manufacturers for the development of large civil aircraft by seeking a dispute settlement panel in the World Trade Organization (WTO) over a new round of tax breaks provided to Boeing by Washington state.
 
According to the EU panel request made on Feb. 12, these subsidies are prohibited under the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures (ASCM) because they are contingent on the use of domestic over imported goods in law and in fact.
 
The panel request has been placed on the agenda for the Feb. 23 meeting of the Dispute Settlement Body. It follows formal WTO consultations with the U.S. on Feb. 2, which failed to resolve the dispute, according to the EU panel request. “The EU had no choice, therefore, but to proceed with the next step in the WTO litigation and request the establishment of a panel,” an EU commission spokesman said this week.
 
The EU sought formal WTO consultations on these subsidies on Dec. 19.
 
At issue are the subsidies extended in the Washington state law known as Substitute Senate Bill 5952, which were successful in securing a Boeing commitment to assemble its new 777X jetliner and the plane’s carbon fiber wing in Washington state.
 
The measure, which was passed in 2013, extended a range of existing tax breaks to Boeing and other aerospace companies from 2024 to 2040. According to the EU panel request, the bill explicitly conditions “billions of dollars in subsidies on the use of aircraft components manufactured in Washington state."
 
Accordingly, these measures are prohibited under ASCM Article 3.1 (b) on local content subsidies and Article 3.2 that prohibits signatories from maintaining such subsidies, the EU said. The EU also notes that prohibited subsidies, when determined by the WTO dispute settlement mechanism, must be withdrawn by the party that maintains them “without delay."
 
The biggest tax breaks cited by the EU in its consultation request are reductions in the Washington state business and occupation tax for aerospace companies.
 
In its earlier case against government subsidies to Boeing, known as DS353, the EU unsuccessfully charged that the same tax breaks, extended from 2006 to 2024, were prohibited subsidies contingent on exports. Neither the panel nor the Appellate Body upheld that EU argument on prohibited subsidies.
 
The EU panel request also points out that the new dispute settlement process it has requested is under an expedited timetable because it relates to prohibited subsidies.
 
For example, under Article 4.6 of the ASCM, a panel dealing with prohibited subsidies claims is to issue its ruling within 90 days instead of the six months set for decisions in other disputes. In addition, it stipulates under Article 4.12 that the timelines applicable to those cases are generally half those of other disputes.
 
“The European Union expects that the panel will observe these expedited time periods,” the panel request says. One deadline stipulated in Article 4.4 is the right of a complaining party to request a panel within 30 days of its consultation request, though this can be extended by mutual agreement with the respondent. By making its panel request on Feb. 12, the EU clearly extended the 30-day timeline.
 
The new panel request comes as two earlier WTO cases, the successful EU challenge against government subsidies to Boeing (DS 353) and the successful U.S. challenge of EU member state subsidies provided to Airbus (DS316), remain mired in WTO litigation to determine if each party has complied with the adverse rulings. Those decisions are expected in the middle and end of 2015, respectively.
 
 
Ecuador politics: Quick View - Ecuador threatens to leave the CAN 
18 February 2015
Economist Intelligence Unit - ViewsWire
 
Event

The Ministry of Foreign Trade is weighing up new multilateral import safeguards in a bid to protect the dollarised country's trade and liquidity positions this year.

Analysis

The president, Rafael Correa, has threatened to withdraw the country from the Comunidad Andina de Naciones (CAN, the Andean Community, comprising of Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador and Peru) following a ruling from the CAN's general secretariat against Ecuador's imposition of import tariffs on its fellow CAN members, Colombia and Peru, in early January. Ecuador rejects the CAN's order that it reimburse its trade partners for the lost income as a result. According to the Servicio Nacional de Aduana del Ecuador (the customs agency), from January 5th to February 5th, it earned US$16m from the safeguards (levied at 21% on Colombia and 7% on Peru).

Ecuador insists that the safeguard tariffs-imposed as a remedial measure to mitigate the recent devaluation of its neighbours' currencies against the US dollar-are permissible under CAN rules. Following bilateral talks with Colombia and Peru (outside of the auspices of the CAN), it agreed first to limit and then remove the measures altogether at the end of February. However, it is now considering a more general set of safeguards that it says will be compliant with World Trade Organisation (WTO) rules, the details of which are pending. In addition, the government has announced a WTO-compliant drawback scheme in support of selected export sectors that will allow local companies to recoup around US$253m in taxes.

The government maintains that its trade policies aim to protect domestic liquidity, which is under severe pressure this year amid a sharp drop in oil export earnings. According to the Banco Central del Ecuador (the Central Bank), there was a trade deficit of US$727m in 2014. Although this was an improvement compared with a deficit of US$1bn in 2013, the drop came as a result of a sharp decrease in the fourth quarter (a deficit of US$1bn, offsetting the US$351m of the first three quarters), following a decline in the international price of oil, a trend that is expected to continue this year.

Ecuador's exit from the CAN would leave just three full members (Bolivia, Colombia and Peru).

 
Thailand starts second round of rubber buying via $180 mln fund 
By Kaweewit Kaewjinda 
 
BANGKOK, Feb 18 (Reuters) - Thailand's government will begin a second round of rubber buying from the market through a 6 billion baht ($184.22 million) buffer fund, the country's farm minister said on Wednesday.

A total of 20 billion baht was made available through a buffer fund for Thailand's state-run Rubber Estate Organisation to buy rubber from the market for resale, part of a 58 billion baht subsidy plan to support rubber prices announced in October.

"The cabinet passed a 6 billion baht budget to aid rubber prices," Thai Minister of Agriculture and Cooperatives Petipong Pungbun Na Ayudhya told reporters on Wednesday following a cabinet meeting.

About 4 billion baht would be used to buy RSS3 grade rubber and 2 billion baht will be spent on supporting latex rubber, he said.

This is the second time the buffer fund has been used. The government had previously withdrawn 6 billion baht in December.

Thailand, the world's No. 1 rubber producer and exporter, has been hit hard by excess supply and weak demand but state support has helped reduce its large rubber stocks, said a Thai trader, who declined to be named.

The government had previously said it would only intervene in the market if it had agreed sales, to avoid building up stockpiles similar to those accumulated under the subsidy schemes of the previous government and to wean farmers off a culture of subsidies.

Rubber farmers defied a law banning political gatherings in December and held rallies calling on the military government to support falling prices.

Soontorn Rakrong, a member of a rubber farmers group, was unimpressed.

"We did not support this rubber fund from the start but we will not block it either," he told Reuters. "This fund will help companies and cooperatives but not your average farmer."

Thai RSS3 prices were at $1.89 per kg on Wednesday, up from $1.72 per kg at the start of February.

Last week, prices for rubber cargoes in Asia picked up amid shorter supply of raw material in Indonesia and expectations of tightness elsewhere, while buyers were scarce in top consumer China ahead of the Lunar New Year break, traders said.

($1 = 32.5700 baht) (Additional reporting by Pracha Hariraksapitak; Editing by Amy Sawitta Lefevre and Anand Basu) 
 
 
Obama OKs drone exports, with many caveats
By Philip Ewing | 2/17/15 5:41 PM EST
POLITICO
 
President Barack Obama opened the door Tuesday to selling more armed drones overseas — but only to governments that pass what the administration calls a stringent screening process.
“As other nations begin to employ military [unmanned aerial systems] more regularly and as the nascent commercial UAS market emerges, the United States has a responsibility to ensure that sales, transfers and subsequent use of all U.S.-origin UAS are responsible and consistent with U.S. national security and foreign policy interests,” the State Department said.
Some U.S. allies already buy American drones. Britain’s Royal Air Force operates the General Atomics-built MQ-9 Reaper, which carries Lockheed Martin’s Hellfire missile. NATO is buying the unarmed Northrop Grumman-built Global Hawk. Other nations operate the small, catapult-launched Scan Eagle, built by a company owned by Boeing.
With this beachhead established, the unmanned systems industry’s trade group and the top drone-builders have spent years pushing the government to permit more overseas sales, arguing the U.S. must exploit its technological edge and not let foreign competition catch up. Tuesday’s announcement was designed to try to thread the needle and open more overseas markets to U.S. vendors but keep the often-controversial drones out of the hands of potential abusers. It’s unclear how quickly sales would begin under the new requirements.
“The United States’ new UAS export policy establishes the standards by which the United States will assess, on a case-by-case basis under the U.S. Conventional Arms Transfer Policy, potential exports of military UASes, including armed systems,” the State Department announcement said. “The new export policy puts in place stringent conditions on the sale or transfer of military UAS.”
Buyers must agree to “use these systems in accordance with international law,” “only when there is a lawful basis for use of force under international law” and not to “conduct unlawful surveillance or use unlawful force against their domestic populations,” among other restrictions.
Upsides include “interoperability” with allies operating the same drones as, for example, the U.S. Air Force, the administration says. That could reduce American troops’ workload and be a potential windfall for drone-builders.
“It also ensures appropriate participation for U.S. industry in the emerging commercial UAS market, which will contribute to the health of the U.S. industrial base, and thus to U.S. national security which includes economic security,” the State Department said.
The Association for Unmanned Vehicle Systems International, the top drone-industry advocate, has estimated that the U.S. “economic impact” from remotely operated systems could grow to $82 billion by 2025. Remotely operated aircraft have already revolutionized military operations and AUVSI and drone-builders argue they could do the same for the energy industry, agriculture, law enforcement and other applications.
But the American use of armed General Atomics-built Predator and Reaper drones in countless counterterror operations overseas has created serious political and image problems for unmanned systems advocates. The military and CIA drone program is shrouded in secrecy and blamed for the deaths of many civilians accidentally killed in strikes aimed at terror leaders.
That controversy and public fears about government surveillance have led to political backlash in parts of the U.S. For example, local governments have banned the presence of remotely operated aircraft even as the Federal Aviation Administration evaluates how users will be permitted to operate them in domestic airspace.
In its latest update to drone rules, FAA said Sunday that it would permit the low-level use of commercial drones under 55 pounds by 2017.
Tuesday’s decision to export armed drones could spark global fears about dictators or authoritarian governments getting hold of state-of-the-art American systems and using them to monitor or attack their own populations. The Obama administration has quietly permitted its shipments of tanks, fighter aircraft and other weapons to the government of Egypt, for example, after temporarily holding them up after Cairo imposed a political crackdown. U.S. officials may find themselves walking a tightrope as they deal with similar situations involving drone sales. 
The U.S. is already the world’s largest global arms dealer, with agreements around the world valued at about $72 billion in 2011, according to the most recent report from the Congressional Research Service.
 
 
Congressional Research Service Reissues Report on Industry-Specific Patent Laws
By Tony Dutra
WTO Reporter, February 19, 2015
 
Feb. 17 — The Congressional Research Service (CRS) reminded Congress of its commitment under the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) in a Feb. 6 reissued report on Tailoring the Patent System for Specific Industries.
 
The report was first published a year ago, highlighting the changes to the Patent Act made via the America Invents Act (AIA) that were “specific to particular types of inventions, including business methods, tax strategies, and human organisms.” It also noted fee-shifting “loser pays” legislation pending before Congress that, at one time, was limited to patents covering computer hardware or software.
 
The “Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS Agreement), requires patents to be available and enforceable ‘without discrimination as to … the field of technology,' ” the report said.
 
In a subsection titled The Feasibility of Sector-Specific Patent Rules, the CRS report focused on TRIPS' considerations but highlighted some “exceptions” to that broad rule: a country's right to “exclude from patentability inventions whose commercial exploitation would violate the public order or morality,” in Article 27, and “limited exceptions to the exclusive rights conferred by a patent,” such as exempting scientific experiments and acts for obtaining regulatory approval, in Article 30.
 
“U.S. legislation could simply track the exceptions identified by the provisions of the TRIPS Agreement, with particular reference to their interpretation by WTO dispute resolution panels,” the report recommended, though it pointed to no legislation in particular.
 
The CRS report was republished a day after the House reintroduced the Innovation Act, which is primarily directed at addressing purported abuses in patent infringement litigation and, more particularly, at so-called patent trolls. The report does not refer to the Innovation Act, and that bill's inclusion of a “loser pays” provision is not industry-specific.
 
The report appeared to douse any argument that a bill targeting specific patent owners would violate the TRIPS Agreement. The AIA had broadened the “prior commercial use” defense to patent infringement but barred its use “if the patented invention was made by an institution of higher education.”
 
This “university exception” appears to comply with the TRIPS Agreement because it draws a distinction based upon the identity of the inventor, rather than on a [technology] ground identified in Article 27.1,” the report said.
 
John R. Thomas, CRS visiting scholar and professor at the Georgetown University School of Law, wrote the report.
 
 
China wants to write the rules for commerce in Asia: Obama 
From Lalit K Jha

Washington, Feb 19 (PTI) President Barack Obama has alleged that China wants to write the rules for commerce in Asia which could give Chinese companies an "unfair advantage" over the US workers.

"Right now, China wants to write the rules for commerce in Asia. If it succeeds, our competitors would be free to ignore basic environmental and labour standards, giving them an unfair advantage over American workers," he said yesterday.

"We can't let that happen. We should write the rules, and level the playing field for our middle class. The first step is for Congress to pass Trade Promotion Authority," he said in an email and an accompanying video message to Americans.

Obama said his top priority as President is making sure more hardworking Americans have a chance to get ahead.

"That's why we have to make sure the United States - and not countries like China - is the one writing this century's rules for the world's economy," he said.

"Trade has an important role to play in supporting good- paying, middle-class jobs in the United States. Unfortunately, past trade deals haven't always lived up to the hype. That's why I've made it clear that I won't sign any agreement that doesn't put American workers first," he said.

"But we also should recognise that 95 per cent of our potential customers live outside our borders. Exports support more than 11 million jobs - and exporters tend to pay their workers higher wages. Failing to seize new opportunities would be devastating not just for our businesses, but for our workers too," Obama said.

That's why his administration is currently negotiating the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) - so that they can benefit from trade that is not just free, but also fair, he argued.

China is not included in the TPP which the US is negotiating with 11 other trading partners. It aims to set common standards on issues such as workers' rights and the environment as well as lower trade barriers.

"We have the chance to open up more markets to goods and services backed by three proud words - Made in America. For the sake of our businesses, and American workers, it's an opportunity we need to take.

"But beyond greater access to the world's fastest-growing region, the agreement will establish enforceable commitments to protect labour, environmental, and other crucial standards that Americans hold dear," he said.

Obama said after years of shipping jobs overseas, the US manufacturing sector is creating jobs at a pace not seen since the 1990s.

Rather than outsourcing, more companies are insourcing and bringing jobs back home. Today, more than half of manufacturing executives have said they're looking at bringing jobs back from China, he said.

"Let's give them one more reason to get it done, by giving me the tools I need to grow our economy, boost exports for our businesses, and give more hardworking middle-class families a chance to get ahead," said the US President. PTI LKJ CPS ZH

 
World trade rules within next 15 years to be regulated by regional agreements instead of WTO standards - Chairman of Eurasian Commission Khristenko
 
World trade rules within next 15 years to be regulated by regional agreements instead of WTO standards - Chairman of Eurasian Commission Khristenko

MOSCOW, February 18. /TASS/. The world trade rules will be mainly regulated by regional agreements instead of WTO standards within the nearest 15 years, Chairman of the Eurasian Commission Viktor Khristenko said Wednesday.

"I’m thoroughly convinced that the future lies in the integrated regional structures," Khristenko said.

Within the next 15 years, around 60% of the world trade will be regulated by regional preferential agreements instead of WTO standards, he said, adding that "this is a sustainable trend, which reflects discontent towards WTO regulations and rules and impossibility to alter them."

Chairman of the Eurasian Commission also said that in recent decades the world has been influenced by two major trends - globalization and regionalization, which have been going hand in hand, sometimes "colliding with one another." However, the 2008 crisis revealed the problems, Khristenko said, adding that "it was not a financial crisis, but it was a crisis of globalization, as by that moment it had become clear that there were no effective mechanisms to manage the global processes." This defined the emerging of regional integrations, he added.
 
 
Swiss prosecutor raids HSBC’s Geneva premises
Madison Marriage in Zurich and Elizabeth Paton and Martin Arnold in London
Financial Times
Last updated:February 18, 2015 2:52 pm
 
The search of HSBC premises in Switzerland is expected to be followed by inquiries at other institutions
 
HSBC’s offices in Switzerland have been raided by prosecutors investigating the bank’s past actions in helping overseas clients avoid taxes. 
Officials acting for the Geneva public prosecutor began to search the premises of the bank’s Swiss arm on Wednesday morning.
“We are looking for everything and anything we can find — documents and files,” the prosecutor said. The decision to investigate the bank over allegations of “aggravated money laundering” was taken this week, it added. 
The prosecutor said the scope of the investigation would affect individuals suspected of having committed or participated in money laundering. 
The search was carried out by officials under the direction of Olivier Jornot, the Geneva public prosecutor, and Yves Bertossa, prosecutor. 
The raid appeared to take HSBC by surprise. The first some of the bank’s executives knew of it was when the Geneva prosecutor put out a press release as the raid started.
On Wednesday, the bank said: “We have co-operated continuously with the Swiss authorities since first becoming aware of the data theft in 2008 and we continue to co-operate.”
The search came 10 days after Europe’s biggest bank by assets was the subject of allegations that it colluded in tax-dodging by clients of its Swiss operation.
Last week, HSBC admitted its Swiss private bank may have held accounts for tax-dodging customers in the past. The admission came after account details of more than 100,000 clients, including about 7,000 in the UK, were leaked to the media. 
The bank has been caught up in a swirl of disputes over its practices 
It was alleged the Swiss unit handed clients large, untraceable bricks of cash in foreign currencies and colluded with them to conceal “black” accounts from tax authorities.
The bank, which said it was “accountable for past control failures”, is facing criminal investigations in the US, France, Belgium and Argentina.
HSBC said it had “implemented numerous initiatives designed to prevent its banking services being used to evade taxes or launder money”. 
People who could face questions from the Geneva public prosecutor about the affair include Peter Braunwalder, who was chief executive of HSBC’s Swiss private bank between 2002-08 — the time when much of the controversial activity is alleged to have taken place. Mr Braunwalder sat on the board of Swedish bank Nordea until last year and is still president of Thommen Medical, the Swiss dental implant maker. 
He was succeeded by Alexandre Zeller, who ran the Swiss operation until 2012. HSBC’s global private banking operation was run out of London between 1998 and 2006 by Clive Bannister, who is now chief executive of London-listed insurer Phoenix Group. He was succeeded by Chris Meares, who left HSBC in 2011 and is now chairman of Quilter Cheviot, a UK investment firm. All of the men either declined to comment or were unavailable for comment.
Since the appointment of Stuart Gulliver as chief executive in 2011, HSBC has increased compliance staff to 6,000 from 1,500 and has been spending an additional $500m to $1bn, the bank said in August.
The bank placed advertisements in the press over the weekend to apologise for the alleged conduct of its Swiss unit, and said the events dated back eight years. The majority were said to have taken place between 2005-07.
On Saturday, Lord Green, HSBC chairman from 2006-10, stepped down as chairman of The City UK, a financial services body, to avoid damaging its operations in the wake of the private banking scandal.
HSBC was drawn into another controversy on Tuesday, when Peter Oborne quit as chief political commentator of the Daily Telegraph after accusing the UK newspaper of failing to run negative stories about the bank, one of its big advertisers.
In Switzerland, some banking executives said HSBC was unlucky to have been the subject of this level of scrutiny over its past actions.
One Swiss executive, who requested anonymity, said: “I doubt HSBC was the only bank to have faced these kinds of issues.” 
Guenther Dobrauz, head of legal and regulatory services at the Zurich office of PwC, the consultancy, said he expected further scandals and investigations of this nature at other Swiss institutions in the coming months. 
“There are still a lot of legacy issues from historical business models that will increasingly come to the fore,” said Mr Dobrauz. “I am expecting [a development in this area] every other day as cleaning up history usually takes a bit of time. I expect there are still quite a few of those skeletons around, but just because one thing pops up, I would not say the whole [system] is bad.” 
HSBC will report its annual results for 2014 in London on Monday and Douglas Flint, its chairman, is due to appear before the Treasury select committee two days later to face questions from MPs about the affair.
END


  ________________________________  
Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.