Impasse over marketing of drugs stalls trade talks
Pacific trade ministers to meet Sunday after latest impasse
UPDATE 2-Japan demands U.S. find drugs compromise in Pacific trade talks
Le ralentissement du commerce mondial s'installe
UE pide regular emisiones, tras fraude de VW
Europe : cacophonie autour des OGM


 
 
 
Impasse over marketing of drugs stalls trade talks
4 October 2015
The Washington Post
 
ATLANTA - Negotiators from the United States and 11 other nations struggled Saturday to break an impasse on an expansive Pacific Rim trade accord backed by the Obama administration, setting up what could be a make-or-break final day of talks.
 
Trade ministers agreed to extend their stay for a fifth day here to give themselves another shot Sunday at reaching consensus Sunday on the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP). The largest free-trade and regulatory pact in a generation has been beset by lingering disputes that have left officials fearful that they are running out of time if they don't close out the pact this weekend.
 
A fierce divide between the United States and Australia over market exclusivity for the creators of next-generation biologic drugs has stalled the talks, which officials had hoped would be wrapped up already. Differences over market access for dairy exports also remained unresolved, though officials said they were hopeful that could be bridged once the other issue was settled.
 
"Progress has been made, but negotiations are still ongoing," Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper, who is running for reelection this month, told reporters during a campaign stop Saturday in Montreal.
 
An all-night negotiating session at the Westin hotel, where the ministers are meeting, failed to produce significant progress on the thorniest issues. The main dispute centers on how long pharmaceutical companies will maintain exclusive marketing rights to genetically engineered medicines.
 
U.S. law provides companies 12 years of protection for the data that underlies the creation of the drugs, preventing other companies from using the initial research to develop similar products that public health advocates said could reduce costs in poorer countries.
 
U.S. negotiators proposed a compromise period of eight years of market exclusivity in the TPP, while Australia has refused to budge from the five years provided under its own laws.
 
"Making sure people in poor countries have access to life-saving medicine is our moral responsibility," Sen. Bernie Sanders (I-Vt.), a candidate for the Democratic presidential nomination, wrote on a Twitter post Saturday.
 
Pharmaceutical companies have countered that weaker protections would reduce incentives for developing the new genetically engineered medicines. In a sign of the high stakes, President Obama spoke by phone Thursday with Australian Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull in an attempt to spur the talks.
 
"TPP partners continue to work on creative solutions toward agreement," said a U.S. official, who was not authorized to talk on the record and spoke on the condition of anonymity. "TPP partners are committed to finding a solution that ensures life-saving medicines are more widely available, while also creating incentives for the development of new treatments and cures."
 
The TPP nations failed to complete the deal during a previous negotiating round in Hawaii in July.
 
 
 
 
Pacific trade ministers to meet Sunday after latest impasse
 
4 October 2015
Agence France Presse
 
Trade ministers of 12 Pacific Rim countries failed again to conclude a deal on a huge free-trade area and will meet one more time Sunday in hopes of reaching agreement.
 
The ministers attempting to nail down a deal encompassing 40 percent of the global economy began meeting late Saturday with hopes of a breakthrough, but the talks in Atlanta broke up after only about 15 minutes, with little progress.
 
Already once this year, in July in Hawaii, trade ministers gathered with expectations of a deal -- and left empty-handed.
 
"The main issues are still biologics and the dairy trade, between the US and Canada and New Zealand. The automotive issues are mostly settled," said an Asian official after the latest meeting.
 
Officials said that Sunday will be the last chance for an agreement during this round, with Japan's economy minister Akira Amari due back in Tokyo for a cabinet reshuffle and others headed to Istanbul for a G20 meeting Monday.
 
The ministers have been meeting since Wednesday and have been stuck for most of the time on the same two problems
 
The toughest one is on US demands for longer patent protections than generally accepted for biologics, or medicines derived from living materials.
 
Amari told Japanese reporters after the meeting that the main difference was between Australia, which has defended its standard of five years of protection for creators of the drugs, and the US, which currently gives 12 years' protection but is willing to compromise at eight years.
 
But others, including Peru, are also not budging on higher protections, other officials said.
 
The other major sticking point is a mainly three-way tug-of-war over lowering barriers to the dairy trade, between the United States, Canada and New Zealand.
 
There was hope but no clear indication that the divisions could be surmounted Sunday.
 
The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) is an ambitious idea pushed hard by the administration of President Barack Obama to create a free-trade area that would address "21st century trade issues" such as intellectual property protections, digital trade rights and protections for investors.
 
The Obama administration also hopes that China, the world's second-largest economy, would eventually be forced to accept the standards locked into place by the TPP, especially if other countries like South Korea join it as expected.
 
The negotiations have been carried out for several years under a tight veil of secrecy on the details of the agreement, with critics saying the beneficiaries will mostly be corporations.
 
The most difficult point has proved to be patent protection for biologics, cutting-edge drugs derived from living organisms, sometimes through genetic manipulation, that are proving valuable sources of treatments for everything from arthritis to cancer.
 
Much of the world grants the makers five years of market protection from competition, while Japan and Canada give eight years.
 
Critics saying the result of longer protections will be higher drug costs for people and for public health programs like Australia's.
 
The global health organization Doctors Without Borders says the lengthy US protections will give drug companies "monopolies" on treatments, preventing others from making generic-like "biosimilar" drugs that can be sold more cheaply.
 
On the other side is US industry, which is pressing the talks via Congress -- which must ratify the TPP deal -- to defend the US standards.
 
A senior senator who enjoys close support from the drug companies, Orrin Hatch, sent a sharp warning Wednesday to the US team.
 
"No one -- at least no one from our side of the negotiations -- should be in a hurry to close talks if it means getting a less-than-optimal result for our country... If the agreement falls short, I will not support it."
 
 
 
 
 
UPDATE 2-Japan demands U.S. find drugs compromise in Pacific trade talks
 
4 October 2015
Reuters News
(Adds New Zealand trade minister comments, byline)
 
By Kevin Krolicki and Krista Hughes
 
ATLANTA, Oct 3 (Reuters) - Japan called on the United States to find a way to break a deadlock over protections for next-generation medicines on Saturday as talks on a sweeping trade pact were extended for another 24 hours.
 
Negotiators have been up all night trying to broker a deal on the 12-nation Trans-Pacific Partnership, which will create a free trade zone covering 40 percent of the world economy.
 
A push by the United States to set a longer period of exclusivity for drug makers who develop biological drugs like Genentech's Avastin cancer-treatment has run into opposition from other TPP economies and is holding up a broader deal.
 
Japanese Economy Minister Akira Amari said he had agreed to a U.S. request to stay on in the southern city of Atlanta for another 24 hours, but said the United States had to find a way forward on biologics.
 
"I said there were two conditions for us to accept that proposal: first, this would be the last chance, in other words there had to be certainty of getting a deal on pharmaceuticals; second, because of the schedule, Japan could not accept any further extension," Amari told reporters.
 
The United States allows pharmaceutical companies an exclusive period of 12 years to use clinical data behind the approval for a new biological drug.
 
The Obama administration had previously proposed lowering that threshold to seven years but has pushed a proposal for an eight-year minimum in the TPP talks in Atlanta.
 
Australia, along with others such as New Zealand and Chile, have been unwilling to offer more than five years protection for the medicines since longer terms will push up the cost of state-subsidized medical programs.
 
New Zealand Trade Minister Tim Groser said the impasse is holding up a deal on trade in dairy products, New Zealand's main interest, and repeated that the country would not be pushed out of the pact. "We are not shooting for the stars," he said.
 
Groser warned that failing to seal a deal would have long-term strategic implications for the United States and all its trading partners.
 
"You can see the summit within reach and it's just a question as to whether or not you've got just enough political energy to reach out and do the last little bit," he said.
 
Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper, whose party faces a general election later this month, said the talks had made progress.
 
"Let me assure everyone that we will only conclude a deal that is in the best interests of our country," he told reporters in Montreal.
 
Harper's Conservatives are on course to win the most seats in the Oct. 19 election but may lose their majority, and the main opposition party has said it would not feel itself bound by any TPP deal that Harper negotiated. (Additional reporting by Ana Isabel Martinez in Atlanta and David Ljunggren in Montreal; Editing by Raissa Kasolowsky, Bernard Orr) 
 
 


 
 
 
Le ralentissement du commerce mondial s'installe
 
4 October 2015
Le Monde Éco et entreprise
 
L'OMC a révisé à la baisse, mercredi 30 septembre, ses prévisions de croissance 2015
 
Morosité, quand tu nous tiens  ! La progression du commerce mondial devrait se limiter à  2,8  % en  2015 au lieu des 4  % prévus en avril, estime l'Organisation mondiale du commerce (OMC) dans ses prévisions, révisées à la baisse, du mercredi 30  septembre. L'année 2015 serait ainsi la quatrième consécutive au cours de laquelle la croissance des échanges de biens et de services ne dépassera pas les 3  %.
 
Le ralentissement du commerce mondial s'installe donc dans le paysage économique. Quelques chiffres donnent une idée des évolutions en cours. Avant la crise, la progression annuelle des échanges mondiaux était deux fois plus élevée que celle du produit intérieur brut (PIB)  : respectivement + 7,2  % en moyenne contre + 3,2  % entre 1995 et 2007. Elle est tombée à + 3,5  % entre 2012 et 2014 pour une croissance mondiale de 2,5  %.
 
Ce ralentissement hors norme, qui tranche avec le fort rebond du commerce mondial en  2010 (+ 13  % contre + 4  % pour le PIB), a surpris les économistes. Ils y ont d'abord vu un phénomène conjoncturel résultant de la croissance molle dans une Union européenne qui compte pour environ un tiers des échanges à la surface du globe en volume. Mais devant la morosité persistante, des causes plus structurelles ont été avancées.
 
Recentrage économique chinois Dans le numéro de décembre  2014 de Finance &  Développement, publication mensuelle du Fonds monétaire international (FMI), trois économistes, Cristina Constantinescu, Michele Ruta et Aaditya Mattoo expliquent cette rupture par les changements intervenus dans les chaînes de valeur internationales des Etats-Unis et de la Chine. Le terme désigne, selon le Centre d'études prospectives et d'informations internationales (Cepii), "  la fragmentation du processus de production en un grand nombre de tâches effectuées dans des pays différents pour tirer le meilleur parti des différences de qualifications, de technologies, de disponibilités d'intrants et de prix des facteurs.  " Ce processus, qui a joué un rôle central dans l'accélération du commerce mondial dans les années 1990 et 2000, s'épuise. Le recentrage économique de la Chine y contribue, les entreprises de ce pays remplaçant désormais les intrants étrangers par des intrants chinois.
 
"  Les importations de la Chine devraient reculer de 3,8  % en volume en  2015. Ce serait la première baisse depuis vingt ans, ce qui pèse sur le commerce mondial, analyse Bernard Marc de l'Insee. L'Europe, toutefois, exporte surtout des produits finis en Chine, dont la demande a  moins baissé que celle des produits d'assemblage, essentiellement importés des autres pays d'Asie.  " L'Europe serait donc mieux armée que les pays asiatiques pour résister au ralentissement chinois.
 


 
 
 
UE pide regular emisiones, tras fraude de VW
 
2 October 2015
Portafolio
 
k EFE k Luxemburgo Tras el fraude detectado en motores diésel en la Volkswagen, la Unión Europea (UE) pidió acelerar las negociaciones de las nueva regulación de emisiones de vehículos en carretera y no solo en laboratorios. La medida fue planteada por los ministros de Competitividad europeos, quienes se mostraron favorables a acelerar la negociación de la nueva regulación, ya en preparación, que medirá las emisiones de los vehículos en carretera y no solo en laboratorio. "Sí, veo voluntad de los países para adelantar la entrada en vigor de la nueva regulación", en principio prevista para el 2017, indicó al término del consejo de ministros la comisaria europea de Mercado Interior, Elzbieta Bienkowska.
 
Los ministros abordaron por primera vez en un almuerzo, trabajo el escándalo de la manipulación del motor diésel EA 189 EU5 por parte del fabricante alemán Volkswagen, que le permitió falsear las emisiones de gases contaminantes en 11 millones de vehículos en todo el mundo, 683.626 de ellos en España. Por otro lado, la Unión Europea dio ayer su respaldo oficialmente al acuerdo de facilitación comercial cerrado en Bali en diciembre de 2013, el primer protocolo de índole global que se alcanza en el seno de la Organización Mundial del Comercio (OMC). Ese acuerdo establece decenas de medidas para facilitar el flujo de bienes en las aduanas, reducir la burocracia y con ello multiplicar los intercambios comerciales entre países. El objetivo es ayudar a las pequeñas empresas a explotar sus oportunidades de exportación y a facilitar la participación de los países en desarrollo en el comercio internacional, destacó el Consejo en un comunicado. 2
 


 
 
 
Europe : cacophonie autour des OGM
 
3 October 2015
Ouest France
 
La Commission a laissé le libre choix aux pays membres. C'est aujourd'hui le dernier délai pour se prononcer sur les OGM.
 
Repères
 
Une majorité de pays contre les OGM
 
Quinze pays européens, dont la France, ont exprimé leur refus de cultiver des plantes génétiquement modifiées. Dans cette liste, on retrouve l'Allemagne, la Bulgarie, la Pologne, les Pays-Bas, l'Italie, la Hongrie, la Lituanie, Chypre, la Lettonie. Le Royaume-Uni l'a également demandé pour l'Écosse, le Pays de Galles et l'Irlande ; même démarche de la Belgique pour la Wallonie.
 
Les retardataires ont jusqu'à aujourd'hui pour se prononcer. Paradoxe de cette situation : même les opposants aux OGM en importent pour leur bétail. L'essentiel du soja cultivé dans le monde est aujourd'hui génétiquement modifié.
 
Dix-neuf plantes OGM autorisées par l'Europe en 2014
 
Faute de majorité, la Commission européenne laisse à chaque pays le soin de se prononcer pour ou contre des OGM même lorsqu'ils sont homologués par l'Autorité européenne de sécurité sanitaire (EFSA). Trois pays européens cultivent des OGM : l'Espagne, la Tchéquie et le Portugal.
 
Un risque de conflit avec les États-Unis
 
La question des OGM fait partie des dossiers sensibles dans le projet de traité de libre-échange entre les États-Unis. Et ces derniers menacent d'attaquer la réglementation européenne pour entrave à la liberté du commerce devant la juridiction de l'Organisation mondiale du commerce (OMC).
 
Pour la France, premier exportateur mondial de semences, le dossier est aussi économique. Limagrain, troisième semencier mondial, travaille sur les OGM et a déjà menacé de délocaliser ses recherches.
 
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.