Russia, EU may settle LCV duty dispute out of court

Russia: Govt to cut import duties on 4,000 goods according to WTO requirements

Indonesia complains over US duties imposed on coated paper

East African Partner states to implement WTO trade deal

BRICS resolve to ensure food security solution by Dec

"Plain packaging": Les cigarettiers contre-attaquent

Menaces de rétorsions contre le vin français

 

Russia, EU may settle LCV duty dispute out of court

16 March 2015

Prime News

SHARM EL-SHEIKH, Egypt, Mar 16 (PRIME) -- Russia and the E.U. may settle their dispute within the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO) over Moscow’s import duties out of court, Economic Development Minister Alexei Ulyukayev told reporters on March 14.

On March 3, Ulyukayev said following his meeting with E.U. Trade Commissioner Cecilia Malmstrom that the sides agreed to improve settlements of their mutual disputes in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO, and two or three of them may be solved very soon.

“It is the E.U. claim over customs duties for palm oil, paper and refrigerators in the first place. It may also possible be the suit over LCVs,” Ulyukayev pointed out.

On March 9, Russia turned down the E.U. request to convene a panel of arbiters of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO to investigate the dispute over duties on imports of paper, cardboard, palm oil and fridges. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO will consider an E.U. request to establish a panel of arbiters to settle the dispute at a meeting on March 25, and Russia will not be able to turn down the panel for a second time.

End

Russia: Govt to cut import duties on 4,000 goods according to WTO requirements

M-Brain

13 March 2015

Esmerk Russian News

Vedomosti, 13 Mar 2015, p.5:- In 2015, Russia will reduce import duties on 4,000 goods according to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO requirements. The country will cut the duty on steel products by 1.2-3.3%, on aluminum products by 1.2-4%, on timber by 1-3.3%, on agricultural products to 11% from 15% at present for five to seven years, on industrial products to 6% from 11%. The plan is to revise rates for 11,000 goods.

M-Brain Insight Oy

Indonesia complains over US duties imposed on coated paper

16 March 2015

The Jakarta Post

Indonesia has filed a complaint with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO) because it says its coated paper shipped to the US has become a target of punitive duties at the hands of the US authorities.

The US has imposed a 20.13 percent anti-dumping tariff and a 17.94 percent countervailing tariff on Indonesia's coated paper, which is normally used for high-quality print graphics.

The duties, imposed since 2010, will this year be assessed to determine if they will be extended.

Indonesia stated the measures violated the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO rules, including Anti-Dumping Agreement and the Subsidies and Countervailing (SCM) Agreement, according to a statement issued by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO on Friday.

Indonesia's move was motivated, among others, by its allegation that the benchmark for pricing used by the US to determine the duties was based on prices in another country, said Trade Ministry trade defense director Oke Nurwan.

"We are adopting a precedent set by China, which has won an appeal in one of its trade disputes, as the reference for pricing in the case inquiry was based on prices in other countries," he told The Jakarta Post Sunday.

Similar coated paper from China was also charged with anti-dumping and countervailing duties by the US authorities.

In May 2012, China took the case to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO's Dispute Settlement Body and later appealed to the Appellate Body following an unfavorable result.

The levies imposed on Indonesia's coated paper have impacted major producers HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"PT Pabrik Kertas Tjiwi Kimia, PT Pindo Deli Pulp and Paper Mills and PT Indah Kiat Pulp and Paper, grouped under pulp and paper giant Asia Pulp and Paper.

The duties imposed have effectively lowered the shipment of glossy paper, which is generally employed in printing multi-colored graphics for catalogues, books, magazines, envelopes, labels, wrapping paper and greeting cards, from US$69.6 million before 2010 to $16.7 million at present, according to data from the Trade Ministry.

Oke further said he expected the US would immediately respond to Indonesia's request for consultations to settle the issue.

The US must address the request within 60 days and if consultations fail to settle concerns, Indonesia can progress the case into a formal trade dispute.

The Indonesian pulp and paper industry has dealt with repeated dumping and subsidy allegations, including from the US, due to its efficient production that allows competitive prices.

Earlier this year, based on petitions from its domestic stakeholders -- HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"United Steelworkers (USW) and four paper manufacturers -- the US suspected that Indonesia, along with Australia, Brazil, China and Portugal, had dumped photocopy paper on the country. In addition, it also claimed that paper makers in Indonesia and China had received improper subsidies.

Indonesia has consulted the US on the issue, but the follow up has not been forthcoming.

Asia Pulp and Paper director Suhendra Wiriadinata did not respond to the Post's request for comment.

--JP/Linda Yulisman

East African Partner states to implement WTO trade deal

CHRISTABEL LIGAMI 

14 March 2015

The East African partner states have taken the final step towards implementing the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organisation Trade Facilitation Agreement, which is expected to widen the market for the region’s goods and services. The five partner states are expected to ratify the WTO protocol before March 31 in order to show their commitment to the trade pact they recently signed with the US.

It is expected that once the protocol is implemented, it will help reduce the cost of doing business between the EAC and other economies by almost 14.5 per cent, adding to trade reforms already underway in the region. READ: Africa to present unified stand on issues at WTO meeting in Kenya

James Kiiru, an external trade officer at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Kenya’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Trade, said final preparations are underway to ratify the protocol not only because of the deadline but also because Kenya will be hosting the WTO summit towards the end of the year.

“A well-functioning trade facilitation regime will allow easier and faster flow of goods across borders. The EAC will be viewed as progressive and ready to attract investments and also promote intra-regional trade,” said Mr Kiiru. In the new deal, recently signed in the US, the two parties agreed to adopt the WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement signed in Bali in 2013, which commits countries to ensure that trade issues, including Customs, documentation procedures along their transport corridors and ports are completely abolished to reduce the cost of doing business.

“The US has committed to supporting the member states to implement the WTO agreement and to team up with other governments and the private sector on trade issues,” said Mr Kiiru.

In November last year, WTO members adopted a protocol to add the Trade Facilitation Agreement to the WTO deal opening the process up for individual WTO members to formally accept the agreement. So far, only China, Korea, Russia, Mauritius and the US have ratified the protocol.

The WTO agreement will enter into force only when two-thirds of WTO’s members have completed their domestic legal procedures and submitted their instruments of acceptance.

“The focus of the US-EAC trade agreement is on trade and investment,” said Mr Kiiru, adding that US companies like HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"IBM, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Fedex and DHL are keen on investing in the region while the ones already here plan to expand. In the agreement, the US will provide access to its markets for East Africa’s agricultural produce and in return the region will cut tariffs on imported manufactured goods from the West.

Currently, the EAC products access quota-free markets in the US through the the Africa Growth and Opportunity Act (Agoa), which is expected to be renewed after the September expiry for another 15 years.

“We are however not utilising this opportunity as the region is only able to export up to five products to the US,” said Mr Kiiru, adding, “The challenge the partner states have is on poor product standards, which hinder them from selling more products in the US.” The two parties will work together to develop and advance trade facilitation initiatives on sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) measures to meet international standards and guidelines. “No later than 18 months after the coming into force of this agreement, each EAC partner state shall establish an effective process to ensure that it notifies all proposed SPS measures to WTO,” read the EAC-US trade agreement. The main exports from East Africa to the US are agricultural goods and textiles, while US exports have so far consisted of heavy machinery and aircraft.

Jane Ngige, the CEO of the Kenya Flower Council, said the main challenge for horticultural products in accessing the US market is lack of direct flights. “We currently have no direct flights and as a result of routing through Holland it takes longer for our fresh produce to get to the US market,” said Ms Ngige, adding that the EAC partners need to also negotiate for direct flights. Andrew Luzze, executive director of the East African Business Council (EABC), said that by adopting the WTO trade agreement, the region will build on the reforms being pursued by the partner states, which have resulted in substantial reductions in the time and cost of moving goods across borders within the EAC. “The US has had bilateral partnerships with individual EAC states since 2013 but this agreement marks the first of its kind with the regional trading bloc,” said US trade representative Michael Froman. Trade between the US and the EAC countries in 2014 increased by 52 per cent to $2.7 billion. Imports from the US totalled $2 billion; Exports totalled $743 million. According to Eric Musau, a business analyst at Stanbic Investment Bank, the US wants to maintain its presence in Africa since China, India, and the EU have all increased their economic links and trade deals with African countries over the past decade. “This will not have much impact on economic development in the region but will help with capacity building on the areas of transport and trade facilitation,” said Mr Musau. Nation Media Group Limited

BRICS resolve to ensure food security solution by Dec

13 March 2015

Press Trust of India

New Delhi, Mar 13 (PTI) BRICS members, including India and China, today resolved to ensure conclusion of negotiations for a permanent solution for public stock-holding of foodgrains under the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO by December, 2015.

"We reaffirmed our commitment to work together to negotiate and make all concerted efforts to agree and adopt a permanent solution to the issue of public stock-holding for food security purposes by December 31, 2015 in line with the decision adopted by the WTO General Council on November 27 2014," said a joint declaration after the three-day meeting of BRICS' agriculture ministers that concluded in Brazil today.

India was represented by Agriculture Minister Radha Mohan Singh . Agriculture Ministers of Brazil, Russia, China and South Africa were also present in the meeting.

"In this joint declaration, public policies for food and nutrition security and the strengthening of family farming are highlighted in detail, the results of which are going to form a key part of the general strategy for ensuring access to food for the most vulnerable populations of BRICS and other developing countries," Singh said at the meeting.

The joint declaration would certainly play a key role in taking forward our agricultural cooperation, he added.

Following an agreement between India and the US, negotiations at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO made a headway after it was resolved that the "peace clause" would continue till a permanent solution to the public stock-holding is found.

Under the peace clause, a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO member gets immunity against penalty for breaching the food subsidy cap. As per the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO norms, a developing nation can provide food subsidy of up to 10 per cent of the total farm output

Expressing concerns over grave distortion caused by agricultural export subsidies on international trade, BRICS nations also resolved to support HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO talks for eliminating the use of this policy instrument by countries as stated in the 2013 HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO ministerial conference declaration adopted in Bali.

"...Multilateral negotiations should prioritise efforts to create a level playing field by substantially improving market access, eliminating export subsidies and significantly reducing the level of trade distorting domestic support," said BRICS nations in the joint declaration. PTI LUX CS NS

Press Trust Of India Limited

"Plain packaging": Les cigarettiers contre-attaquent

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Marc Payet

14 March 2015

Le Parisien-Aujourd'hui en France

La loi de santé qui instaure le paquet neutre sera examinée à partir de mardi à l'Assemblée. Les industriels se démènent pour trouver des parades.

C'est un vaste bras de fer qui est engagé. L'industrie du tabac, qui n'a pas du tout envie de se voir imposer le paquet neutre par le gouvernement français, riposte tous azimuts. La bataille, qui va commencer officiellement mardi, sur les bancs de l'Assemblée, est déjà lancée en coulisses. L'enjeu n'est pas mince pour les cigarettiers. La suppression des logos des marques sur les paquets et la présence de photos chocs de plus grande taille, au resto et au verso, nuiront aux ventes...

Lobbying intense auprès des députés

C'est le but recherché par Marisol Touraine, au nom de la santé publique, et des 73 000 morts par an. L'arrivée de ces nouveaux paquets est prévue « début 2016 ». L'Australie les a adoptés en 2012 et l'Angleterre s'apprête à faire de même. Le lobby du tabac organise la contre-attaque. Michèle Delaunay, cancérologue, ancienne ministre des Personnes âgées, et députée de la Gironde, confie que « des représentants de l'industrie du tabac sont venus voir des députés en défilé à l'Assemblée ces deux dernières semaines pour nous prévenir que si le paquet neutre passait en France, cela coûterait cher à l'Etat, en faisant des procès, comme cela a eu lieu en Australie ».

L'offensive est mondiale. L'Indonésie, important pays producteur de tabac, menace, par la voix de son ambassadeur auprès de l'OMC, de faire adopter en représailles une directive d'étiquetage « neutre » sur les bouteilles de vin françaises. Mais c'est sur le front intérieur que la menace est peut-être la plus sérieuse. Très remontés, les buralistes ont lancé une campagne offensive sur le thème : « La prévention oui, la culpabilisation non ».

Et ils recueillent des oreilles attentives... y compris dans la majorité. Ainsi, la sénatrice Catherine Génisson, élue PS du Nord, médecin, s'interroge « sur l'efficacité de ces images chocs. Ça va peut-être au contraire inciter les jeunes à collectionner ces paquets de cigarettes ». Elle ajoute qu'il faudrait plutôt « soutenir les buralistes, qui subiront un vrai manque à gagner ».

Quelle que soit l'issue de cette bataille, l'industrie montre qu'elle a de la ressource. Un moment menacée par le succès de l'e-cigarette, elle rebondit en lançant officiellement demain en France la première cigarette électronique assemblée par HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Imperial Tobacco, à Liverpool, en Angleterre. Son originalité ? Elle peut se glisser... dans un paquet de cigarettes.

Menaces de rétorsions contre le vin français

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Daniel Rosenweg

14 March 2015

Le Parisien-Aujourd'hui en France

LA RIPOSTE au projet français d’instauration du paquet de cigarettes neutre ne s’est pas fait attendre. Dès octobre dernier, le gouverneur de l’Etat de Caroline du Nord, aux Etats-Unis, grand producteur mondial de tabac, a écrit à Gérard Araud, l’ambassadeur de France à Washington, pour mettre en garde notre pays. La lettre restée confidentielle est claire : « Imaginez si les Etats- Unis imposaient un emballage neutre et standardisé pour l’alcool?; la même bouteille pour tous les alcools, écrit Pat McCrory. Les grands producteurs français seraient furieux et ne manqueraient pas d’arguer que la qualité et la particularité de leur vin ont été volées »… Voilà donc la France prévenue.

C’est maintenant au tour de l’ambassadeur permanent de l’Indonésie auprès de l’Organisation mondiale du commerce, l’OMC, de menacer — en termes diplomatiques — la France. « Nous respectons totalement le droit des Etats à légiférer comme ils l’entendent pour réduire la consommation de tabac. Nous-mêmes luttons contre ce fléau, nous explique Iman Pambagyo dont le pays est le cinquième producteur de tabac au monde. Mais il y a plusieurs moyens de faire, notamment la prévention. En revanche, insiste l’ambassadeur et ex-ministre du Commerce indonésien, le paquet neutre pose un problème de droit international. » Le diplomate enfonce le clou : « Si la France estime avoir le droit d’imposer le paquet neutre, alors l’Indonésie serait légitime à imposer la bouteille d’alcool neutre, car l’alcool aussi est dangereux pour la santé »… La loi du talion, donc.

Le diplomate rappelle qu’il a engagé auprès de l’OMC une procédure contre l’Australie qui a institué le paquet neutre en 2012. « L’Australie doit répondre aux questions soulevées d’ici à juin prochain, dit-il, et l’OMC rendra sa décision sur la légalité de ce paquet neutre en 2016. La France ferait bien d’attendre cette décision plutôt que de se placer dans l’illégalité de façon proactive. »

La France est l’un des premiers exportateurs d’alcool en Indonésie, surtout du vin rouge, avec près de 1?000 hl en 2012, chiffre en progression de 20?% par an dans ce pays de 240 millions d’âmes.

Le tabac, lui, est un des piliers de l’économie indonésienne?; il rapportait en 2011 près de 700 M€ au pays. Un secteur qui emploie 6,1 millions de personnes travaillant dans des milliers d’exploitations rurales. Quand l’Australie a instauré le paquet neutre, des centaines de salariés ont manifesté devant l’ambassade d’Australie à Jakarta.

Mais pourquoi tant d’hostilité à l’égard précisément du paquet neutre?? « Le Chili, la Nouvelle-Zélande, l’Australie ont déjà imposé le paquet neutre?; si tous les pays suivent, ça mettra en danger notre économie, explique l’ambassadeur auprès de l’OMC. Déjà l’augmentation de notre production de tabac montre des signes de ralentissement. »

SNC Le Parisien Libéré

