Headlines:
China's slowdown will weigh heavily on global economy
ICC urges countries to observe rules of origin
TPP trade deal would reignite North American co-operation: Mexican minister
EU tries to clear "fog of confusion" over U.S. trade pact
Interview: Eastern Economic Forum to promote Russia's Far East development
HANDELSBLATT EXCLUSIVE; Rousseff: Brazil Poised for Recovery
 
Details:
China's slowdown will weigh heavily on global economy
Paul Pong Po-lam 
22 August 2015
EJ Insight
Copyright 2014 Hong Kong Economic Journal All Rights Reserved 
Various industries and companies worldwide have been relying on China markets for growth over the last decade. 
China’s economic slowdown will inevitably hurt big exporters like Germany and Japan. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Morgan Stanley’s “Fragile Five” now swells to “Troubled Ten”, referring to those with the biggest trading exposure in China.
The surprise renminbi depreciation has weighed on the currencies of the “Troubled Ten”, including the South African rand, Brazilian real, Thai baht, Singapore dollar, Taiwan dollar, South Korean won, Chilean peso, Colombian peso, Russian ruble and Peruvian Nuevo Sol.
All these nations either depend heavily on exports to China or compete with Chinese exporters.
For example, China is the largest export destination for South Korea and South Africa, and accounts for 30 percent and 37 percent of their exports last year.
Exporting nations and developed countries are relying on exports to China. China is the biggest economic powerhouse among the BRICs. The mounting pressure on China’s economic growth is set to ripple across the global economy.
Meanwhile, economic data from the eurozone remains disappointing. The GDP growth rate in eurozone’s three largest economies -- Germany, Italy and France -- all have lagged behind expectations in the second quarter.
That reflects the bumpy road for economic recovery in Europe. The CPI in the region was 0.2 percent in July, far below the target of 2 percent.
The United States currently represents 22.3 percent of the global GDP, and China’s GDP is about half of that of the US.
Europe’s overall economic size is similar to that of the US, and Japan’s GDP is around one-fourth of that of the US.
The US is still in the early stage of economic recovery. Given its shrinking ratio of global economy, how could the US lead global economic growth again?
The US could slip back to slower growth, dragged by Europe, Japan, China and other emerging economies.
Most are still confident in the US economic recovery, and global capital has been flowing into the US because of the strong the US dollar. 
US bonds have become the best safe haven as China's currency devaluation and falling commodity prices are sparking deflationary pressure worldwide, in particular in the Troubled Ten.
China has kept increasing US bond holdings for four straight months to US$1.27 trillion, close to the historical peak of US$1.317 trillion in 2013.
It is now the biggest holder of US bonds, followed by Japan who holds US$1.197 trillion. China has also ramped up its gold reserve.
In this case, who will be the growth engine for next decade? There is limited upside for growth stemming from population dividend and technology upgrade.
Emerging markets, in particular BRICS, used to be hot spots for investors. China is the world’s largest emerging market, and hence has significant impact on global economic growth. India and Africa have yet to reach the same level.
Global investors are pinning hopes on China’s reform agenda, including liberalizing financial markets, renminbi internationalization, SOE reform, One Belt One Road and the Asia Infrastructure Investment Bank.
If all these reforms progress well, China could continue to spearhead global economic growth for the next 10 years, which would benefit world.
This article appeared in the Hong Kong Economic Journal on Aug. 20. 
ICC urges countries to observe rules of origin
22 August 2015
Manila Bulletin
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" International Chamber of Commerce (ICC) has urged countries to observe governing rules of origin, saying the rise of different country-level non-preferential rules of origin is leading to cross-border confusion and hardships for enterprises.
In a policy statement, the ICC noted that the current trend in which jurisdictions develop their own country-of-origin regulations is leading to "trade distortion and increased confusion for manufacturers and importers and exporters alike due to competing non-preferential origin regimes."
"Each of these regimes features its own unique set of non-preferential rules of origin, creating trade distortion, and costly complexity for traders stifling cross border trade and economic growth."
ICC stressed that the proliferation of non-preferential rules of origin has become an increasing barrier to cross-border trade and called for "a standstill until either a multilateral agreement or sectoral agreements can be reached."
Non-preferential rules of origin of goods are considered an important instrument in international trade. The generally accepted HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) criterion for this type of rule states that when a good is produced in a single country, then the product is wholly obtained in that country.
When two or more countries are involved in the production of a good, the product's country of origin shall be the country where the product undergoes its last substantial transformation.
The biggest risk from having different countries of origin for one product is how it limits trade flow, said ICC." Bureaucratic barriers reduce the potential of growth of international trade. Compliance to the increasing number of country specific non-preferential rules of origin will lead to burdensome trade costs for international traders-building a barrier to trade for big companies as well as for small and medium sized companies."
ICC also urged countries to ratify and honor the provisions of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Customs Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) Revised Kyoto Convention Specific Annex K on definitions, principles, standards, and recommended practices with regard to origin.
Moreover, ICC sought for a halt in implementing new country-specific origin rules and for mutual recognition of non-preferential rules of origin until the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's Agreement on Rules of Origin (ARO) is ratified.
ICC also proposed increasing efforts to ratify the ARO. The agreement, which aims to precisely define the substantial transformation of all products for all non-preferential purposes, has eluded the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO for nearly two decades.
"Cooperation between customs administrations can be organized easily compared to the cost of implementing numerous different rules of origin regimes by countless enterprises."
"The non-preferential rules of origin implemented in the country of manufacture should therefore be accepted by the country of import. As documentary evidence, a certificate of origin issued by a trusted third party in the exporting country may be used," said the ICC.
ICC, which speaks for enterprises from all sectors worldwide, is a global network comprised of over six million companies, chambers of commerce, and business associations in more than 130 countries.
Manila Bulletin Publishing Corp
TPP trade deal would reignite North American co-operation: Mexican minister
 If Canada, the United States and Mexico can see eye to eye on automobiles, not only could the three countries help to rescue the troubled Trans-Pacific Partnership talks, but they could also kick-start a new era of North American co-operation, Mexico’s Foreign Minister predicts
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" John Ibbitson
21 August 2015
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
OTTAWA -- If Canada, the United States and Mexico can see eye to eye on automobiles, not only could the three countries help to rescue the troubled Trans-Pacific Partnership talks, but they could also kick-start a new era of North American co-operation, Mexico’s Foreign Minister predicts.
“There are very few issues that would not benefit from a more North American perspective,” Jose Antonio Meade told The Globe and Mail in an interview.
“More and more we are coming to realize that there is benefit to trilateralizing the issues.”
But analysts warn that it will take more political will than U.S. President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Barack Obama has displayed thus far to get the Three Amigos working together again.
Efforts to conclude the Trans-Pacific Partnership negotiation – an ambitious trade agreement that would involve 12 Pacific nations – foundered last month in Maui in part because Canada and Mexico rejected a deal that the United States and Japan had reached on automobiles and auto parts.
Canada and Mexico want a higher threshold of production within the trade zone before cars and car parts are exempt from tariffs than the United States and Japan are proposing.
And feathers were ruffled when Ottawa and Mexico City learned that the United States and Japan had negotiated the lower threshold without consulting them.
“I think it was safe to say it was a surprise,” Mr. Meade acknowledged.
To get the talks back on track, trade officials from Canada, the United States and Mexico met in Washington on Thursday in an effort to reach a compromise. In an e-mail, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Canadian Department of Foreign Affairs, Trade and Development described the talks as “constructive,” but had no further comment.
The TPP, as it is known, is facing major headwinds, and time is running out to reach an agreement. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" U.S. Congress must ratify whatever agreement is reached, the American presidential election could hijack congressional approval and attention in Canada is distracted by the federal election.
But Mr. Meade remained confident that an agreement will be reached, although he would not predict by when.
And he said he believes that agreement would revive a continental approach to tackling major issues affecting the three countries.
Such co-operation has been on the decline, with Canada and Mexico negotiating bilaterally with the United States during the Obama administration, especially on border issues.
The trilateral relationship is “stalled for lack of political ambition and leadership,” said Colin Robertson, an analyst in Canada-U.S. relations.
Mr. Obama has shown little interest throughout his presidency in taking a continental approach to issues, preferring to talk with Canada and with Mexico separately – to the extent he talks to them at all.
“There’s not that grand vision, which we’ve had under previous presidents and which I think you have to have,” Mr. Robertson observed.
Canada-Mexico relations are also strained as a result of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Stephen Harper government’s decision to impose visa requirements on Mexicans visiting Canada.
But a successfully concluded Trans-Pacific Partnership would not only strengthen ties among the 12 Pacific nations that are part of the talks, Mr. Meade predicted, it would also update the two-decade-old HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" North American Free Trade Agreement involving Canada, Mexico and the United States.
And that, in turn, could lead to a continental approach to other pressing issues, especially energy security. “The more we integrate our energy markets the more security we will have, the better prices we will have, the more competitive we will be,” Mr. Meade predicted.
Similarly, it makes sense to pursue a continental approach to reducing carbon emissions, he added.
But others are skeptical. Len Edwards, a distinguished fellow at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Centre for International Governance Innovation in Waterloo, Ont., and a former deputy minister of foreign affairs, agreed that a successful conclusion to the TPP talks would rejuvenate HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" NAFTA.
But grappling with challenges in energy, the environment, agriculture, mobility and the like “will require renewed energy, co-operation and commitment,” he added. And at the moment, all three are lacking.
Globe and Mail Update
EU tries to clear "fog of confusion" over U.S. trade pact
21 August 2015
Reuters News
* TTIP talks hit by criticism of secrecy
* Opponents fear erosion of food, environment standards
* Disclosure move follows German pressure for more openness (Adds German reaction)
By Barbara Lewis and Caroline Copley
BRUSSELS/BERLIN, Aug 21 (Reuters) - The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Commission will publish detailed reports on its negotiations with the United States to forge the world's biggest trade pact, EU trade chief Cecilia Malmstrom said on Friday, responding to criticism that the talks have been shrouded in secrecy.
If agreed, the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) would encompass a third of world trade, and proponents say it would deliver more than $100 billion of economic gains on both sides.
But opponents in Europe have voiced concern that it could erode EU standards on food safety and the environment, and argued the negotiations have not been transparent.
In a blog post, Malmstrom said one of her first decisions as trade commissioner when she took office last year had been to make the negotiations more open, but the debate "seems to have been caught up in a fog of confusion".
To address that, she said that from now on the Commission will published "detailed and extensive reports" on its website in all official EU languages.
The move came after Germany had urged the Commission to restore EU governments' access to electronic reports on the state of the negotiations, which it had halted last month in order to end a series of leaks.
A spokesman for German Economy Minister Sigmar Gabriel confirmed he had written to Malmstrom to express his concerns about that move, which he called "the latest setback in transparency efforts."
It was essential that politicians in individual member states were fully informed about the talks, he wrote in an Aug. 20 letter, published by investigative news site Correct!v.
"Only this way can we create the necessary legitimacy and acceptance for the talks, the result of which the German parliament must also vote on."
Gabriel is struggling to drum up support for the TTIP, which is backed by only 39 percent of Germans, according to a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" PEW Research Center survey.
Asked for reaction to Malmstrom's blog post, an economy ministry spokesman said: "We welcome that the Commission has moved on this important question. This step must, however, also lead to more transparency compared with the process up to now."
He said Germany would keep talking to the Commission to make sure members of national parliaments were kept fully informed about the negotiations via access to 'consolidated documents'.
So far, 10 rounds of TTIP talks have taken place and further negotiations are expected later this year with a view to finalising a deal in 2016, Malmstrom said early this month.
One hurdle was overcome in July when the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Parliament backed a compromise on setting up a new European court to settle disputes arising from any trade pact. (Editing by Mark Trevelyan) Thomson Reuters (Markets) LLC
Interview: Eastern Economic Forum to promote Russia's Far East development
Igor DingChao 
22 August 2015
Xinhua News Agency
MOSCOW, Aug. 22 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xinhua) -- The upcoming Eastern Economic Forum (EEF) to be held in Russia's Far East city of Vladivostok will inject powerful impetus into the region's development, Russia's Far East Development Minister Alexander Galushka told HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xinhua in a recent interview.
Noting that the domestic market in the Far East is small because the district is an enormous but sparsely populated territory, the minister said that its natural and human resources could only be developed in close cooperation with the region's neighbors, particularly with China.
"It is natural that the region has been oriented towards the export to Asia-Pacific countries: China, Japan, South Korea and Singapore," Galushka said.
People in these countries need green agricultural products, clear water and other goods that Russia can provide, the minister said, adding that the Far East region is ready to respond to those needs.
The demand from Asia-Pacific countries would give the region the opportunity to develop the production of export goods, he said.
Galushka added that cooperation with China will give a green light to the creation of transport corridors connecting Russian and Chinese cities and ports.
In July, Russian President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Vladimir Putin signed a law to give Vladivostok and 15 other maritime administrative districts the "free port" status.
"That would dramatically cut the logistical cost for companies in northeast China, thus speeding up their growth," Galushka said.
This is a direct response to the alignment of the Russia-led HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Eurasian Economic Union framework with the China-proposed Silk Road Economic Belt, which was agreed upon between Putin and Chinese President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xi Jinping during Xi's visit to Moscow in May, Galushka said.
"This is beneficial for Russia's Far East, so we welcome such cooperation," Galushka said, adding that the Russia-China cooperation agenda is very broad and promising.
Moreover, the minister said that during the BRICS and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Shanghai Cooperation Organization summits in Ufa in July, Putin has sent invitations to leading Chinese entrepreneurs to participate in the EEF.
"Now we see a big interest in that event from Chinese entrepreneurs," he said.
The EEF, which will be held from Sept. 3 to Sept. 5, is an annual event proposed by Putin in order to speed up the development of eastern Russia and expand multilateral cooperation in the Asia-Pacific region.
"The forum will be a platform to promote projects and mechanisms which would help Russian and foreign investors succeed in the Far East," Galushka said.
"We are going to present these opportunities during the forum," Galushka said, adding that they expected investors to consider the new opportunities.
According to Galushka, foreign investment in the region has grown by over 10 percent in the first seven months of this year. "So the EEF has become an important accelerator for the Far East development even before the event kicks off," the minister said.
"Mutually respectful and beneficial interaction between the peoples is bound to be successful. Russia-China relations have become an example of such interaction, thanks to both leaders' creative approach to remove all obstacles for cooperation," he said. Xinhua News Agency
HANDELSBLATT EXCLUSIVE; Rousseff: Brazil Poised for Recovery
Alexander Busch 
21 August 2015
Handelsblatt Global Edition
In an interview with Handelsblatt in Brasilia, President Dilma Rousseff said South America's largest economy needed more time to fight corruption, poverty and boost trade. The economy will soon begin to turn around, sh
Erstveröffentlichung 21.08.2015 10:17:18
At the presidential palace in Brasília, time seems to have stopped in the 1950s. Attendants dressed in white serve tiny cups of coffee from silver carafes in the sparsely furnished, immense white marbled waiting room, as though architect Oscar Niemeyer had just completed the elegant building. In the president’s office, several humidifiers moisten the dry desert air.
Dilma Rousseff’s voice sounds slightly cracked during her hour-long interview with Handelsblatt, due to the many speeches she has given over the last few days. The 67-year-old, who is serving her second term as president, appears more fragile than during her re-election campaign nine months ago.
Handelsblatt: Ms. Rousseff, Brazil is in the middle of a severe recession. When is the economy going to grow again?
Dilma Rousseff: We expect the recession to go on for another six to 12 months at the most, after which we hope there will be signs of an improvement.
What makes you so confident?
Brazil is still in a fairly stable position. We don’t have a bubble anywhere that could burst, either on the property market or in terms of private household or corporate debt. Our banks are solid. We have high foreign exchange reserves, which we built up during the good times.
Inflation is high. The increase in prices is threatening to move into double digits…
We are currently doing everything we can to limit inflation. The central bank has raised interest rates to over 14 percent. We also need to rebalance our national budget as quickly as possible. That is our goal.
Brazil has successfully reduced poverty and differences in income over the last decade. Is the population now getting poorer again?
No, there’s no risk of that. The speed at which poverty is being reduced will slow down and we won’t progress as quickly as in the last decade. However, we won’t cut social welfare or stop our house building programs. Those are important tools for social integration. We have built four million homes for poor people to date, and we’re going to continue.
But that won’t stop growing unemployment.
There will definitely be fluctuations in employment. We are without doubt currently experiencing massive economic difficulties. No one will be able to get through this without a painful adaptation process.
Is that why only 7 percent of Brazilians are still happy with your government?
In the nine months since the election, we did not succeed in implementing what we promised for our second term. They are now severely disappointed. I say, give us more time, so we can meet the expectations.
The Brazilians are also appalled by the corruption scandal at state-owned group HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Petrobras. As the energy minister, you were the most senior controller on the supervisory board of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Petrobras at the time.
Compliance regulations were only introduced at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Petrobras at the end of last year. Only limited rules were in place when I was on the supervisory board there. The rules of conduct against corruption must be implemented across the board at companies. Without these rules, corruption cannot be fought.
The German industrial group HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Siemens, for example, reported itself to the authorities for becoming involved in the formation of cartels in connection with the construction of the underground system in São Paulo. Will companies that have become embroiled in such scandals be able to bid for public contracts in future?
In my view there is a very clear distinction between individual culprits and the companies. We want to expose and punish criminal practices. However, we don’t want to criminalize the companies or punish them collectively. Our model is the U.S. They act very pragmatically; they punish those responsible, and the companies move on.
One of Brazil’s problems at the moment is a lack of investment. Companies are complaining that the rules are changing all the time.
I agree with them that it’s best to change the rules as little as possible. We need to work on this, to improve the conditions that Brazil offers as a location. That includes stronger regulators. However, we have never breached or disregarded existing contracts. We’re proud of that.
"We don't want to criminalize the companies or punish them collectively. Our model is the U.S. They act very pragmatically; they punish those responsible, and the companies move on."– Dilma Rousseff, Brazilian President
Brazilian bureaucracy is regarded as cumbersome, to put it politely.
If in future the decision of an authority doesn’t fall within a certain timeframe, the approval will be automatically granted. Society has the right to a protected environment. But it’s the duty of the state to organize it, and not to delay it.
Brazil is near the bottom of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Bank’s rankings of how easy it is to do business in a country…
We are well aware that we are going to be dependent on investment if we can no longer rely on high commodity prices in the coming years. We have proposed reforms to our tax system in congress. We want to simplify VAT and standardize it across the different federal states.
Is Brazil prepared for the storm that’s currently brewing in the global economy, with weakness in China and interest rate rises in the United States?
I’m least concerned about the upcoming interest rate increase by the U.S. central bank. I’m not expecting the United States to start an abrupt or even damaging movement in interest rates. If they think it’s the right time to raise interest rates, they will do this cautiously and at the right pace, so as not to encourage instability.
And what about China? The country is Brazil’s biggest target for exports and an increasingly important investor. Is this growing dependence a risk?
We have a strategic relationship with China. It’s in our best interests for China to explore all of its options as an investor in our country. For example, we’re working on a project with Chinese companies to construct a rail line from the Atlantic to the Pacific.
The devaluation of the yuan means that manufactured goods from Brazil will become less competitive.
I don’t think that China is hoping to make its companies more competitive by devaluing its currency. China is more interested in introducing more market elements into its economy. Our currency has also depreciated by almost 50 percent against the dollar since August last year. That wasn’t the aim of our monetary policy. Our exchange rate is free. But this depreciation increases our competitiveness on the global market.
Nevertheless, manufactured products from Brazil are not very competitive on the global market.
That’s why we’re working flat out to try to conclude trade agreements, like the automotive agreement with Mexico and now the liberalization agreements with the United States and China.
The free trade zone between the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union and the South American economic zone Mercosur is still failing to get going, even after 20 years…
We agreed in Brussels in June that each side would put forward proposals by the end of 2015. I think that, with Germany being the third-largest and Brazil the seventh-largest economy in the world, they are equally interested in this integration and occupy similar key positions in their regions. The agreement with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union is of fundamental importance to us. Consumers there will be able to benefit from it just as they will here.
"We have a strategic relationship with China. It's in our best interests for China to explore all of its options as an investor in our country. "
Are there any other issues on which Germany and Brazil are cooperating?
We want to work together closely in future on projects relating to rare earths and on biotechnology, the management of state-owned harbors and rail transport. We have worked out a joint position on cyber security, which will lead to a U.N. resolution. We have worked out important joint positions for the COP21 climate negotiations in Paris and, together with Japan and India, we are in the group of four countries that are seeking to extend the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" U.N. Security Council. We also cooperate within the G20.
We no longer hear about the group of 20 leading countries. The G7 made up of the “old” major powers is now meeting again, and you have formed the BRICS forum with Russia, India, South Africa and China as an alternative.
No, the BRICS isn’t an alternative to the G20 or the G7. The BRICS is a product of globalization, a group of countries thrown together that has developed a political momentum of its own. We started to become more closely integrated in 2005, and in 2014 we set up a development bank for the BRICS countries and a foreign exchange rescue fund. None of these initiatives is intended to replace the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Bank or the IMF.
What about the G20?
The G20 was particularly important during the global financial crisis that began in 2008. We emerging countries got off very lightly following the crisis. In 2011 the G20 had the daunting task of preventing the euro from collapsing, while emerging markets have been responsible for 40 percent of growth in worldwide GDP in the last few years.
But that has now changed. Emerging countries are now the problem child of the global economy.
Since 2014, we have also been feeling the effects of the crisis. Not just Brazil, all other countries, even China, have experienced a significant slowdown. The process of sinking commodity prices through the adjustments in China will impact the world economy for a while yet. Changes in demand for oil and mineral ores are having a dramatic impact in Latin America in particular. We must all be aware that we are living in a global world. Crises will continue, sooner or later, in other countries. The current crises in emerging countries will have an impact on the worldwide economy. Then the G20 may soon have an important part to play again.
You and Angela Merkel are among the most powerful people in the world. Do you think we still need quotas for women?
I’m absolutely in favor of a quota for women’s quota in business and politics. Just because I am president doesn’t mean that women have more power. I always look around this table, and there are almost always only men around me. It is urgently necessary that women get access top companies and politics through a quota. It is incredibly difficult to implement equality otherwise.
What do you mean — do women rule or manage differently?
Women take more care of things and want precision in their work.
How do you support women?
We have now introduced the first laws against domestic violence against women. But I fear that the threat will decline only very slowly. We want to introduce a law to ensure the same pay for the same work. But I think it will be a million years before there is true equality. The cultural barriers in our country are high.
Ms. Rousseff, many thanks for the interview.
Alexander Busch is Handelsblatt’s South America correspondent. He is based in Brazil, where he has covered the country and region for nearly 20 years. To reach him: alexander.busch@terra.com.br
WHY IT MATTERS
Dilma Rousseff is president of South America’s biggest economy, the seventh-largest in the world.
FACTS
Ms. Rousseff is a member of Brazil’s center-left Workers’ Party.
The Brazilian president said she sees the economy turning around in six to 12 months. Brazil wants to cooperate with Germany in biotechnology, harbor management and rail transport.
Handelsblatt GmbH
Modi seeks support for reforming the UN and WTO at FIPIC
21 August 2015
UNI (United News of India)
Jaipur, Aug. 21 -- Prime Minister Narendra Modi today sought the co-operation of the India Pacific island nations support for reforming the United Nations Security Council, serious issue of climate change and shared interest in the World Trade organisation.
Mr Modi in his address at the plenary session said the United Nations is at a historic milestone of its 70th anniversary.
He said,' seven decades after the United Nations was created, the world is a different place. The number of nations have quadrupled with new challenges like climate change and new frontiers like space and ocean. 'The United Nations must keep pace with the changing world as we live in a globalised world with a transformed economy in a digital age,'' he said.
"We must press for reform in the United Nations Security Council to ensure its relevance and effectiveness in the 21st century and sought the support for reforming the Security Council,'' he said.
Mr Modi said, 'India's permanent membership of the Security Council would give the United Nations the global character and balance that mirrors our age. 'Talking about climate change, he said, 'it is an existential threat to the Pacific Islands. It is also taking a toll on the teaming millions on India's shoreline of 7500 km and its nearly 1300 islands. So a concrete and effective outcome on climate change at COP 21 in Paris later this year is called for. 'He stressed that united effort for a separate goal on climate change in the Sustainable Development Goals and in a manner that addresses the interests of developing countries is the need of the hour.
Mr Modi also emphasised the need for building closer partnership in pursuit of our shared aims in the WTO like fisheries.
Emphasising the importance of regional co operation he said, 'Just as FIPIC should become our springboard for a stronger global partnership, we can also enrich each other through our bilateral and regional cooperation. 'He said during the last summit, India announced a number of new initiatives with the Pacific Islands countries and was able to deliver on many of our commitments which included increase in India's grant-in-aid to Pacific Island countries from 125,000 to 200,000 US dollars, e-tourist visas, deputation of Indian experts in the area of coir industry and a special training programme for diplomats of the Pacific Island countries.
He announced the establishment of the FIPIC Trade Office in the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry in New Delhi to promote trade.
Published by HT Syndication with permission from United News of India.
For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com 
United News Of India


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.