HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "L’OMC fête ses vingt ans, son directeur se confie
·         HYPERLINK \l "La Suisse défend ses agriculteurs
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO chief welcomes strong support of G7 leaders
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO to Consider Canada, Mexico's Requests for COOL Retaliation Measures Against U.S.
·         HYPERLINK \l "Rules approves COOL debate rule with no amendments
·         HYPERLINK \l "Radiation fears: Japan, South Korea eye June 20 start to WTO consultation over import ban
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO to mull Russia’s request for arbiter panel vs EU Jun 19
·         HYPERLINK \l "Vietnam counters Indonesia steel tariffs
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S. and Middle East airlines trade accusations on subsidy claim
·         HYPERLINK \l "Mexico slaps duties on hot-rolled steel from Germany, China, France
·         HYPERLINK \l "EU Lawyers' Opinion Says China Should Be Given Market-Economy Status Next Year
·         HYPERLINK \l "Sessions: House Rules action on TPA still unclear
·         HYPERLINK \l "Gulf expat workers send home $100 billion: report
·         HYPERLINK \l "Multinationals including Amazon yield to global tax crackdown
·         HYPERLINK \l "Trade Deficit Myths
 
L’OMC fête ses vingt ans, son directeur se confie
La Tribune de Genève
Wednesday, 10 June 2015
 
L’Organisation mondiale du commerce (OMC) organise une journée portes ouvertes pour ses vingt ans dimanche 14 juin. Entre taxes douanières, engouement pour les produits du terroir, subventions et litiges commerciaux, l’institution basée à Genève fait face à de nombreux défis. Entretien avec son directeur général, le Brésilien Roberto Azevêdo.
 
Pourquoi organiser une journée portes ouvertes le 14 juin?
 
Pour célébrer les vingt ans de l’OMC et présenter son nouveau site, notamment son accès au lac, complètement rénové. Nous voulons remercier le Canton de Genève et la communauté genevoise pour leur accueil. La qualité des conditions ici nous permet de fournir un travail de qualité.
Il y a peu de places pour grandir. Est-ce un problème?
Par rapport au travail qu’elle fait, l’OMC est une petite organisation. Elle emploie 639personnes à plein temps, dont un tiers travaille dans un bâtiment inauguré il y a deux ans. Avant ce bâtiment, nous n’avions pas assez de place et devions louer des bureaux non loin. Pour des questions de budget, l’effectif ne va pas beaucoup s’étoffer, nul besoin de grandir plus.
 
Les agriculteurs ne cèdent pas facilement aux volontés de l’OMC. N’est-ce pas en effet à contre-courant que de réduire les taxes douanières agricoles, alors qu’on parle de plus en plus de produits du terroir?
 
L’agriculture a toujours été et restera un élément clé et sensible de chaque négociation multilatérale. Réformer les politiques agricoles est un exercice difficile pour les pays développés comme pour les pays en voie de développement. De nombreuses populations dans les pays en voie de développement vivent de la terre et sont vulnérables. L’objectif de ces négociations est de réduire les mesures de distorsion qui ont un effet sur les pays en voie de développement pour que les fermiers des pays riches et pauvres puissent travailler de manière équitable. Ceci passe par un meilleur accès aux marchés pour les pays en voie de développement.
 
Que pensez-vous du système des contingents en Suisse?
 
Il faut réaliser que l’agriculture a des significations différentes selon les pays. Difficile d’imaginer que la Suisse soit compétitive sur le marché des céréales, alors que d’autres pays, comme le Brésil ou les Etats-Unis, ont plus de terres. En même temps, la Suisse peut proposer des produits de qualité sur des marchés de niches, culturels, à haut prix, comme le gruyère ou la viande séchée.
Encourager les échanges mondiaux ne paraît guère écologique.
Avoir moins d’échanges n’est pas forcément plus vert. Un meilleur échange l’est, par contre. L’OMC travaille sur une initiative visant à réduire les barrières tarifaires sur les produits respectant l’environnement. Les échanges permettent de créer des technologies plus avancées, les biens échangés dans le monde tendent à être plus écologiques que les autres.
 
Les accords plurilatéraux foisonnent et ils impliquent de plus en plus de pays. N’est-ce pas un échec pour l’OMC?
 
Non. Depuis que le GATT existe(ndlr: l’ancêtre de l’OMC), il y a toujours eu des accords bilatéraux ou plurilatéraux en dehors de l’OMC et c’est vrai qu’ils tendent à être plus étendus. Ce n’est pas une mauvaise nouvelle car ils servent souvent de tests. S’ils fonctionnent, ils peuvent être répliqués dans le système multilatéral. Le vrai problème, c’est que pendant 18ans, l’OMC n’avait pas réussi à sceller un accord multilatéral jusqu’au succès de la Conférence ministérielle de Bali en 2013. Mais, grâce aux principes de transparence, d’inclusion et de souplesse et une approche au pas à pas, nous devrions obtenir de nouveaux accords sous peu.
Roberto Azevêdo, directeur général de l’institution, ne voit pas ses effectifs genevois s’étoffer
 
 
La Suisse défend ses agriculteurs 
R.ET. 
10 June 2015
La Tribune de Genève
 
La Suisse, pays hôte de l’OMC, ne respecte pas tous ses désirs sur le front agroalimentaire. Pour défendre ses produits du terroir, Berne subventionne despans entiers du secteur primaire,impose des taxes douanières et défend les contingents tarifaires.

L’Etat soutient l’exportation de produits agricoles transformés, selon ladite «loi chocolatière», signée en accord avec l’OMC. Berne peut ainsi verser jusqu’à 115 millions de francs par an à son industrie exportatrice de produits transformés. Cela dit, elle se contente d’en verser 70 millions dans ce cadre, mais la récente envolée du franc l’a poussée à débloquer 20 millions de francs en plus. L’industrie chocolatière est ainsi incitée à recourir au lait du pays.

Sur le front des droits de douane, l’Etat ne tire par contre pas la même corde qu’au centre William Rappard. Là où l’OMC aspire à abolir toute taxe, la Suisse est pragmatique: une banane peut être importée sans autre, elle n’en produit guère. Pour la viande, c’est une autre histoire: les barrières sont élevées et des contingents régulent la concurrence étrangère. L’Etat fixe un seuil à partir duquel il érige des taxes à l’importation. Le café? Les graines à l’état brut ne sont pas taxées, celles prêtes à la consommation le sont. Idem pour le cacao. Les fèves arrivent librement du Ghana; nos douanes n’incitent par contre par les barres chocolatées ghanéennes à s’écouler en Suisse. Ce système – proposé par d’autres pays – est salué par la plupart des représentants des paysans en Suisse.

 
WTO chief welcomes strong support of G7 leaders
The Dollar Business Bureau
10 June 2015 8:39
 
The World Trade Organisation Director General, underlined the importance of implementing all of the decisions taken in Bali, including those which deal specifically with LDC issues.
 
A Declaration issued by leaders’ of G7 nations at the end of their summit in Germany on the World Trade Organisation (WTO) and its efforts on the multilateral trading system, was welcomed by the WTO Director-General (DG), Roberto Azevedo.

The DG, attended the Summit to brief G7 leaders on the state of play in the current negotiations at the WTO and the importance of the WTO’s 10th Ministerial Conference, to be held in Nairobi this December.
 
 
WTO to Consider Canada, Mexico's Requests for COOL Retaliation Measures Against U.S.
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, June 10, 2015
 
June 9 – The World Trade Organization's Dispute Settlement Body (DSB) on June 17 will consider the next steps in Canada and Mexico's dispute against U.S. country-of-origin labeling (COOL) rules, including requests by those countries to suspend tariff concessions to their neighbor.
 
Canada and Mexico have notified the DSB that they would seek a combined $3.2 billion in annual retaliatory tariffs if the U.S. failed to comply with WTO rules regarding meat labels (108 WTO, 6/5/15).
 
The notifications came a month after a WTO dispute panel found for a fourth time that COOL rules, which require meat producers to indicate on retail packaging where each animal was born, raised and slaughtered, accord less favorable treatment to imported meat than to domestic products (96 WTO, 5/19/15).
 
$3.2 Billion in Tariffs
 
Canada asked the WTO to authorize $2.4 billion in annual trade tariffs against U.S. products like: beef, pork, apples, rice, corn, maple syrup, pasta, wine, jewelry, office chairs, wooden furniture and mattresses.
 
Mexico asked the WTO to sanction its suspension of $653 million worth of annual tariff concessions and said it would provide its list of targeted U.S. products “in due course.”
 
The level of retaliatory tariffs are equivalent to the damage in trade that Canada and Mexico endure as a result of the failure by the U.S. to bring its COOL measures into compliance with WTO rules.
 
The U.S. also may object to the level of the Canadian and Mexican trade measures and refer the matter to arbitration. The arbitration process must be conducted within 60 days.
 
 
Rules approves COOL debate rule with no amendments
POLITICO
6/9/15 7:28 PM EDT
 
The House Rules Committee voted 8-4 today to approve a rule for debate on a bill to repeal country-of-origin labeling for beef, pork and poultry, which supporters said was needed to avoid more than $3.6 billion in potential trade retaliation by Canada and Mexico. 
The rule would allow one hour of debate Wednesday equally divided between the chairman and ranking member of the Agriculture Committee followed by a vote on the legislation. It would not allow any amendments to the bill.
House Agriculture Committee Chairman Michael Conaway introduced the repeal bill after the U.S. lost its fourth case at the World Trade Organization, which ruled the requirements were discriminatory toward Canadian and Mexican producers.
In a preview of tomorrow's debate, Republicans argued the legislation was needed to avoid $3 billion of retaliation threatened by Canada and more than $600 million by Mexico because the labeling program violates World Trade Organization rules.
Democrats argued the bill was premature and more time should be given to drafting an alternative COOL program that complies with WTO rules or working out a compromise with Canada and Mexico.
They also argued the program was important because consumers have the right to know where their food comes from, but Republicans said the program was ineffective and imposed burdensome costs on industry with little tangible benefit.
— Doug Palmer
 
 
Radiation fears: Japan, South Korea eye June 20 start to WTO consultation over import ban
10 June 2015
Nikkei Report
 
TOKYO -- Japan and South Korea are discussing a start of around June 20 to bilateral talks at the World Trade Organization over Seoul's ban of Japanese fishery products, imposed after the March 2011 Fukushima meltdown.

South Korea banned imports of some such products from Fukushima, Miyagi, Ibaraki and five other prefectures after the nuclear disaster. The restriction was expanded in September 2013 to cover all fishery goods from those locations. Japan argues that the ban has no scientific basis and is pushing for it to be lifted.

In December 2014 and January 2015, South Korean experts measured radiation levels in the affected areas. They worked with Japan's Nuclear Regulation Authority in February to examine fishery products and seawater and concluded that radiation throughout the region was below the levels specified in the import ban.

The talks will start in Geneva. If the two sides cannot reach an agreement within 60 days of the request for WTO consultation, an official complaint will be filed.
 
 
WTO to mull Russia’s request for arbiter panel vs EU Jun 19 
 
GENEVA, Jun 9 (PRIME) -- The committee for dispute settlement of the World Trade Organization (WTO) will consider Russia’s first request to set up a panel of arbiters under its claim against the E.U. in the energy industry on June 19, an organization’s representative told PRIME on Tuesday.

The claim is linked with the use of measures by the E.U. within the third energy package, Maxim Medvedkov, director of the Economic Development Ministry’s department for trade negotiations, said.

Russia filed a claim against the E.U.’s third energy package in April 2014.

The package prohibits gas producers to own mainline pipelines located in the region that created significant difficulties for construction of Russia’s South Stream gas pipeline designed to export gas to Europe bypassing Ukraine. The South Stream project was halted in late 2014.

 
Vietnam counters Indonesia steel tariffs 
9 June 2015
Vietnam News Summary
 
Vietnam is taking steps to protect local steel exporters' rights in the wake of safeguard measures taken by some import countries.

In the latest move, the country initiated dispute settlement proceedings against Indonesia through the World Trade Organisation (WTO) early last week over safeguard tariffs imposed on Vietnam's flat-rolled products of iron or non-alloy steel.

According to the Vietnam Steel Association (VSA), the filing of the complaint will help avoid the risk of possible investigations from Indonesia as well as other import countries.

This move also reflects the Government's stand on protecting the legitimate rights of domestic exporters against violations in the form of trade safeguard tariffs by import countries.

A representative of Viet Nam Competition Authority, the ministry has been collecting information and evidences from domestic companies to settle the matter in line with international regulations and commitments.

The VSA noted that Indonesia's studies and decisions leading to the imposition of the safeguard tariffs on certain Vietnamese iron and steel products were finalised without consulting with Vietnam.

Nguyen Van Sua, the association's deputy president, said Indonesia's Ministry of Finance imposed safeguard tariffs on certain iron and steel products from Viet Nam for three years starting July 2014 and the tariff imposition can be extended.

According to Hoa Sen Group, the safeguard tariffs remained high at US$430 per tonne in 2014, $371 per tonne in 2015, and $312 per tonne in 2016, and undermined the competitiveness of Vietnamese products.

Tran Ngoc Chu, General Director of Hoa Sen Group, has been quoted by as saying that with such tariff imposition, the group's turnover is estimated to decline by about $115 million per year.

Southern Steel Sheet Company noted that the tariff has made steel exports to Indonesia increasingly difficult, while the industry has already been struggling in the domestic market.

Experts urged Vietnamese companies to prepare to deal with the investigation and application of trade defences from import countries amid rapid international integration and export expansion. (Viet Nam News – June 9)

 
U.S. and Middle East airlines trade accusations on subsidy claim 
By Victoria Bryan and Alwyn Scott 
 
MIAMI, June 8 (Reuters) - U.S. and Middle East airline chiefs traded accusations on Monday over a campaign by major U.S. carriers to restrict what they say is heavily subsidized competition from Gulf counterparts. 
 
In the United States, airlines are trying to persuade the U.S. government to alter the "Open Skies" agreements with the United Arab Emirates and Qatar, accusing them of lavishing their airlines with more than $40 billion in subsidies and distorting competition. Emirates, Etihad Airways and Qatar Airways deny the subsidy claims. 
 
The chief executive of Qatar Airways, Akbar Al Baker, said any change in the agreements could spark protectionism. 
 
"Any rollback of liberal market access and Open Skies policies will reverberate across the whole world and will lead to retaliatory protectionism affecting all aspects of trade," Al Baker said at the International Air Transport Association (IATA) annual meeting in Miami. 
 
Following Al Baker's comments, IATA Director General Tony Tyler said the body was in favor of liberalization. IATA has said it has no mandate to formally act on the issue. 
 
"IATA and its members are fully in favor of growing liberalization, free and fair competition, that's the policy of members and policy of IATA," Tyler said in response to questions from journalists. 
 
Doug Parker, the CEO of American Airlines Group Inc, acknowledged that the carrier has code-share alliances with Qatar and Etihad, but said the United States must enforce its trade policies. 
 
"We've produced evidence to the U.S. government that indeed other countries are subsidizing carriers that are flying to the United States," Parker said at a news conference after Al Baker's remarks. 
 
Parker said the U.S. government was working diligently on the issue and was in regular communication with the airlines. He said the U.S. government's timeline was not clear, but he hoped it would act soon. 
 
While U.S. carriers like American and Delta Air Lines Inc have closed ranks on the issue, others, like global cargo carrier FedEx Corp and Emirates codeshare partner JetBlue Airways Corp have stood up for the Open Skies agreements, voicing concern that changes would set a bad precedent. 
 
Germany's Lufthansa, whose business on routes to Asia have been hurt by competition from the Gulf carriers, echoed Delta and American's concerns on Sunday. 
 
 
Mexico slaps duties on hot-rolled steel from Germany, China, France 
 
MEXICO CITY, June 9 (Reuters) - Mexico's government said on Tuesday it has imposed provisional import duties on hot-rolled steel from Germany, China and France amid an ongoing anti-dumping investigation. 
 
The government said in its official gazette it was imposing a duty of 25.43 percent on imports from ArcelorMittal Bremen and of 36.08 percent on imports from other German companies. 
 
It imposed duties of 72.16 percent on imports from Tangshan, and of 78.96 percent from other Chinese companies. It imposed duties of 12.42 percent on imports from ArcelorMittal Mediterranee, and of 14.12 percent on other French companies. 
 
Mexico's steel chamber, Canacero, said in a statement that it expects the government to announce additional import duties on steel products from other countries in the next few days, but did not name any countries. 
 
 
 
EU Lawyers' Opinion Says China Should Be Given Market-Economy Status Next Year 
By Matthew Dalton 
10 June 2015
Dow Jones Newswires 
 
BRUSSELS--European Union lawyers have concluded that China should be formally designated a "market economy" at the end of next year, a step that would make it far harder for European companies to protect themselves against low-price Chinese exports, EU officials say.

The question of whether China is given market-economy treatment at the end of 2016 will be hotly debated by governments around the world in the coming months. Beijing and its allies argue that China's 2001 agreement to join the World Trade Organization requires countries to give China market-economy treatment 15 years later, in December 2016.

If the EU recognizes China as a market economy, it would make it more difficult for Europe to impose steep tariffs on Chinese goods, at a time when European industries still complain that China uses a vast array of government subsidies to boost exports and undercut overseas competition.

The commission's legal service circulated its confidential opinion within the institution in recent weeks, officials familiar with the opinion said. "The legal service is of the opinion that it would be unwise not to grant market-economy treatment to China," a senior EU official said.

The opinion doesn't necessarily indicate what position the commission itself will take on the market-economy question, said commission spokesman Daniel Rosario. Mr. Rosario declined to comment on the substance of the opinion. That decision will fall on Cecilia Malmstrom, the trade commissioner, and commission president Jean-Claude Juncker. The commission is currently reviewing the legal implications of China's WTO accession treaty.

"This will take some time," Mr. Rosario said. China has been particularly eager to get the 28-nation EU, its largest trading partner, endorse that argument. The U.S., China's second-biggest trading partner, will also examine the issue in the months to come. The office of the U.S. Trade Representative declined to comment.

Opponents say the accession agreement doesn't imply that China gets market-economy treatment automatically at the end of next year. Governments must account for the fact, they argue, that China's economy is still controlled by the state, with prices and costs set by government fiat and not by the invisible hand of the market.

European industries say that Beijing's policies lead Chinese firms to pump out far more goods than China's domestic market can consume. The result has been a flood of cheap products shipped to Europe, the U.S. and other developed markets. Granting China market-economy treatment would leave European manufacturers with few tools to protect themselves, industry lobbyists in Europe say. Most of Europe's antidumping tariffs are imposed on goods from China.

"This is the mother of all trade issues now," said Karl Tachelet, director of trade policy at Eurofer, which represents European steel giants such ArcelorMittal and ThyssenKrupp. "We would have to function in a constantly depressed price environment" if the EU grants China market-economy treatment.

Chinese officials in Brussels didn't respond to a request for comment.

The move must also be approved by the European Parliament and European national governments, which are bitterly divided on the benefits of trade with China. Nations from Europe's southern rim, including Italy, Spain and France, tend to support a tougher stance against China.

But the EU's northern nations, including the Nordic countries, the Netherlands, Belgium and the U.K., are likely to support giving China market-economy treatment.

Germany will be crucial to settling the debate. Berlin has sometimes supported the southern faction in disputes with China, but the country's lucrative export relationship with China has in recent years made it reluctant to challenge Beijing.

Germany's exports to China in 2011 supported more than one million jobs across the 28-nation EU, according to a study released by the European Commission in June, with most of those jobs coming within Germany itself. The main exports are cars and sophisticated machine tools for Chinese manufacturers.

WTO rules allow countries to impose tariffs on dumped exports, which are goods sold in an overseas market at below the domestic cost of production. But for nations like China that aren't considered to be market economies, domestic prices are artificially depressed by government policies.

Countries can therefore use prices in other countries as a substitute for what the domestic cost of production in China should be. Doing so almost always leads to the conclusion that more dumping has occurred, and the result is higher tariffs on dumped goods.

China's accession treaty appears to forbid countries from using other countries as a proxy when calculating antidumping tariffs beginning in December 2016.

 
Sessions: House Rules action on TPA still unclear
POLITICO
6/9/15 7:48 PM EDT
 
House Rules Committee Chairman Pete Sessions said today he still did not know the timing of committee action on trade promotion authority and other trade legislation, even as House leaders are pushing for a floor vote on the bills by Friday.
The Rules Committee must report a rule governing debate on any piece of legislation before it goes to floor. At the end of a markup today on other pending bills, Rep. Louise Slaughter pressed Sessions for any information on when the committee would meet to consider the trade legislation.
"I don't know exactly for sure," Session said, but he noted the panel was already scheduled to meet Wednesday at 3 p.m. and he expected to have more information at that time. "I'll tell you ahead of time if that's what we're going to do," he added, referring to the possibility of committee action on the trade bills.
The Senate sent over three bills to the House for consideration: a combined bill that renews trade promotion authority and Trade Adjustment Assistance for workers, another that bolsters U.S. customs and enforcement operations and a third that renews trade benefits for Africa and other countries.
Sessions told Slaughter there had been no decision yet on how to handle Republican desires for a separate vote on the TPA and TAA bills.
— Doug Palmer
 
 
Gulf expat workers send home $100 billion: report 
9 June 2015
Agence France Presse
 
Foreigners working in the energy-rich Arab states of the Gulf sent more than $100 billion in remittances to their home countries last year, an economic report showed Tuesday.

The figure was twice as high as remittances in 2010, an indication of strong growth, the head of economic research at Kuwait Financial Center (Markaz), Raghu Mandagoathur, said in the report.

Around 25 million expats live in the Gulf Cooperation Council states -- Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates -- equal to the native population.

The remittances are estimated at 6.2 percent of the combined GDP of the six GCC states of $1.6 trillion, the report said, citing IMF and World Bank figures.

In comparison, foreigners in the United States and Britain sent home just 0.7 percent and 0.8 percent of GDP, respectively, it said.

Saudi Arabia topped the list with its estimated 10 million expats sending home $44 billion, followed by UAE with 29 billion.

Remittances from Kuwait and Qatar were $12 billion and $9.5 billion, respectively, while smaller transfers were made out of Oman and Bahrain, the report said.

The majority of Gulf expatriates originate from India, Egypt, the Philippines, Bangladesh and Pakistan, as well as Indonesia, Sri Lanka and Yemen.

The report attributed the high level of remittances to curbs applied by GCC states on foreign ownership and investment.

And unlike in Western countries, foreigners have no hope of acquiring citizenship in GCC states regardless of the duration of residence.

The report advised GCC states to encourage expatriates to invest by launching specialised services and opening up their markets to foreign residents, especially the real estate sector.
 
 
Multinationals including Amazon yield to global tax crackdown 
Vanessa Houlder 
9 June 2015
Financial Times (FT.Com)
 
Several leading multinational companies are at an advanced stage of dismantling the structures used to minimise corporate tax bills, according to an official leading an international crackdown on avoidance.

Pascal Saint-Amans, the top tax official at the Paris-based OECD, said the moves were a sign that the "very aggressive tax planning of the past is over".

He cited recent decisions by Amazon and Starbucks - two US companies accused of tax avoidance in 2012 - to change their business models, as well as feedback from lawyers breaking up structures involving offshore centres such as Bermuda.

In an interview with the Financial Times, Mr Saint-Amans said the OECD was making "huge progress" on a substantial package of reforms that would close loopholes in the global corporate tax system.

Even though discussions on some issues are mired in controversy, the OECD is on track to issue its final recommendations in October to G20 finance ministers. They commissioned the project aimed at tackling Base Erosion and Profit Shifting [Beps] in 2013 in response to widespread public anger over the lengths to which some multinationals went to avoid tax.

Some critics, including trade unions and campaign groups, have already expressed doubts about whether the final recommendations will have a lasting impact. Last week, a panel of development experts including Joseph Stiglitz, the economist, said the OECD project would not go far enough and called for a fundamental rethink of the corporate tax rules.

But companies are braced for changes as a result of the Beps project. Nearly three out of five multinationals recently surveyed by Deloitte, the professional services firm, agreed that the Beps project would have greater impact on their organisation than they originally thought.

Investment analysts at Citi said last month that the project had progressed faster and further than expected, although they warned that obtaining international agreement on the most contentious issues may yet prove impossible.

They said: "We believe the tax environment has changed materially and is significantly less favourable for aggressive tax planning than previously."

But some governments have already broken ranks and implemented anti-avoidance measures without waiting for the conclusion of the project. Over half of the companies surveyed by Deloitte expected "significant unilateral legislative changes", and more than three out of four expected some degree of double taxation.

One example of unilateral action was the UK's introduction in April of a "diverted profits tax" that penalises multinationals that divert profits to low tax countries. Mr Saint-Amans, who in April talked of being 'embarrassed' over the UK's diverted profits tax legislation, said unilateral moves by governments remained a concern. A senior US official said last month that it "undermined the whole reason to do the Beps project."

The reforms will include minimum standards on some issues such as the banning of "harmful" tax practices and abuses of tax treaties. But it will be less prescriptive on other issues.

"It's not a one size fits all. We have designed something which is flexible," said Mr Saint-Amans.

The tabular content relating to this article is not available to view. Apologies in advance for the inconvenience caused.

The OECD published on Monday details of how the new "country by country" reporting regime will be implemented, paving the way for next year's introduction of rules requiring companies to divulge where they earned their profits, carried out operations and paid tax. Mr Saint-Amans said the new reporting rules were a big incentive for companies to change their approach to international tax to ensure their profits were reported in the same place as they conducted their activities.

But the details of the country by country reporting rules were criticised by campaigners, who objected to the plan for data to be collected by the country where a multinational was headquartered, which would then exchange it with other countries.

Alex Cobham, director of research at Tax Justice Network, a campaign group, said the corporate transparency measure had been "strangled at birth" because it would exclude many developing countries that did not have the instruments in place to exchange information with multinationals' home countries.

Amazon's low tax structure, which has sparked intense controversy in recent years, is in the process of being overhauled, it emerged last month. The online retailer has begun booking sales in the countries where its customers are based, following the establishment of local branches of its Luxembourg operating companies.

In April 2014, Starbucks - the world's largest coffee shop chain - announced the move of its European headquarters from the Netherlands to the UK. The EU is investigating whether a ruling given by the Dutch tax authority broke state aid rules.
 
 
REVIEW & OUTLOOK (Editorial)
Trade Deficit Myths 
10 June 2015
The Wall Street Journal Europe
 
In the fight against freer trade, Democratic Representative Rosa DeLauro plays Robin to Senator Elizabeth Warren's Batman. So with the House due to vote on trade-promotion legislation this month, it's worth examining Ms. DeLauro's slippery claims about the U.S. trade deficit.

Two years ago the Connecticut lawmaker led 151 Democrats in opposing presidential trade authority, blocking President Obama's trade ambitions until after the midterm elections. Today, as the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) tops Washington's agenda, Ms. DeLauro says it "would increase the trade deficit, loss of jobs and depression of wages." She has accused the Administration's top trade negotiator, Michael Froman, of "plainly misleading" Congress about America's trade balance with its free-trade partners.

The first problem with Ms. DeLauro's charge is that running a trade deficit -- that is, having more imports than exports -- isn't necessarily bad. In the U.S. it can signal economic health: that American consumers and businesses are saving money by buying cheaper foreign goods, and that the U.S. economy is attracting overseas investment, which drives productivity and demand for domestic and imported goods.

That's why the U.S. trade deficit, which was about $41 billion in April, generally expands during periods of economic growth, when Americans can demand more goods from the global market and attract more foreign investment. During economic slowdowns the deficit shrinks, as after the 2008 financial crisis. It even turned into a surplus during the 1990-91 recession and the Great Depression.

Ms. DeLauro also has it wrong on the simple trade math. She says America's trade balance with its 20 free-trade partners (Canada, Mexico, South Korea, etc.) is a $105 billion deficit, when in fact it is a $10 billion surplus. Big difference.

The root of Ms. DeLauro's mistake is that in counting U.S. exports she excludes "re-exports," or goods that arrive in the U.S. as imports but leave unchanged as exports. So if a car dealer in Seattle imports 50 BMWs but sells 20 of them in Canada, she subtracts the value of those 20 re-exported autos from the U.S. export total.

Yet Ms. DeLauro conveniently fails to eliminate re-exports from the import side of the equation, thereby inflating imports relative to exports and concocting a trade deficit where none exists. Such accounting wouldn't fly in a basic algebra course, but it passes for politics on Capitol Hill.

In an April letter reviewed by the Journal, U.S. Trade Representative Froman and Commerce Secretary Penny Pritzker blasted Ms. DeLauro's distortions as inconsistent "with the economic reality of trade and widely accepted and applied international guidelines for calculating trade balances." They explained further that "it is not correct to assume that every import displaces U.S. jobs. Indeed, many imports are goods we do not produce in the United States and half of U.S. imports are intermediate goods that go into supporting U.S. production." Amen.

Ms. DeLauro and other protectionists need to obscure these facts because the case that free trade raises overall American living standards is so overwhelming. Republicans shouldn't let such misinformation prevail.
END


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.