AFRICA urges other to pursue policy for an integrated continent 
Greece, EU partners pressed to resolve debt crisis at G7 finance meeting
Top finance officials debate what's needed for global growth
Global economy 'at its best since crisis'
India's patent laws fully WTO compliant: Sitharaman
 
AFRICA urges other to pursue policy for an integrated continent 

30 May 2015
FARS News Agency
FARSNA

 African countries urged to pursue policies aimed at fast-tracking integration of the continent. Foreign Affairs and International Trade Cabinet Secretary, Amina Mohamed said that for Africa to pursue an economic integration agenda it would ensure the continent is at the centre of global economic growth.

She said, countries should seek new partnerships and take advantage of emerging markets and opportunities and lower trade barriers to leverage trade for sustainable development.

Africa should expedite the process of building a Free Trade Area (FTA) at embryonic stage. Heads of State are ready to initiate the negotiation process when they meet in South Africa for the forthcoming summit, a move that demonstrates a high level political commitment by the African leaders that time is ripe for Africa to pursue its economic agenda and integrate fully into the global trading system as a focused entity.

It is crucial to interrogate potential impact of mega regionals with a view to formulate requisite response on how such agreements are likely to affect all involved. African economies need to deepen domestic economic reforms, diversify markets and risk, build economies of scale, enhance competitiveness, pursue export-led growth, and build global supply chains.

Africa becomes a global standard maker to ensure the multilateral trade system based on the criteria set in Africa. It is expected that an African wide Continental (CFTA) will become operational by 2017. We need to strengthen the role and maintain the centrality of WTO in the trading system and not allow that role to be diluted.

Africans ought to build the dynamism, confidence and boldness that the noble idea and vision of free trade in Africa is now. I know we can do it because our history has prepared us well.

Africa stands at monumental place with an opportunity that must not be missed, to make a significant impact and make her voice loud enough to be heard through the integration process.
 
Greece, EU partners pressed to resolve debt crisis at G7 finance meeting 

30 May 2015
Middle East North Africa Financial Network (MENAFN)


  (MENAFN - The Peninsula) The United States and Japan pressed Greece and its European partners to resolve Athens' debt crisis and avoid rattling the eurozone and the global economy, as the issue dominated talks of the Group of Seven finance ministers on Friday.

Even though Greece was not on the official agenda of the three-day meeting in Dresden, it was a key topic as time runs out for Athens to reach a deal with its international creditors to unlock 7.2. billion euros ($7.9 billion) in bailout cash.

"All parties need to move," US Treasury Secretary Jack Lew told reporters after the meeting wrapped up.

Lew urged Greece to bring forward a "credible plan" and "take serious action."

But there also "needs to be some flexibility on the part of the institutions," namely the European Central Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the European Commission, Lew said.

The three lenders are demanding that the Greek government push through economic reforms in return for the last tranche of bailout funds.

"Greece needs to make very tough decisions," the US finance chief continued, but "one won't happen without the other."

"Everyone agrees that resolving this without crisis would be in the interest of everyone and the global economy," he said.

- No 'Grexit' scenario -

Representatives of the key actors in the Greek negotiations - IMF chief Christine Lagarde, ECB president Mario Draghi and the EU's commissioner for economic and monetary affairs Pierre Moscovic - all attended the Dresden talks, held to prepare for a wider summit of G7 leaders starting June 7.

Lagarde had caused a flurry the day before by saying in a newspaper interview that a so-called "Grexit" - or Greek exit from the eurozone - was "a potential."

But French Finance Minister Michel Sapin insisted: "There is no Grexit scenario."

There had been "progress" in the negotiations, but "results are still insufficient so far," Sapin said.

The meeting's host, German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schaeuble, also sought to play down assertions by Athens that Greece is on the verge of reaching a deal with its creditors.

"The positive reports out of Athens don't fully reflect the state of talks," Schaeuble said.
 
Top finance officials debate what's needed for global growth
 
May 28, 2015 1:58 pm  

By DAVID McHUGH
 
DRESDEN, Germany (AP) — Economic growth that's not as strong as everyone would like. Volatile markets. A potential financial blowup in Greece.
 
Those were three of the most pressing topics hanging over top finance officials from the Group of Seven wealthy democracies at their gathering in Dresden, Germany.
 
Finance ministers and central banks traded ideas on growth-boosting reforms and discussed financial markets and monetary policy. The talks were marked by concern over growth that is uneven and below long-term averages.
 
Both the U.S. and Europe are growing. But unemployment remains elevated in the 19-country eurozone, and stock and bond markets have been volatile, although they remain at high levels.
 
U.S. Treasury Secretary Jacob Lew has been pressing his point that European creditor countries and Greek officials need to reach agreement on Greece's finances. Greece, which is running out of money after two bailouts and six years of economic misery, is seeking the release of more bailout loans so it can avoid a default and possible chaotic departure from the euro currency union.
 
Greece shadowed the discussion although it was not on the official discussion agenda. Greece isn't a G-7 member, but three of its creditor countries — Germany, France, and Italy — are. The European Union's executive commission, another key player, is also represented.
 
During Thursday's working session, officials including Christine Lagarde, the head of the International Monetary Fund, and host Finance Minister Wolfgang Schaeuble discussed the global economy and markets. They touched on the recent sudden rise in interest yields on bonds. Officials said the general sense was that the move was that yields had fallen to extreme low levels — below zero in some cases.
 
The meeting, which ends Friday, is a discussion forum that sets up final positions to be taken at a summit of presidents and prime ministers June 7-8 outside Munich.
 
The G-7 countries are Britain, Canada, France, Germany, Japan, Italy, and the U.S. The group is an informal forum among leading economies for discussions of economic and foreign policy issues. Germany has the rotating presidency for this year's meeting.
Global economy 'at its best since crisis' 
The Straits Times Chia Yan Min 
By Chia Yan Min
30 May 2015
 
THE world economy is strong enough for interest rates to begin rising sooner rather than later, a top banker said yesterday. 
 
Dr Jacob Frenkel, chairman of JPMorgan Chase International, said the financial sector has stabilised and the global economy is at its best since the financial crisis. 
 
Speaking at the second Asian Monetary Policy Forum at the Pan Pacific Hotel, he said that too much of the public debate has focused on the cost of raising interest rates, also known as "normalisation". 
Meanwhile, too little has been said about the cost of sticking with negative real interest rates for an extended period. 
 
Since the global financial crisis, borrowers have enjoyed an unprecedented period of low interest rates as central banks try to spur spending and investment amid sluggish economic growth. 
However, negative real rates distort the allocation of resources in the economy, said Dr Frenkel, who likened the global economy to a sick patient. 
 
Negative rates discourage savings and lead to increased speculation as investors seek higher returns. 
Dr Frenkel added: "We should normalise sooner rather than later if the patient is strong enough." 
The signs show that the "patient" is ready for recovery and the world economy is gradually returning to growth, he said. For instance, unemployment rates in the United States have "fallen like a rock". 
The exact timing of the interest rate hike is less important than the fact that expectations of higher rates will remove a fundamental source of uncertainty and distortion in the global economy, Dr Frenkel added. 
"If you have to do it, just do it. There is really no more reason to hesitate." 
 
The two-day forum attracted about 100 participants, including academics, senior policymakers and financial practitioners. 
 
It also featured a presentation by prominent University of California-Berkeley economist Barry Eichengreen about the development of financial markets in Asia. 
 
The evidence suggests that Asian bond markets have grown significantly in recent decades, said Professor Eichengreen yesterday. 
 
However, the experience of the global financial crisis has raised the possibility that financial markets can become "too large", he noted. 
 
Some studies suggest that the contribution of financial development to economic growth and stability can reach a point of diminishing returns, and might eventually even have a negative impact. 
This suggests that places such as Singapore, Malaysia, South Korea, Hong Kong and China are all at or above the level of financial development where the contribution of further financial deepening to economic growth turns negative, Prof Eichengreen said. 
 
Those studies are a reminder that "what matters is the quality and not just the quantity of financial development", he added. 
 
"There's also a real question of whether there exists a quantity- quality trade-off at some point." 
India's patent laws fully WTO compliant: Sitharaman 
Indo-Asian News Service
30 May 2015
 
New Delhi, May 30 (IANS) India has a robust legal framework and it has always been on the side of the law with regard to intellectual property right (IPR) matters and fully compliant with WTO on the issue, Commerce Minister Nirmala Sitharaman said on Saturday. 
 
"It is pure misinformation that India has poor protection for intellectual property. India has a robust legislative framework and any company holding a patent is well-protected," she said on the programme "Talkathon", a new media initiative of the information and broadcasting ministry telecast live on Saturday evening. 
 
Power Minister Piyush Goyal and Human Resource Development Minister Smriti Irani were also present in the programme. 
 
"There is not a single case against India in the WTO (World Trade Organisation). If our patent laws were poor, any number of countries could have dragged us to international courts on IPR matters," she added. 
IPR issues have been a sticky point in India-US relations, with the US administration periodically demanding that India change some of its patent laws. 
 
Regarding a policy on patents currently being formulated, the minister said the government had adopted a transparent process in drawing up a policy. 
 
"The think-tank has submitted its report, which is now in the process of inter-ministerial consultations. After that, once it is cleared by the cabinet, we will have a policy," Sitharaman said. 



Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.