HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO Optimistic Doha Round Can Be Concluded In Near Future
·         HYPERLINK \l "Malaysia to Ratify WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement
·         HYPERLINK \l "Taiwan accepts WTO Protocol on Trade Facilitation
·         HYPERLINK \l "Fiji works toward implementing WTO Agreement
·         HYPERLINK \l "Air cargo spends most of its time on the ground, IATA chief says
·         HYPERLINK \l "TPP agreement vital to global trade, says WTO
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO to Adopt COOL Report on May 29, with Retaliatory Tariff Request to Follow
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S. lawmakers move swiftly to avoid trade war with Canada
·         HYPERLINK \l "Brazil sugar industry group eyes trade case vs India, Thailand
·         HYPERLINK \l "China lifts three-year embargo on Brazil beef imports
·         HYPERLINK \l "Russia may ease food import ban for three EU states - wire
·         HYPERLINK \l "Court Orders Cash Deposit Rate Lowered for Company's Imports of Chinese Tires
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S. News: Currency Measure Sparks Trade Veto Threat
·         HYPERLINK \l "US Senate votes AGOA re-authorisation for next 10 years; South Africa subject to review
·         HYPERLINK \l "China effect weighs on emerging market exports
·         HYPERLINK \l "Malaysia faces headwinds in final lap to developed nation status
 
WTO Optimistic Doha Round Can Be Concluded In Near Future
 
KUALA LUMPUR, May 19 (Bernama) -- World Trade Organisation (WTO) Director-General Roberto Azevedo is optimistic that the 2008 Doha Development Round could be concluded in the near future as member countries begin to show signs of receptiveness towards the agenda being discussed.

Without giving a specific target, he said currently the possibility of concluding the negotiations looks positive, given that members are now more receptive towards one another.

"When I came to the organisation two years ago, there was no conversation about all this. Now they are getting out of their comfort zone, they are in solution-finding mode.

"Yes, it's going to be extremely difficult but I think it is possible and I think we are moving from an objective of trying to get the 'perfect deal' to getting the 'possible deal'," he told reporters after giving a talk entitled "Benefits and Importance of WTO to International Trade and Developing Members" here Tuesday.

The talk, in conjunction with his two-day working visit to Malaysia starting today, was also attended by International Trade and Industry Minister Datuk Seri Mustapa Mohamed.

The Doha Development Round is the current trade-negotiation round of the WTO which commenced in November 2001 under the previous WTO Director-General Mike Moore, with an objective to lower trade barriers around the world, and thus facilitate increased global trade.

However, since 2008, talks have stalled over a divide on major issues, such as agriculture, industrial tariffs and non-tariff barriers, services, and trade remedies.

Azevedo said the Doha round must be concluded in the foreseeable future because the WTO cannot wait for another long period of time to deliver the next multilateral ?agreement.

"We have to do it more quickly. At the end of the day if we cannot do it, then the members have to realise that we cannot do it," he said.

Realising this, Azevedo expects that at some point in time, member countries themselves will eventually sit and discuss among themselves the impossibility of concluding the Doha round.

"What is clearly not in the interest of the multilateral system is when all negotiating works of the organisation are paralysed by the fact that we cannot conclude all around.

"The major perimeter that I have been pushing in this negotiation of the conversation is doability. Let's go for what is doable, what can be done at this point in time, not what is perfect or desirable," he added.
 
 
Malaysia to Ratify WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, May 20, 2015
 
May 19 — The Malaysian government will become the fifth World Trade Organization member to ratify the Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA), said WTO Director-General Roberto Azevedo in a May 19 speech in Kuala Lumpur.
 
Malaysian Trade Minister Mustapa Mohamed told Azevedo that his government recently completed the domestic process to ratify the TFA and plans to deposit its instrument of acceptance in the coming days.
 
The TFA instructs WTO members to improve their customs procedures and expedite the movement, release and clearance of goods, among other commitments. TFA proponents said the agreement would generate hundreds of billions of dollars in global trade efficiencies and provide a significant boost to the global economy.
 
After two-thirds of the WTO's 161 members submit their instruments of acceptance, the TFA will be ratified and enter into force. Hong Kong, Mauritius, Singapore and the U.S. have already ratified the agreement.
 
“I hope Malaysia can help other members, particularly those in the region, ratify the agreement as soon as possible,” Azevedo said.
 
 
Taiwan accepts WTO Protocol on Trade Facilitation 
 
Taipei, May 19 (CNA) The Legislative Yuan accepted Tuesday a decision by the World Trade Organization (WTO) General Council on Nov. 27, 2014 to adopt the Protocol of Amendment to insert the Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA) into the Annex 1A of the WTO agreement.

In line with the decision adopted in Bali, WTO members adopted on 27 November 2014 a Protocol of Amendment to insert the new Agreement into Annex 1A of the WTO Agreement. The TFA will enter into force once two-thirds of members have completed their domestic ratification process.

The protocol provides provisions for improved and simplified transit procedures, reduced formalities and documentation requirements, and uniformity in the application of border procedures and customs cooperation among members.

In addition, the agreement recognizes that many countries will require technical assistance before they can implement some of their obligations, stating that full account should be taken of the need for special and differential treatment for developing and least-developed countries.

It is the first multilateral trade agreement reached by the WTO since the launch of the Doha Round of world trade negotiations in 2001.

The Trade Facilitation Agreement shall be open for acceptance by members and will enter into force once 66 percent of the members have completed their domestic ratification processes. (Tseng Ying-yu and Evelyn Kao) 
 
 
Fiji works toward implementing WTO Agreement
Fiji Broadcasting Corp.
May 20, 2015
by: Ellen Stolz
A three day seminar is underway in Nadi to set the roadmap for Fiji’s implementation of the World Trade Organisation (WTO) Trade Facilitation Agreement. 
Supported by the World Bank Group, the workshop has brought together Fijian officials from all the relevant ministries and Government entities, as well as the private sector, to carry out the national self-assessment. Ministry Trade permanent secretary Shaheen Ali has urged stakeholders to design a ‘Fijian Made’ solution that would reduce red-tape and streamline customs and border processes with reforms and technology upgrade. 
He gave the example of the successful implementation of Public Private Partnership at Fiji Ports Terminal Limited which has improved vessel productivity by 70 per cent, vessel turnaround time has been reduced from 36 hours to 22 hours, and reduced vessel berthing time from 6 hours to 1 hour or less. Ali says significant investments have been made to improve Fijian Airports and roads network contributing to improved logistics in the transportation and movement of goods at its borders.
 
 
Air cargo spends most of its time on the ground, IATA chief says 
Greg Knowler 
19 May 2015
Journal of Commerce Online
 
HONG KONG — Products being shipped as air cargo spend up to 90 percent of the transport time on the ground waiting to be processed, according to IATA director general and CEO TonyTyler.

The former Cathay Pacific chief executive was commenting after the signing of a memorandum of understanding with the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE), that will strengthen their support to developing countries seeking to implement the World Trade Organization (WTO) Trade Facilitation Agreement.

The accord will help the countries lower transport costs by up to 10 percent through more efficient facilitation that would raise their competitiveness, the UNECE said in a statement.

"The air cargo industry ships around 35 percent of global trade by value. For up to 90 percent of the transport time the goods may actually be on the ground waiting to be processed,” Tyler said. “Alligning regulation and procedures with global standards and best practices has the potential to deliver major efficiency gains. That’s the aim of the WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement, which presents a great opportunity for our industry to reduce these delays and costs, particularly in developing countries.”

IATA has been heavily focused on speeding up the air freight processes. Evolving shipper demands in the past few years have forced the air cargo industry into an adapt-or-die situation as it fights off competition from other modes of transport that offer better service and prices. This prompted IATA to set an industry goal of cutting 48 hours off the average end-to-end time of a consignment. Since the 1960s, the average transit time of air cargo has not changed from six to seven days.

By cutting down the end-to-end time, the industry would be making dramatic improvements to processes and data sharing across the supply chain, enabling airlines to cope with handling products that were growing in value and complexity.

“There is no alternative to not coming up with an enhanced and optimised industry. As the supply chain demands become increasingly more complex and the products are more sophisticated and higher in value, we need to provide a more sophisticated service,” said IATA cargo director Glyn Hughes said.

Simplifying the measures involved in shipping air cargo across borders will remove significant costs from the supply chain, and a faster service will be a natural by-product. Crucial to the process was working with customs organisations in the provision of cargo data and building systems that provided an integrated, transparent chain that would avoid unnecessary delays during different steps in the voyage.

“Together with UNECE, we will work with developing countries to simplify their procedures and enhance their facilities. This is a win-win scenario for everyone – the industry, the economy and the community,” said Tyler.

Christian Friis Bach, UNECE executive secretary, said developing trade facilitation recommendations and standards reduced the cost of doing business.

“An excellent example of the application of these instruments is the IATA eFreight Programme which reflects UNECE standards. This MoU with IATA will strengthen the implementation of our standards in developing and least developed countries, and as a consequence, help create growth and new jobs,” Bach said.

Contact Greg Knowler at greg.knowler@ihs.com [mailto:greg.knowler@ihs.com] and follow him on Twitter: @greg_knowler. [http://www.twitter.com/greg_knowler]
 
 
TPP agreement vital to global trade, says WTO 
20 May 2015
Business Times
 
KUALA LUMPUR: The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) and other major multilateral agreements which are being negotiated are important to keep the global trading system "breathing", said the World Trade Organisation (WTO) head.

WTO director-general Roberto Azevedo said trade liberalisation in terms of market access as well as improved access in services, agriculture, industrial and other sectors works better.

"It is also easier to liberalise for trading partners (in the grouping) who know them than to open to the whole world where the degree of competition or sensitivities are larger," he said at a media briefing after an information sharing session organised by the International Trade and Industry Ministry, here, yesterday.

"The fact that they are negotiating for new and improved market access is good and will be deeper than the WTO... that has always been the case." Disciplines chosen by negotiators could be areas currently not covered by WTO such as environment and labour concerns.

He was asked if the TPP pact would shape things in the Geneva-based organisation in the future.

"It's difficult to tell whether there is room in WTO. It is also up to the member countries if they want to develop such disciplines."

With negotiations still under way between the 11 countries, including Malaysia, Azevedo admitted it was too early to tell if the TPP would inspire changes in Geneva.

International Trade and Industry Minister Datuk Seri Mustapa Mohamed said Malaysia would leverage on its capacity as chair of Asean this year to enhance trade facilitation.

This is being done through the re-convened Asean Trade Facilitation Joint Consultative Committee, which includes the business community.
 
 
WTO to Adopt COOL Report on May 29, with Retaliatory Tariff Request to Follow
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, May 20, 2015
 
May 19 — The World Trade Organization will adopt its recent country-of-origin labeling (COOL) report on May 29, the next procedural hurdle before Canada and Mexico may seek retaliatory trade tariffs against the U.S.
 
On May 19 the WTO Dispute Settlement Body (DSB) circulated a notice that it would hold a special meeting May 29 to adopt the COOL report. The notice comes a day after a WTO appellate panel said that the revised COOL rules, which require meat producers to indicate on retail packaging where each animal was born, raised and slaughtered, favor domestic products in violation of WTO rules (96 WTO, 5/19/15).
 
Once the report is adopted, Canada and Mexico may seek authorization from the WTO to take retaliatory trade measures against the U.S.
 
Canadian trade officials have already signaled their intention to impose an estimated $2 billion in tariffs on an array of U.S. products—like beef, pork, poultry, cherries, chocolate and frozen orange juice—if the U.S. fails to comply with the WTO ruling (230 WTO, 12/1/14).
 
Repeal Legislation Introduced
 
Following the adoption of the report, the U.S. may signal its intention to comply with the recommendations and rulings of the DSB and request a reasonable period of time to do so.
 
On May 19 House Agriculture Committee Chairman Mike Conaway (R-Texas) introduced legislation (H.R. 2393) to repeal U.S. COOL rules.
 
Senate Agriculture Committee Chairman Pat Roberts (R-Kan.) and ranking member Debbie Stabenow (D-Mich.) previously said that they would consider repealing U.S. COOL rules in order to avoid retaliatory trade actions (74 WTO, 4/17/15).
 
The Office of the U.S. Trade Representative (USTR) is “considering all options going forward and will continue to consult with members of Congress and interested members of the public regarding possible next steps,” said USTR General Counsel Tim Reif via e-mail.
 
 
U.S. lawmakers move swiftly to avoid trade war with Canada 
The Canadian Press
19 May 2015
The Toronto Star
 
OTTAWA—A group of U.S. lawmakers hopes to move swiftly to avoid a trade war with Canada.

Members of a congressional committee have introduced a Bill that would repeal American meat-labelling standards.

The move from the House agriculture committee came a day after the World Trade Organization found the standards violated international trade law.

Canada and Mexico are seeking to slap tariffs on a wide range of American goods, unless the U.S. Congress changes the rules.

The new Bill would repeal the requirement that beef, pork and poultry sold in the U.S. be labelled with the country where the animals were born, raised and slaughtered.

Canada and Mexico blame the rule for reducing exports and major business groups in the U.S. also criticize it for complicating the sorting process.

The Canadian government said Tuesday it is serious about retaliation.

“In light of the WTO’s final decision and due to the fact that this discriminatory measure remains in place, our governments will be seeking authorization from the WTO to take retaliatory measures against U.S. exports,” Agriculture Minister Gerry Ritz said.

He said, however, he doesn’t see this action sparking a trade war.

“The Canada-U.S. relationship is far bigger than one particular irritant,” he said.

The labelling laws segregate Canadian and Mexican livestock and meat shipments from American production.

This damages the whole North American supply chain and is costing Canadian farmers, Ritz said.

The sponsors of the American bill sponsors expressed optimism that it would have enough votes to pass the House of Representatives and then also the Senate, where adoption could be a bit trickier.

If it fails, Canada and Mexico are preparing to impose tariffs on a range of American goods including wine, cereal and frozen orange juice.

Labels on packaged steaks and other cuts of meat in the United States that say where the animals were born, raised and slaughtered will have to be dropped or revised after a World Trade Organization ruling Monday. 
 
 
Brazil sugar industry group eyes trade case vs India, Thailand 
By Alonso Soto and Marcelo Teixeira

BRASILIA/SAO PAULO, May 19 (Reuters) - Brazilian sugar cane producers are gathering evidence to persuade their government to launch a trade case against India and Thailand over subsidies, highlighting the growing global tensions stoked by the plunge in commodity prices.

Eduardo Leão, executive director of the Brazilian cane industry association Unica, said the group hired an international law firm to dig into the subsidy programs, which they estimate could cost Brazil $1.2 billion a year in lost revenue.

"We are determined to challenge both countries," said Leão. "Our role now is to deepen our analysis and convince the government that we are getting hammered by these subsidies."

Brazil, the world's largest sugar exporter, has brought questions about incentives for Thailand's and India's sugarcane producers to the Agricultural Committee of the World Trade Organization. The South American country has grown more concerned about those programs at a time when global sugar prices are at six-year lows.

The Thai and Indian embassies in Brazil did not immediately return calls seeking comment.

Raw sugar futures in New York, weighed down by a supply glut fed by large crops in the main producer countries in recent years, are hovering around 12 cents per pound, levels last seen in early 2009.

Brazil, whose economy appears headed for its worst recession in 25 years, is aggressively protecting its share of the global food market as a commodity boom fades. Last year, Brazil launched a case against Indonesia for restricting poultry exports. Officials are also considering challenging the United States over its soy and corn subsidies.

Disagreements over rural subsidies also threaten efforts to revive long-delayed global trade talks known as the Doha Round.

Sugar prices have been slumping at a time when Brazilian sugarcane producers were already struggling because of government fuel policies that have reduced demand for ethanol.

According to preliminary estimates by Brazilian consultancy Agroicone, subsidies by India and Thailand would add 4 million tonnes of sugar - or nearly 7 percent - to world supply, dragging down prices 13 percent.

Unica's Leão said producers are more concerned with Thailand's policies.

That country's share of global exports has risen four percentage points to 16 percent in the last three years. Brazil's share has fallen by five percentage points to 48 percent during the same period, according to Unica.

It may be difficult to prove that Thai authorities are breaking trade rules with policies that include local price supports for producers and a fund to help farmers. Still, Brazil's government may be willing to try.

"In the case of Thailand, it is a very complex system, but if producers are able to build a strong case the government will without a doubt support them and launch a case," said a senior Brazilian official involved in trade policy.

Challenging India's sugar subsidies may be more difficult politically for Brazil, since the countries are partners in the BRICS group of large emerging economies. India is also a player in talks to seal a global trade deal brokered by Brazilian diplomat Roberto Azevedo, new head of the WTO. (Writing by Alonso Soto; editing by David Gregorio and G Crosse) 
 
 
China lifts three-year embargo on Brazil beef imports 
 
BRASILIA, May 19 (Reuters) - China has ended an embargo on Brazilian beef imports, Brazil's agriculture ministry said on Tuesday, lifting a three-year old ban and opening the door to half a billion dollars of new sales.

Eight Brazilian beef processing plants and one poultry plant were approved to ship to China, the ministry said in a statement after Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff and Chinese Premier Li Keqiang signed trade, finance and investment deals worth tens of billions of dollars.

Seventeen more processing plants are expected to get approval in June, when Brazilian Agriculture Minister Katia Abreu visits China. The 26 plants represent $520 million of potential sales to China, the ministry said.

Though other countries like Japan and South Korea have blocked Brazil's fresh Brazilian beef exports since 2012 due to a mad cow disease scare, the World Animal Health Organization maintained Brazil's status as a country with an insignificant risk of the disease.

Brazil is the world's largest beef exporter and China is its top trading partner. In 2014, Brazil exported $7.2 billion worth of beef.

Brazil's agriculture ministry also expects the United States to approve imports of fresh Brazilian beef for the first time by late June, when President Dilma Rousseff visits Washington.

In total, 29 Brazilian chicken plants and seven pork plants are already exporting to China. (Reporting by Marcela Ayres; Writing by Caroline Stauffer; Editing by W Simon and Marguerita Choy) 
 
 
Russia may ease food import ban for three EU states - wire 
 
Budapest, May 19, 2015 (MTI-Econews) - Russia may exemptaround fifteen Hungarian firms from its embargo on food imports from the European Union, Interfax news agency quoted a senior Russian official as saying on Tuesday.

Sergei Dankvert, the head of Russia's federal veterinary service, said the ban could be lifted for the Hungarian and a few Greek and Cypriot producers, altogether for about twenty companies, Interfax reported.

Russia introduced the ban on food imports from the EU last August in response to Western sanctions imposed on Moscow over its role in the Ukraine crisis, denying many food producers access to the large Russian market.

The Hungarian economy has suffered losses of nearly EUR 300,000 a day as a result of the Russian food embargo, Hungary's minister for foreign affairs and trade said in an interview with Slovak business daily Hospodarske Noviny published in October last year.

Interfax quoted Dankvert as saying his service was not currently conducting negotiations with the EU on lifting the wider ban on food imports.

The ban, which affects some 6,000 European firms and a USD 9bn worth of food imports annually from the EU, the United States and some other countries, is due to run out on August 7, a year after it was imposed. But the EU has suggested it might extend its sanctions against Russia.

Russian Minister of Economic Development Alexey Ulyukayev said early this year that Russia was exploring ways of softening the food embargo for the three countries on their request. The solution should be in consistent with WTO norms, and entry into Russian markets could be made possible through processing or tolling mechanisms, Mr Ulyukayev said.
 
 
Court Orders Cash Deposit Rate Lowered for Company's Imports of Chinese Tires
By Brian Flood
WTO Reporter, May 20, 2015
 
May 19 — Cash deposits for countervailing duties (CVDs) on Tianjin United Tire & Rubber International Co. Ltd.'s (TUTRIC) off-road tires from China must be set at 3.93 percent, the Court of International Trade ruled May 18 (GPX Int'l Tire Corp. v. United States, 2015 BL 152621, Ct. Int'l Trade, No. 08-00285 (Slip Op. 15-46), 5/18/15).
 
Judge Jane A. Restani ruled that the Commerce Department was violating the court's earlier decision by ordering U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) to collect cash deposits at a rate of 6.85 percent on the company's tires.
 
The ruling states that the Court of International Trade retains the authority to rule on issues that were not raised in what are known as Section 129 proceedings.
 
Challenges at Court, WTO
 
When it issued the CVD order, Commerce originally assigned TUTRIC a 6.85 percent CVD rate. The company sued on several grounds, including Commerce's determination that TUTRIC was subsidized because it did not repay certain governmental loans. Commerce eventually lowered the company's CVD rate to 3.93 percent, which the court upheld in 2013.
 
While that litigation was ongoing, the World Trade Organization Appellate Body ruled that the U.S.'s CVDs on a number of Chinese products, including the tires at issue, violated the country's international obligations (54 WTO, 3/21/11).
 
Commerce issued a “Section 129 implementation,” also known as a “Timken notice,” under the provision of the Uruguay Round Agreements Act that directs Commerce to bring agency determinations into line with WTO rules. Commerce later argued to the court that under this notice, CBP was instructed to continue collecting cash deposit rates on the company's merchandise at the 6.85 percent rate.
 
Commerce Was ‘Cryptic at Best.'
 
The court ruled that the higher cash deposit rate was unlawful.
 
While Section 129 proceedings can address issues outside those raised by the WTO, the court said, Commerce usually chooses to limit them that way. Nothing in the law indicates that an issue the WTO didn't consider, such as TUTRIC's loan repayment argument, is waived for all ongoing domestic litigation if it is not raised in the Section 129 proceedings, the court said. Rather, parties can still raise such arguments before the court, as the company did.
 
Even if Commerce's interpretation of Section 129 were reasonable, the court said, TUTRIC was not on notice that it should raise its loan repayment argument in these Section 129 proceedings and that if it did not, it would forfeit it.
 
Moreover, Restani rejected Commerce's argument that the court had accepted Commerce's cash deposit decision when it issued its 2013 ruling. Commerce's remand results did not explicitly state what TUTRIC's cash deposit rate would be, but since cash deposits rates are based on the specific CVD rate assigned, they implicitly set TUTRIC's rate at 3.93 percent, the court said.
 
Commerce was “cryptic at best” in referencing the Section 129 determination in its remand results and did not clearly signal its intentions to keep using the 6.85 percent rate, the court ruled. The court's 2013 ruling therefore was not meant to uphold the higher cash deposit rate, the court said, but rather one set at 3.93 percent.
 
Mark B. Lehnardt of Lehnardt & Lehnardt, LLC, Liberty, Mo., represented plaintiff Tianjin United Tire & Rubber International Co., Ltd.
 
Alexander V. Sverdlov, trial attorney for the Justice Department's Civil Division, argued for defendant U.S.
 
Elizabeth J. Drake, Terence P. Stewart and Philip A. Butler of Stewart and Stewart, Washington, represented defendant-intervenor Titan Tire Corp.
 
 
U.S. News: Currency Measure Sparks Trade Veto Threat 
By William Mauldin 
20 May 2015
The Wall Street Journal
 
The White House on Tuesday threatened to veto a crucial trade bill if it contains legislation with binding punishments for currency manipulation, the main point of contention between President Barack Obama and congressional critics of his trade policy.

Treasury Secretary Jacob Lew called the bipartisan currency measure a "poison pill" that could sink the proposed 12-nation Trans-Pacific Partnership pact if it is included in legislation needed to complete and win passage of the deal.

"If a trade agreement is required to come back with a currency discipline that is enforceable through trade mechanisms, I don't think there is another country in the world that would agree to that," Mr. Lew said at a Bretton Woods Committee conference in Washington. "It's a poison pill in terms of getting agreement on TPP."

Backed by Ford Motor Co. and other lawmakers, Sen. Rob Portman (R., Ohio) and Sen. Debbie Stabenow (D., Mich.) have proposed an amendment to so-called fast-track trade legislation that would press the administration's negotiators to include enforceable currency rules in the Pacific pact.

Mr. Portman rejected the "poison pill" label Tuesday, saying the amendment was "a vitamin" that would strengthen the U.S.'s negotiating objective on currency. He said he would be "really surprised" if Mr. Obama vetoed fast track over the measure.

Granting the president fast-track authority would allow him to complete negotiations on the Pacific pact and then present it to Congress for an up-or-down vote, without amendments.

But the White House and Mr. Lew warned that Mr. Obama could veto the entire fast-track bill if Mr. Portman's language is included. The bill could go to a full Senate vote this week.

"The president would . . . take the extraordinary step of vetoing the TPA bill if this amendment were added," said White House spokesman Josh Earnest, adding that the amendment would "interfere with the ability of the Federal Reserve to implement monetary policy."

The majority of Republican lawmakers who back Mr. Obama on the trade legislation and the Pacific trade deal also don't want to see it torpedoed by the currency rules. "Most of my members are opposed to it," Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell told reporters at the Capitol. "We'll be working hard to keep any amendments off the bill that would defeat the bill."

With tariffs already low, many lawmakers, including most Democrats, have expressed interest in rules that would punish countries that take unacceptable steps to cheapen their currencies to gain a trade advantage.

 
US Senate votes AGOA re-authorisation for next 10 years; South Africa subject to review 
15 May 2015
Bridges Africa
 
The US Senate passed legislation on 14 May to extend duty-free access to the US for Sub-Saharan African countries through the African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) for another decade.

“I am very glad that we have found a way to get them to this point,” said US Senate Finance Committee Chairman Orrin Hatch following the vote. 
 
AGOA expands upon the US Generalized System of Preferences (GSP), a set of formal exceptions from the WTO’s most-favoured nation (MFN) principle, which allows developed countries to offer developing countries preferential treatment on specific goods. The current version of AGOA is due to expire on 30 September, unless re-authorised beforehand. 
 
The bill, passed last week by a margin of 97 votes to 1, includes the renewal of several trade preference programmes: the GSP, expired since July 2013, will now be renewed through 31 December 2017; AGOA, including the third-country fabric (TCF) provision and preferential duty treatment programme for Haiti, will be extended until 30 September 2025. (See Bridges Africa, 27 April 2015) 
 
The legislation will still require approval by the House of Representatives and President Barack Obama before it can become law.

New features

The general rule of origin under the new AGOA retains a value-added requirement of 35 percent. 
 
This provision entails that products may integrate materials sourced from outside countries – in other words, non-AGOA-beneficiaries – provided that the "direct costs of processing" undertaken in one or more designated AGOA-beneficiary countries equal at least 35 percent of the product's appraised value.

While those lawmakers who crafted the legislation argue that such a provision is likely to increase the utilisation rate of the scheme and promote greater regional integration, some experts contend, however, that such a requirement is still likely to be difficult for small developing countries to meet.

Generally, preference–receiving LDCs in the context of AGOA have shown a relatively high utilization rate only in a few sectors – particularly in textile and clothing – and have therefore pushed for a revision of the US rule of origin in the context of AGOA. (See Bridges Africa, 5 November 2014)

The new version also includes language on the promotion of the role of women in social and economic development in sub-Saharan Africa as part of the eligibility criteria of the scheme.

The bill gives the US President the authority to designate “certain cotton articles” as eligible articles for least developed countries under the GSP programme. A Senate Finance Committee report associated with the legislation links this undertaking to the WTO implementation commitments on duty-free quota-free treatment for certain cotton products originating from LDCs.

Under the new text, beneficiary countries will be expected to develop biennial AGOA utilisation strategies in order to “more effectively and strategically utilise benefits available under AGOA,” the bill says, which additionally cites the possibility for Regional Economic Communities to be involved in this exercise. 
 
Such strategies would mainly review opportunities and challenges around exports under AGOA, obstacles to regional integration, and establish a plan to increase the utilisation of benefits under the Act.

Focus on “good faith progress”

“I share many of my colleagues’ belief that benefits under AGOA should go to countries making good faith progress towards meeting the programme’s eligibility criteria,” said Hatch last week, before explicitly raising concerns over recent policy changes in South Africa which, he argued, contradict specific AGOA’s provisions.

Hatch added that the creation of a mechanism under the AGOA programme that would allow for benefits to be “scaled back” in case a country is found to not be making “good faith progress” on certain issues was “important.” 
 
The AGOA provides now greater flexibility to the White House to withdraw, suspend, or limit benefits under the scheme if it determines that such action would be more effective than termination.

For example, the bill requires the President to notify and explain to Congress his intention to terminate a country’s designation as a beneficiary at least 60 days before the decision takes effect. 
 
The bill provides for a petition process allowing interested parties to file petitions at any time with the Office of the US Trade Representative regarding compliance of a beneficiary country. Regarding public hearings, the inclusion of public comments will be required during reviews of a country’s AGOA eligibility.

The new AGOA will also allow the US President to conduct out-of-cycle reviews of any beneficiary country to determine whether it is making continued progress towards meeting the scheme’s eligibility criteria. 
 
Since AGOA was put in place, 13 countries have lost their eligibility, although seven eventually had it restored, according to a report by the US Government Accountability Office (GAO), an independent agency providing audit and evaluation to Congress.

Six countries – Central African Republic, Democratic Republic of Congo, Eritrea, The Gambia, South Sudan, and Swaziland – lost their eligibility primarily due to political reasons and have not regained it to date. (See Bridges Africa, 27 April 2015)

South Africa subject to “out of the cycle” review 
 
Although South Africa remains eligible for AGOA under the new legislation, the bill specifies that some concerns have been raised about the country’s compliance with certain provisions of the Act. An “out-of-cycle” review of South Africa will therefore be undertaken 30 days after AGOA’s enactment. 
 
In the context of such review, if the President determines that South Africa does not meet certain requirements, the country’s eligibility could be either withdrawn, suspended or limited.

Earlier talks over AGOA’s renewal had move slowly due to a dispute between Pretoria and Washington on poultry trade, following South Africa’s decision to impose anti-dumping duties on certain imported US poultry products. (See Bridges Africa, 27 January 2015)

Additionally, according to a report by the US Senate Finance Committee, South Africa recently indicated its intention to renegotiate its commitments under the WTO’s General Agreement on Trade in Services requiring foreign-owned companies to relinquish 51 percent ownership to South Africans. Moreover the country has developed proposals for policy changes with regard to intellectual property rights laws that could result in several “shortcomings.” These issues will be taken into account during the review of South Africa’s eligibility, the report says.
 
 
China effect weighs on emerging market exports
James Kynge
Financial Times 
Last updated: May 19, 2015 8:01 pm 
 
Dip compounded by strong US dollar and low commodity prices
 
The impact of China’s slowing economy is depressing export earnings across the developing world, not only from countries that rely on commodity production but increasingly also from manufacturing exporters that have hitherto enjoyed buoyant demand.

Data from Capital Economics, which compiles three-month rolling averages for emerging markets (EM) in order to smooth out monthly volatility, found that exports from EMs fell 8 per cent year on year in March, after a 4.4 per cent decline in February (see chart). Partial data available for April suggest EM exports continued to weaken in the month, the research company said.

Several effects are conspiring to damp EM exports, including lower commodity prices, the strength of the US dollar and China’s slowdown, analysts said. 
 
On a 12-month rolling basis, Capital Economics calculated, exports to China from Latin America are down 10 per cent year on year, while those from emerging Asia and emerging Europe are down 5 per cent and 3 per cent, respectively. Exports from Africa to China are down 7.5 per cent, it added.

“While commodity producers have been hit harder than most, manufacturing-based EMs have also suffered as China has slowed,” said Neil Shearing, chief emerging markets economist at Capital Economics. 
 
“Manufacturers in Asia, including Korea and Thailand, have seen exports to China fall over the past year. And while around half of the drop in exports from Malaysia has been in commodities such as palm oil, manufactured exports, including computer parts, have also contributed to the decline,” Mr Shearing added.

All of this challenges the view that some economies might benefit as Beijing shifts its economic model from investment-led to consumption-led growth. China’s rebalancing towards consumer spending has so far failed to yield any export dividend, with Chinese imports falling 17.3 per cent in the first four months of this year.
 
“The headwinds from China are likely to persist for some time,” Mr Shearing said.

None of the main EM regions is immune from the soft export trend (see chart), though emerging Asia has shown more resilience than the other regions, with emerging Europe suffering a slump driven by weak exports from Russia, Romania, the Czech Republic and Hungary.

The downturn in Europe — and in some other regions — is exacerbated by the strength of the US dollar, which pushes down the dollar value of exports priced in other currencies. Many emerging European exports, which are denominated in euro, have suffered valuation effects as the EU currency hit the skids.
 
 
Malaysia faces headwinds in final lap to developed nation status 
 
* PM to unveil next five-year plan on Thursday
* Govt under pressure over cost of living, corruption allegations
* Analysts expect new populist measures
* Fall in energy prices seen hurting growth in coming months

By Praveen Menon

KUALA LUMPUR, May 20 (Reuters) - Malaysian Prime Minister Najib Razak will outline on Thursday a five-year development plan leading up to 2020, the date the country has set for achieving developed economy status, but that goal may prove elusive as political pressures crowd out reform.

Najib's government faces its harshest test since coming to power in 2009, as Malaysia braces for a downgrade of its credit rating by Fitch and a once-stable political environment is shaken by allegations of state corruption and mismanagement.

When the prime minister reveals his plans to complete the final step towards Malaysia's vision of being a high-income nation by the end of the decade, he may have to forgo some long-term growth targets to tackle pressing short-term concerns.

"There would be more popular measures introduced in this plan than the long-term transformative measures that would get us to the 2020 target," said Oh Ei Sun, senior fellow at S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies.

"This is because the immediate political survival is more important for Najib, and for that he needs to improve his public image. Besides, Najib would have retired by 2020 so his bigger concern is the current political issues."

Public discontent spilled onto the streets this month with more than 10,000 people demonstrating against rising costs and a new goods and services tax (GST), the largest protests seen by the country in years.

Attacks by influential former Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad over alleged corruption in debt-ridden state investment fund 1MDB, and calls for him to step down, have also weakened Najib's position.

Analysts expect him to try to turn around some of that sentiment by announcing more short-term measures to improve living standards.

SUBSIDY CUTS

In the last five-year plan in 2010, Najib set out plans to cut subsidies and accelerate investment into the country.

Since then, Malaysia has abolished fuel subsidies that had weighed on the government's budget deficit and also introduced the GST that should help offset some of the revenue lost from the fall in global prices for its oil and natural gas exports.

But Najib has also introduced measures to further boost the economic participation of the ethnic Malay majority, entrenching race-based policies seen as shoring up support among the politically-dominant Malays.

More incentives are expected in this five-year plan for the Bumiputeras, or "sons of the soil", who are the core constituency of Najib's United Malays National Organisation that has been the dominant force in the country's ruling coalitions since independence in 1957.

Ethnic Malays have benefited from wide-ranging affirmative action privileges since the early 1970s, a policy that critics say has stunted the country's competitiveness and led to a huge "brain drain" of ethnic Chinese emigrants.

Najib said last week that priorities of the people, especially with regard to the cost of living, security, transport and rural infrastructure, would be the focus of the 11th Malaysia Plan.

There would be a special focus on education, especially on technical and vocational training, he added.

"In addition to doing the more populist policies, I think he will ramp up the Bumiputera policies," said Professor James Chin, director at the Asia Institute Tasmania.

OIL PRICE HEADWINDS

Achieving the 2020 target would make Malaysia the second high-income nation in Southeast Asia after neighbouring Singapore.

Malaysia's economy grew a stronger-than-expected 6 percent in 2014, and a respectable 5.6 percent in the first quarter, but economists expect the net energy exporter to feel the full impact of weaker global oil and gas prices in the coming months.

Ratings agency Fitch said in January it would review Malaysia's rating in the first half and may downgrade it, citing the revision of its fiscal deficit target to 3.2 percent of GDP as evidence that "dependence on commodities remains a key credit weakness for Malaysia".

Delivering major infrastructure projects, diversifying industry and increasing investment are seen as priorities for the next plan.

But while the finish line is in sight, the final lap is not going to be easy, Weiwen Ng, economist for ASEAN and Pacific at ANZ Research said in a note.

"Malaysia might well be taking the staircase, rather than the elevator as it nears the top," said Weiwen.

"The risk is that budget allocation for development expenditure (and hence infrastructure) might be slashed, especially if the government were to come in to bail out 1MDB."

Investment so far this year has been subdued, with issuance of public debt securities and business loans below average.

Income (GNI) per capita has gradually increased, rising 2 percent on average in the previous three years to $10,246 in 2014, said Diana Del Rosario, an economist at Deutsche Bank in Singapore.

"But at least a 6 percent annual rate is still needed to meet the $15,000 mark by 2020," she said. (Additional reporting by Trinna Leong; Editing by Alex Richardson) 
END


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.