ASEAN declares creation of integrated community
Timeline set for 16-country trade pact
APEC moves to liberalize trade in services
IMF decision on yuan will help accelerate economic reforms in China
Japan plans to raise minimum wage in stimulus to revive economy
India defended climate change red lines
India: Academics are divided on liberalising education
India is growing at 7.5 per cent, will grow faster in the coming years, says PM Narendra Modi
Challenger Wins Argentine Presidential Runoff;  rejection of interventionist economic policies 

 
ASEAN declares creation of integrated community
Zakir Hussain, Deputy Political Editor In Kuala Lumpur
23 November 2015
The Straits Times
Road map to draw grouping of 10 nations closer over next decade also endorsed
Asean leaders yesterday put pen to paper to form an Asean Community to further lift the well-being of the grouping's 625 million people.
They also endorsed a road map to draw the grouping of 10 nations closer over the next decade.
The Kuala Lumpur Declaration on the Establishment of an Asean Community comes at a time when the global economy is weak and rising geopolitical rivalry threatens to affect the peace and stability that have enabled South-east Asia to prosper in recent decades.
The document is aimed at building "economies that are vibrant, competitive and highly integrated, and an inclusive community that is embedded with a strong sense of togetherness and common identity".
Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Lee Hsien Loong said the grouping has come a long way, but there will be work to be done after the Asean Community is established on Dec 31.
Asean has made progress not just in lowering barriers to trade and mobility, but also "in the thinking, the realisation that we do have to work together", he added.
He was speaking to Singapore reporters after two days of meetings among Asean leaders, as well as with their key partners. The Asean and East Asia summits came right after the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Group of 20 summit in Antalya and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Apec) summit in Manila, both of which he attended.
Tackling terrorism featured at all three meetings, as did the possibilities of economic development and improving livelihoods in a sluggish global economy, including through more integration.
While some in Asean may have more pressing issues, Mr Lee said regular meetings put pressure on officials to make progress.
He recalled how the upgrading of the Asean-China Free Trade Area ran into some last-minute difficulty and its scheduled signing on Saturday had to be put on hold.
"But because we were all here and we were close to agreement, overnight, they worked away and the form of words was settled, and we were able to sign the agreement," Mr Lee said.
He noted that most of the commitments outlined in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Asean Economic Community (AEC) on freeing up trade have been met.
So Dec 31 will not see a sudden transition, but Singapore businesses can benefit by understanding what the AEC offers and how they can seize the opportunities to gain access to other markets, he said.
Analysts noted that the AEC is not just about trade but strategy too. Mr Lee said both China and the United States want to develop good relations with Asean, as do countries such as India.
On Saturday, Chinese Premier HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Li Keqiang pledged infrastructure loans totalling US$10 billion (S$14 billion) to Asean states to improve railway and production capacity and connectivity across the region.
Separately, US President Barack Obama invited all Asean leaders to the US next year and reiterated America's commitment to Asean and the region.
Asked for his observations about US-China dynamics at the summit, Mr Lee said while difficult issues like the South China Sea remain, Asean-China ties are growing in many areas like trade and tourism.
As coordinator for Asean-China relations for the next three years, Singapore hopes to improve ties and make progress on a Code of Conduct to manage tensions in the South China Sea. The South China Sea is one area where China and the US do not see eye to eye, and is an issue between them at Asean forums.
"But China and America have got a broad account too," Mr Lee said.
"This has to fit into that wider account and the two have to work it out in that broader context, as well as within the Asean backdrop."
Laos will take over from Malaysia as Asean chairman next year.
Singapore Press Holdings Limited
Timeline set for 16-country trade pact
An Baijie in Kuala Lumpur
23 November 2015
China Daily-Hong Kong Edition
Nations plan to eliminate tariffs on 65% of traded goods next year
China was among 16 nations issuing a joint declaration on a trade pact during the ASEAN meetings on Sunday, paving the way for the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership to take effect next year.
Under the declaration, negotiations on the RCEP, which started three years ago, will conclude in 2016 and the 16 countries will accelerate the reduction of tariffs for trade in goods. Its members - the 10 ASEAN states, China, Australia, Japan, the Republic of Korea, New Zealand and India - account for almost half the world's population and have a combined GDP exceeding $17.1 trillion, or 27 percent of the global GDP.
The RCEP is thus larger than the recently concluded 12-nation Trans-Pacific Partnership, which includes the United States, Japan, New Zealand, Austrailia and Brunei, but not China.
At a meeting of ASEAN members, Japan and the ROK, Premier HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Li Keqiang said on Saturday that China is willing to work with the other countries to finalize RCEP negotiations next year and to establish a free trade zone covering the largest population of the world.
China believes that the TPP and RCEP can help each other and contribute to the joint goal of establishing an Asia-Pacific free trade zone, Li said. He added that China has an open attitude toward the TPP.
China will continue to hold the East Asia Business Forum, work toward advancing East Asian e-commerce and logistics cooperation, and make regional trade and investment more convenient, he said.
In the first step of RCEP trade liberalization, tariffs on 65 percent of trade will immediately be dropped when the pact takes effect. In the next phase, tariffs on another 20 percent of trade in goods will be gradually eliminated within 10 years. The remaining 15 percent will remain in place or be gradually reduced to from 5 to 10 percent.
Gao Yan, vice-minister of commerce, said at a media briefing last week that China has been "a firm supporter and promoter" of the RCEP and hopes the negotiations maintain their momentum so as to conclude as soon as possible.
RCEP negotiations have already gone through 10 rounds of talks and four rounds of ministerial-level meetings, Gao said, and an early finalization would significantly boost all parties' confidence.
Sunanta Kangvalkulkij, deputy director-general of Thailand's Trade Negotiations Department, said in a recent report in the Nation newspaper in Bangkok that the RCEP will help compensate ASEAN member states that do not join the US-led TPP pact.
"The RCEP should be enforced before the TPP so that it will help ensure regional growth," Sunanta was quoted as saying.
Ding Yifan, an economist at the State Council's Development Research Center, said that the RCEP and TPP are competing pacts and have overlapping characters.
"China has been pushing to advance free trade in the whole Asia-Pacific region, but the US selected only a group of countries in the region to establish the TPP," he said.
China Daily Information Company
APEC moves to liberalize trade in services
23 November 2015
Manila Bulletin
Realizing that trade is not just about trade in goods, Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" APEC) leaders have adopted the Services Cooperation Framework in a move to liberalize this sector as a strategy to achieve inclusive growth.
“We, the Leaders of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" APEC, gathered in Manila on 19 November 2015 to reaffirm our commitment to achieve inclusive growth in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" APEC region. We recognize the important role of services in realizing this goal,” the APEC Leaders said.
The services sector accounts for a dominant share of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" APEC economies, providing high quality jobs and new avenues for growth. Efficient and competitive services sectors provide whole-of-economy benefits.
Services exports show higher contribution than manufactured goods. For every $1 million of services exports generates 105 jobs, whereas goods exports generate only 59 jobs for the same amount.
Not only the services trade creates new jobs but it allows people from all parts of the economy to participate in the economic and social mainstream.
In the Philippines, services account for more than 50 percent of the total gross domestic product (GDP) in a year. It also accounts for at least 10 percent of the country's total exports, which in turn contributes 38 percent to the country's economy.
With the booming business process outsourcing sector, the services sector is expected to grow at a faster pace.
The leaders also acknowledged that “international trade in services facilitates the transfer of technology and management know-how, spurs innovation, boosts competition and productivity, raises the standard of domestic services suppliers, reduces costs, and widens the range of choice for consumers.”
The adoption of the Services Cooperation Framework is also seen as a strategic step to achieve the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" APEC goals under the Bogor Leaders' Declaration for a free and open trade and investment area by 2020.
Moving forward, the leaders agreed to develop a strategic and long-term APEC Services Competitiveness Roadmap in 2016 with the adoption of a concerted set of actions and mutually agreed targets to be achieved by 2025.
The process of drafting the Roadmap will begin with discussion of the elements of the Roadmap followed by deliberations on actions and mutually agreed targets.
The leaders also directed their respective Ministers and Senior Officials to mainstream this Framework into the strategic and long-term planning of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" APEC's work program through all the relevant Committees and Working Groups, in particular the Group on Services (GOS).
Senior officials of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" APEC are also ordered to develop a mechanism for implementing the services cooperation beginning 2016.
Manila Bulletin Publishing Corp
IMF decision on yuan will help accelerate economic reforms in China
SCMP Editorial
23 November 2015
The inclusion of the Chinese currency in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" International Monetary Fund's special drawing rights (SDR) basket is long awaited, long overdue and, finally, all but a foregone conclusion. Before the end of the month, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF's governing board is expected to adopt the recommendation of staff advisers that the yuan be added to the existing four units of the basket - the US dollar, euro, yen and sterling - boosting its rise to the status of a global reserve currency. The experts reported that the yuan met the requirements as a "freely usable" currency.
The yuan did not have to be included in the basket to be widely recognised as a store of value, the Swiss franc being one example. But, addressing the recent meeting of leaders of G20 nations, President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xi Jinping rightly welcomed consensus that inclusion would increase the representation and attraction of the SDR, improve the international monetary system and safeguard global financial stability.
The Chinese economy is, after all, a major driver of global growth. That said, the global dividends of the yuan's ascent will ultimately depend on Beijing pushing ahead with liberalisation of its markets and capital flows to make it widely available for use as a reserve asset. Xi implicitly acknowledged this, saying that China's confidence in its ability to sustain a medium-to-high growth rate came from its determination and actions to deepen reform and build an open economic system.
However, he admitted that "this endeavour won't be smooth sailing. It won't happen overnight". In that respect, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" IMF decision sends a positive message for the internal debate about accelerated reform.
Meanwhile, Xi predicted 7 per cent growth overall this year, following a dip to 6.9 per cent in the third quarter, meaning China will contribute about a third of global growth. This may be down from 50 per cent in the past, but is still critical when other major economies have slowed. China's 13th five-year plan aims to double 2010 GDP by 2020. This calls for 6.5 per cent annualised growth, underpinning future global growth. 
South China Morning Post Publishers Limited
Japan plans to raise minimum wage in stimulus to revive economy
23 November 2015
Reuters News
By Takashi Umekawa and Stanley White
TOKYO, Nov 23 (Reuters) - Japan's government plans to raise the minimum wage and introduce other steps to revitalise the economy, but the draft of stimulus measures seen by Reuters on Monday appeared to break no new ground on reforms that analysts say are needed to end decades of stagnation.
Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Shinzo Abe's government will also offer some financial support to people living off their pensions to bolster consumer spending, a copy of the draft obtained by Reuters showed.
Citing unnamed sources, the Nikkei newspaper said on Monday that the government is planning to raise the minimum wage by 3 percent. But the draft didn't provide any specifics and analysts say the government will need to do more to foster durable growth.
Raising wages is an urgent task for policymakers as Tokyo is keen to ramp up consumer spending, which is seen as crucial to boosting domestic demand and pulling the economy out of 15 years of deflation.
However, some economists remained sceptical of the plans because they do not do enough to address Japan's rigid labour market and low worker productivity.
"This sounds like short-term stimulus, but Japan needs structural reforms more than stimulus measures," said Marcel Thieliant, Japan economist at Capital Economics in Singapore.
"We might get a growth spurt for the next one to two years, but this will not lead to stronger growth in the long term."
BOWL OF RAMEN
The economy has fallen into recession twice since Abe took office in late 2012, and his government is under pressure to show that it can improve the economy with a package of steps due this week.
The national average of Japan's minimum wage was at 780 yen ($6.33) per hour in the last fiscal year, so a 3 percent increase would still not buy more than a bowl of ramen noodles - an illustration of the daunting task policy makers face in boosting consumption and growth.
The minimum wage has been rising for the past few years, but Japan's rates are only slightly above the average for HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD members, and labour unions have argued for bigger increases.
The government will also loosen regulations to encourage capital expenditure by small firms, and provide a time frame for lowering the corporate tax rate below 30 percent to improve competitiveness, the draft showed.
The government has already committed to lowering the corporate tax rate to around 31 percent next fiscal year, but companies have been asking for bigger tax cuts.
Economics Minister Akira Amari will present the draft at a meeting of the government's top advisory panel on Tuesday. Abe's government is due to finalise the economic stimulus measures by the end of this month.
Thomson Reuters (Markets) LLC
India defended climate change red lines
Nitin Sethi New Delhi,
23 November 2015
Business Standard
At a recently concluded talks of G20 countries, India prevented an attempt to pre-decide the contours of the Paris climate change agreement outside the formal United Nations (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN) climate convention negotiations, to start on November 30.
The proposals from the developed countries at the G20 meet to include a joint communique, which the 20 heads of states were to sign, would have breached Indian interests. The diplomatic tug of war with the developed countries in the meeting at Antalya, Turkey, on November 16 delayed the final communique by the heads of states for hours.
India was represented by the National Institution for Transforming India Aayog Chairperson Arvind Panagariya as the Sherpa for Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Narendra Modi at the G20 talks. “It was surely a very tough and long-drawn negotiation,” said an Indian negotiator. The developed countries pushed for inclusion of three contentious issues in the communique, which have been difficult to resolve at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN negotiations, and wanted to keep a reference to the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities out.
An Indian official said: “We have always been opposed to plurilateral forums, such as G20, dictating terms to the rest of the world when all countries are engaged to deliver at the Paris meet. That is the right forum, where all countries get an equal voice.”
The decisions at a G20 meet are not added to the formal HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN climate negotiations. But these hold great weight because some economically and politically powerful countries are members of the club. An endorsement of ideas at G20 often becomes difficult to fight off at the formal HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN talks.
“The first draft of the communique did not have any contentious ideas but then these were introduced, which got us worried,” said one official. Business Standard reviewed the draft communique independently too.
A reference was brought in to endorse a recent HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development report on climate finance, which said developed countries would deliver the promised $100 billion annually by 2020. As many as 134 developing countries in the G77+China group had criticised the report for counting unrelated funds as part of climate financing. “How could we let that report be endorsed through the G20 ... when all of us acknowledge there are many problems with it?” said the official.
At the Turkey meeting, developed countries demanded the G20 endorse a mechanism to review and ratchet up the climate targets of the countries under the Paris agreement.
Countries have largely agreed to a periodic review of the targets as a collective. But large differences persisted over how countries would revise their targets periodically. The Paris meet would settle the targets, which for now were determined at the national level and not the international level.
Business Standard Limited (India)
India: Academics are divided on liberalising education
AREEBA FALAK
22 November 2015
The Sunday Guardian
NEW DELHI, Nov. 22 -- The education sector is deeply divided with the Indian government expected to sign the formal commitments to liberalise education under the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation-General Agreement on Trade in Services (WTO-GATS) at the "10th WTO Ministerial Conference" in Nairobi, Kenya next month. "The word liberalisation here is synonymous to commercialisation. We are against higher education becoming part of GATS as a commercial tradable service," said Nandita Narain, president, Delhi University Teacher's Association (DUTA).
GATS is a legally binding agreement aimed at deregulating trade in services. Its framework excludes government services. Since education in most developing countries is a government service activity, it lies outside the scope of "free trade". However, GATS defines government service as those "exercised in the control of governmental authority" and sees government activity as one that is "supplied neither on a commercial basis nor in competition with other suppliers". Since education systems in most countries include both commercial private universities and government institutions, these have become a part of GATS negotiations. The widespread concern that India is to open its higher education sector for foreign service providers might absolutely do away with public subsidies to make formal commitments under GATS. "Already the budget for education has been reducing drastically over the years. If the subsidies go away too, then Indian higher education will become too expensive for a common man to afford," said Narain.
Even though India is keeping its final commitment to the GATS on education pending, education in India is already becoming internationalised, though not necessarily within the GATS framework. But experts believe the agreement would make a considerable difference. "If the agreement is signed, the government will be obligated to allow the foreign stakeholders equal share in the domestic market. Under GATS, equal treatment has to be accorded to both foreign and domestic service providers in a country," explained Ritika Khurana, assistant professor, Narsee Monjee College of Commerce and Economics, Mumbai. Jandhyala B. G. Tilak, VC, National University of Educational Planning And Administration (NUEPA), said, "Internationalisation of higher education of traditional type - student exchanges, faculty exchanges, research collaboration, etc., is desirable as it brings diversity on the university campuses and also enhances the knowledge production and dissemination environment. But internationalisation under the WTO-GATS framework, i.e., essentially in the framework of international trade, aiming mainly at economic gains, will be harmful for the development of the higher education sector in the developing countries. It is important to note that under the WTO-GATS framework, education is treated as a tradable commodity." On the other hand, former VC of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Jawaharlal Nehru University, B. B. Bhattacharya, supported GATS. He said, "You have to take into account the considerable gap that exists in the education profile of India. There are either PhD scholars or illiterate labours. This gap exists because there are not enough universities and colleges to provide education to a large number of people who are not able to make it to good institutes. We need more courses so that students will have options while choosing their career. Opening our markets can resolve this problem."
"But improving domestic market and going global can be done simultaneously. We cannot deter growth. We can use a systematic approach to attain balance. GATS is good for India,"said S. P. Sharma, chief economist, PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry. "This good has its drawbacks too. I believe that signing this agreement would be a premature step. It would be advisable to first secure the domestic standards then look outside to liberalise," said Dr Khurana.
MJP Media Pvt. Ltd. 

India is growing at 7.5 per cent, will grow faster in the coming years, says PM Narendra Modi
22 November 2015
Deccan Chronicle
Kuala Lumpur: Projecting India as a bright spot amid global slowdown, Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Narendra Modi on Sunday said the country is "running at" 7.5 per cent and will grow "even faster" in the coming years.
"India is today the fastest growing major economy in the world...We are running at 7.5 per cent per year, but will grow even faster in the coming years," he said while addressing the Indian diaspora on the second day of his three-day visit to Malaysia.
"Every major global institution has placed its bets on India growing strongly," Modi said.
Read:
Religion should be delinked from terror, says PM HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Narendra Modi
He said India is witnessing growth even when rest of the world, including parts of Asian region, are experiencing a slowdown.
Indian economy witnessed a growth of 7.3 per cent in the last fiscal. During the first quarter of 2015-16, the growth was 7 per cent.
Talking about the 18 months of his government, Modi said, there is also a change in the way government is working. "We are making government transparent and accountable. We are eliminating corruption at all levels. We are making governance driven by policies and systems, not by discretion of individuals," he said.
"There is change in the cities. There is momentum in the villages. And, there is confidence in our citizens, especially our youth. And, there is change in the way government is working," he added.
On the cooperative federalism, Modi said, "we are changing the way government and citizens interact with each other. And, Central and State Governments work with each other. States compete with each other now. That is healthy."
At the same time, he noted that the world is inter-dependent and "our national progress will depend on the strength and success of our international partnerships... What happens in a far off country can affect the livelihood of workers in another place."
Modi said the decision that may be taken in a conference room in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN or HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO can affect the life of a farmer in a village in India and the lifestyle in one part of the world affects climate and agriculture in another part of the world.
"We need each other's markets and resources...We don’t have to look far to find friends and partners. Southeast Asia is our neighbour on land and sea. This is one of the most dynamic and peaceful regions of the world. This is a region of culture, talent, enterprise and hard work," he said.
He said India has excellent relations with all Southeast Asian countries.
Deccan Chronicle Holdings Limited
Challenger Wins Argentine Presidential Runoff;  rejection of interventionist economic policies 
By Juan Forero and Taos Turner
23 November 2015
The Wall Street Journal Online
BUENOS AIRES—The conservative HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" mayor of Buenos Aires, Mauricio Macri, was elected president of Argentina on Sunday, in a win seen as a rejection of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" departing leader Cristina Kirchner's interventionist economic policies and a turn to the right after 12 years of leftist rule.
With 90% of votes counted by the electoral authority on Sunday night, Mr. Macri, the candidate of the Let's Change opposition coalition, had 52.2%, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" ahead of ruling-party candidate Daniel Scioli with 47.8%. Mr. Scioli acknowledged “the will of the people" in a dramatic speech late Sunday.
Minutes later, Mr. Macri, in a victory speech before euphoric crowds, said, “Today is a historic day," adding, “We need to build an Argentina with zero poverty. A marvelous phase is beginning for Argentina."
The winner's platform resonated with an electorate weary of a stagnant economy and high inflation. Mr. Macri, 56 years old, promised to revive the economy after a drop in commodities prices halted growth and rising government spending fueled inflation. The country faces recession next year, according to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" International Monetary Fund.
“He will open up the economy and be very welcoming to foreign investors and domestic investors," said HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Susan Segal, president of the New York-based Council of the Americas, a policy group that closely follows business issues here. She offered praise for Mr. Macri's economic advisers. “They understand the world and they understand why it is important for Argentina to be integrated into the global economy."
Mr. Scioli came out on top in the first round of voting on Oct. 25, but didn't get enough support to win outright. Just before the first-round vote, pollsters had predicted he could win the final runoff as well. But Mr. Macri received far more support than expected in the first round, triggering a runoff. He then took the momentum from Mr. Scioli.
Mr. Macri has signaled that he aims to improve frayed ties with the U.S.
“We want to have good relations with all countries," he said. “We expect to build an international agenda based in cooperation."
He said he would seek to have Venezuela expelled from the Mercosur trading block because of political prisoners jailed in that country, a position that would make him the first Latin American leader to call for tough action against Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro. Other countries in the region—most of them led by leftist governments—have remained silent about alleged rights abuses of Mr. Maduro's opponents.
Mr. Scioli, 58, governor of Buenos Aires province and Mrs. Kirchner's choice to succeed her, had said he would maintain the various social programs—from pensions for poor laborers to support for worker cooperatives—created by the Kirchner administration.
But pollsters said Argentines were disillusioned by rising crime and weary of what they see as a combative government that had polarized this country of 40 million.
Carlos Salcedo, 54, who described himself as a common laborer, said corruption—frequently covered in newspapers—as well as high food prices and crime were among his main concerns.
“They just think of themselves," he said of the ruling Victory Front coalition. “That is why I voted for change."
Mr. Macri, a wealthy businessman who for 12 years headed the famed Boca Juniors soccer club here, will have to confront a host of economic problems.
Central-bank reserves are at a nine-year low. Argentina can't access international credit and inflation is the second-highest in Latin America. Mrs. Kirchner recently added loyal ruling-party members to a government payroll that economists say is bloated. She has also encouraged the sale of U.S. dollar derivatives by the central bank to contain rising demand for greenbacks, a move Mr. Macri's advisers say could cost the country billions.
While voting, Mrs. Kirchner defended the administration's accomplishments since her late husband and predecessor Néstor took over the presidency in 2003.
“There has never been a period in government with such tangible economic progress," Mrs. Kirchner told reporters at a polling station in her Patagonian hometown of Rio Gallegos. “It would be painful to see these achievements being eroded."
Mrs. Kirchner's allies in her Peronist movement have warned that the coming of Mr. Macri would mean deprivation, unemployment and economic disaster, assertions he denied.
They also reminded voters that under non-Peronists—in 1989 and 2001—Argentina was rocked by economic calamity and social turmoil.
Buenos Aires schoolteacher Laura Lemes recalled budget cuts by Mr. Macri in his time as mayor.
“Teachers in the capital went through a lot of suffering," she said. “We had to stage a very tough fight to secure wage increases. He thinks we are ranch hands."
Mr. Macri, who has been sharply critical of Mrs. Kirchner's handling of the economy, has promised extensive changes. He has said he would negotiate with foreign bondholders who have sued Argentina for failing to repay billions of dollars—a plan Mrs. Kirchner has publicly criticized. He also vowed to scrap currency controls that have generated a thriving black market for dollars.
Mr. Macri's victory would have been a surprise just a month ago. Some pollsters then had predicted Mr. Scioli could win the first-round vote on his way to succeeding Mrs. Kirchner, who steps down Dec. 10.
He still could have won in this round. But in a debate between the two men in mid-November, Mr. Scioli failed to score the victory analysts said he needed to kick-start a faltering campaign.
Polls show that the high disapproval rate that had long dogged Mr. Macri, who was derided by some voters for his patrician background, dissipated in recent weeks.
Mr. Macri also avoided discussing specific policy adjustments, which scare Argentines concerned that broad overhauls of the economy will hurt them. Instead, he had focused on how he would bring efficient government and economic growth.
“We can live in an Argentina without poverty, where we can all aspire to have our own homes with running water and a sewage system," Mr. Macri said on Thursday at his last campaign event.
The messages appealed to people like Leon Tobal, 52.
“I got tired of this government, especially the lack of security," he said, speaking of Mrs. Kirchner's government. He said the shop he runs has been robbed three times in a month and that he had seen increased poverty, leading him to vote for Mr. Macri.
Another voter, Nestor Shenkis, 33, said he chose Mr. Macri, too, because of the inflation.
“They gave me a raise in January, but the costs nearly doubled," he said. “Yesterday I went to buy bread and it rose 20%" over the previous week.
More than 60% of voters believed that Mr. Macri had “moved his platform to the center," according to a recent poll by Buenos Aires-based Consultora Wonder. That helped attract voters who are traditionally close to Argentina's Peronist movement.
Dow Jones & Company, Inc. 
