India, others turn down demand from US for binding liberalization of services
US report on intellectual property as unilateral: India
Russia complains to  WTO  over EU anti-dumping policies,  WTO  says
Moscow takes on Kiev at  WTO  over fertiliser tariffs
Russia files lawsuits at  WTO  against Ukraine and EU
Chinese exports dip for second month
AISI president advocates customs bill as way of garnering votes for TPA
EU Trade ministers support proposals for investor-state dispute settlement
TTIP: les négociations au point mort, selon Paris
Russia and China agree to join EAEC and Silk Road projects
Services in Bilateral, Regional and Plurilateral Negotiations - Implications for LDCs 
Stronger partnerships essential for robust deliverables on TFA implementation
Business Travel Will Save Kenya's Tourism
 
 
 
India, others turn down demand from US for binding liberalization of services
9 May 2015
Mint
 
India along with other developing countries turned down a demand from the US for binding what are called autonomous liberalization measures adopted by governments for trade in services as part of the post-Bali work programme to conclude the Doha development agenda negotiations at the World Trade Organization (WTO).
 
These countries made their stand clear at a meeting of the Doha negotiating body on services on Thursday. The chair for Doha services negotiations, ambassador Gabriel Duque, convened the meeting to seek members' views on a five-page summary he had released over a week ago.
 
That summary had suggested "one delegation proposed a minimum binding of sectors in existing GATS (general agreement on trade in services, the WTO's agreement on services) at the level of applied domestically or in its RTAs (regional trade agreements), followed by a request/offer process for sectors currently outside the schedule with a view to achieve bindings at the applied level".
 
The chair's summary came under criticism from developing countries on the ground that it was one-sided and tilted in favour of industrialised countries. Many countries such as Brazil, Barbados on behalf of the ACP (Africa, Caribbean and Pacific) group, South Africa, Argentina, Ecuador and India called the chair to issue a corrigendum to reflect their views.
 
Duque, however, refused the demand for a corrigendum, saying he would issue an addendum based on the members' views echoed at the meeting, said a South American trade official, who preferred not to be named.
 
At issue is what elements of services negotiation ought to be incorporated in the work programme for concluding the Doha trade negotiations by the end of this year. The Doha trade talks were launched in 2001 but remained deadlocked because of intransigent positions adopted by some major industrialized countries on agriculture.
 
While it is agreed that agriculture would set the level of ambition for the final outcomes in the Doha negotiations based on what is called the sequencing framework, the WTO's director general Roberto Azevêdo suggested on 5 May that the sequencing-based approach is damaging the negotiations.
 
Against this backdrop, the special negotiating session on services on Thursday became a flash point for taking the next steps in the services negotiations.
 
At the meeting, the US said it wants countries to merely bind their autonomous liberalization of services due to the proposed recalibration in all areas of Doha market access negotiations.
 
Since Washington would not seek new market access in services, countries must bind their current autonomous levels of market access for different services sectors, a US official argued, according to a negotiator who was present at the meeting who declined to be identified.
 
Effectively, binding autonomous liberalization of services implies that measures taken by any government on a voluntary or autonomous basis such as allowing higher equity participation for a foreign company in telecom services sector must bound as a permanent commitment at the WTO.
 
Countries agree to bind their autonomous measures only in return for a reciprocal concession in areas of their interest. The give-and-take framework is the hallmark of the WTO's mercantile trading system.
 
The European Union (EU) demanded transparency and predictability in the services commitments akin to tariff reduction formula for market access in agriculture and industrial goods.
 
In response to the US and EU demands, India maintained that while countries want removal of water between bound and applied commitments in services, there are members who are not prepared to remove water between their bound and current effective aggregate measurement of support, which indicates the overall trade-distorting domestic support.
 
The US, for example, provided trade-distorting domestic subsidies to the tune of $6 billion last year while its bound level at the WTO close to $20 billion. The US is, however, not ready to bring its effective level of subsidies to around $6 billion as demanded by many developing countries.
 
New Delhi asked whether major industrialized countries such as the US are willing to remove the existing visa and other restrictions on the short-term services providers in return for binding commitments at the current applied level of access for services.
 
India reminded the US and the EU that it is wrong to compare the services negotiations with what is being done in agriculture and industrial goods as the services talks are based on a "request/offer" framework.
 
The US also opposed a demand from Hong Kong for a workshop to address the barriers faced by developing countries through what is called domestic regulation.
 
In the face of sharp differences on the way forward between industrialized and some developing countries on one side and a large majority of developing countries on the other, the chair concluded the meeting on a sombre note saying he would hold further consultations on various issues, including a possible meeting early next month.
 
 

 
US report on intellectual property as unilateral: India
9 May 2015
The Hans India
 
India has rejected the US' annual report on intellectual property rights (IPR) and patents, describing it as a "unilateral" action "inconsistent" with global trading rules, against the backdrop of its earlier announcement on bringing a national IPR policy by early 2015, parliament was told on Friday.
 
"The Special 301 Report issued by the United States under their Trade Act of 1974 is a unilateral measure to create pressure on countries to enhance IPR protection beyond the TRIPS agreement," Commerce Minister Nirmala Sitharaman told the Lok Sabha in a written reply.
 
"Special 301 which is an extra territorial application of the domestic law of a country is inconsistent with the established norms of the WTO," she added.
 
The US Trade Representative (USTR), in its annual Special 301 report last week on IPR and patents regime of its partner countries, put India under the category of 'Priority of Watch List' (PWL) as it believes the country has inadequate IPR laws.
 
"Any dispute between two countries needs to be referred to the Dispute Settlement Body of the WTO and unilateral actions are not tenable under this regime," the commerce minister said.
 
Last year, the then newly-installed NDA government announced the rolling out of a 'National IPR Policy' by early 2015. The department of industrial policy and promotion created a think-tank which has formulated a draft policy.
 
Bilateral trade between India and the US crossed the $100 billion mark in 2013-14, and currently stands at $103 billion. The countries have set a bilateral trade target of $500 billion by the decade-end.
 
 

 
Russia complains to  WTO  over EU anti-dumping policies,  WTO  says
8 May 2015
Reuters News
 
Russia has made a trade complaint at the World Trade Organization over European Union methods of applying anti-dumping policies, saying they breach international trade rules, the WTO said on Friday.
 
The case applies to EU anti-dumping measures on imports including ammonium nitrate, certain welded tubes and pipes of iron or non-alloy steel, certain seamless pipes and tubes of iron or steel, the WTO said, citing Russia's filing.
 
Under WTO rules, the EU has 60 days to resolve the complaint in bilateral talks. After that period, Russia could ask the WTO to adjudicate on the matter. 
 
 
 
 
Moscow takes on Kiev at  WTO  over fertiliser tariffs
8 May 2015
Agence France Presse
 
Russia has launched a procedure against Ukraine at the WTO over anti-dumping tariffs Kiev imposed on the fertiliser ammonium nitrate, a source close to the global trade body said Friday.
 
Moscow demanded consultations over the imposition of the tariffs on its ammonium nitrate shipped into Ukraine, the first step in resolving a dispute before the World Trade Organisation.
 
According to Moscow the tariffs imposed in July 2014 violated global trade rules, in particular those concerning anti-dumping duties.
 
Russia banned numerous products from Ukraine last year, ostensibly for health reasons, as relations became strained over the conflict in eastern Ukraine which Kiev accuses Moscow of having fomented and supported.
 
The procedure is the third Russia has launched at the WTO since joining in August 2012. The first two were against the EU.
 
 
 
 
Russia files lawsuits at  WTO  against Ukraine and EU
8 May 2015
Unian
 
Russia has filed a lawsuit at the World Trade Organization (WTO) against Ukraine for imposing duties on ammonium nitrate, Russian news agency RIA Novosti has reported, with reference to the head of Russia`s trade negotiations department, Maksim Medvedkov.
 
In July 2014, Ukraine increased by three times its duties on imports of ammonium nitrate from Russia (from 11.91% to 36.03%) and extended their effective period for another five years.
 
The decision was made following the statements from the Ostchem companies incorporated in a financial and industrial Group DF, owned by Ukrainian oligarch Dmytro Firtash.
 
They appealed to the fact that the gas price for Ukrainian nitrogen chemistry plants and Russian manufacturers differ significantly.
 
Ammonium nitrate is used as a component of explosives and as a nitrogen fertilizer.
 
Medvedkov also stated that Russia had filed another lawsuit at the WTO – against the EU - in connection with the anti-dumping measures against Russian welded pipes and also ammonium nitrate.
 
In early January, the European Commission abolished duties on imports of Ukrainian welded pipes, and duties were introduced with regard to manufacturers from Russia, China and Belarus. 
 
 
 
 
Chinese exports dip for second month
Taipei Times
9 May 2015 
 
China’s exports unexpectedly fell 6.4 percent last month from a year earlier, while imports tumbled by a deeper-than-forecast 16.2 percent, fueling expectations that Beijing would quickly roll out more stimulus to avert a sharper economic slowdown.
 
The dismal trade performance raises the risk that second-quarter economic growth may dip below 7 percent for the first time since the depths of the global financial crisis, adding to official fears of job losses and growing levels of bad debt.
 
“This is bad. I expect an interest rate cut this weekend,” economist Tim Condon at ING in Singapore said.
 
“This is going to make 7 percent [GDP] growth hard to attain. It looks like the weakness in the first quarter wasn’t transitory. It’s persistent,” Condon said.
 
The People’s Bank of China has lowered interest rates and banks’ reserve requirement ratio (RRR) thrice in three months since November last year to stoke the economy, and most analysts had expected it to loosen policy again on both fronts in coming months.
 
Policy insiders told Reuters this week that China’s leaders have been caught off guard by the sharpness of the downturn, and are likely to resort to fiscal stimulus to revive growth after a flurry of monetary policy easing has proved less effective than hoped.
 
Imports have been weaker than exports, falling 16.2 percent last year from a year earlier, according to data released by China’s General Administration of Customs yesterday, highlighting tepid domestic demand as the world’s second-largest economy slows.
 
Analysts polled by Reuters had expected exports to rise 2.4 percent last month after a 15 percent plunge in March, and predicted imports would fall 12 percent after a 12.7 percent drop the previous month.

Economists at Nomura expect annual economic growth to slow to 6.6 percent in the second quarter from 7 percent in the first quarter, and are pencilling in three more 25-basis-point rate cuts and two more 50bps cuts in banks’ reserve requirements for the rest of the year, which would mark the central bank’s most aggressive easing campaign since the global crisis.
 
Buffeted by lukewarm foreign and domestic demand, China’s trade sector has wobbled in the past year, adding to pressure on the slowing economy and unsettling policymakers.
 
Earlier this week, China’s trade minister said the devaluation of currencies by some countries has led to sharp gains in the yuan, hurting the competitiveness of Chinese exports.
 
The yuan has gained against major non-dollar currencies in recent months, leading to its rise on a trade-weight basis. However, Chinese Premier Li Keqiang (???) has ruled out a devaluation, even as the economy faces headwinds.
 
While some exporters said they have not felt the impact of a rising yuan, thanks in part to the growing popularity of currency hedging options, few doubt that sales would suffer in coming months if the yuan sustains its ascent.
 
 
 
 
AISI president advocates customs bill as way of garnering votes for TPA
8 May 2015
Inside U.S. Trade
 
Trade remedy law changes contained in the Senate version of the customs and enforcement bill could be used to entice members of Congress who are wary of supporting Trade Promotion Authority (TPA) to vote for its renewal, if both bills were passed as a package, according to Tom Gibson, the president and CEO of American Iron and Steel Institute (AISI)
 
In a May 4 press call, Gibson said he is hopeful that people will see the customs bill as necessary to get enough votes for TPA passage in both houses of Congress. He said the trade remedy law changes included in the bill are consistent with World Trade Organization rules and supported by the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative.
 
"As the bill moves forward -- and it looks like votes are going to be [hard to get] for passage of TPA -- we hope that people will see that this set of WTO improvements that are supported by USTR and Congress will help the president get the Trade Promotion Authority he is seeking," he said. "I think it will bring votes to TPA."
 
A steel industry source said that "trade remedy law changes are the single most important thing" that the steel industry is focused on in terms of its legislative agenda. He said if the customs bill were passed in a package with TPA, it would attract the support of members who are on the fence on TPA, particularly in the House. According to the source, this applies to a "lot of" Republicans, but also Democrats.
 
He also said pairing the TPA bill simply with the renewal of Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) will not attract enough votes.
 
In a related development, Gibson amplified his message in a May 6 letter to Senate Finance Committee Chairman Orrin Hatch (R-UT) and Ranking Member Ron Wyden (D-OR) in which he pledged support for the TPA bill if it were accompanied by the customs bill. "AISI strongly supports packaging the customs bill and trade enforcement bill with [TPA] legislation on the Senate floor and would support passage of both bills if packaged together," he wrote.
 
The customs bill approved by the Finance Committee on April 22 includes a number of trade remedy law changes under the purview of the U.S. International Trade Commission (ITC) and the Commerce Department aimed at making it easier to bring successful antidumping and countervailing duty cases.
 
It would change the process by which the ITC determines injury to make it easier for petitioners to secure the affirmative determination necessary for trade remedy duties to be imposed. It also includes other trade remedy law changes under the purview of Commerce such as more flexibility in the use of adverse facts available.
 
These provisions were included in an April 22 chairman's mark before the Senate Finance markup, and represent an expanded version of a bill sponsored by Sen. Sherrod Brown (D-OH) as the Leveling the Playing Field Act. In addition to Brown, they were sponsored by Sens. Bob Casey (D-PA), Rob Portman (R-OH), Richard Burr (R-NC), and Dan Coats (R-IN).
 
The House Ways & Means Committee's version of the bill, which was approved one day later, does not contain these changes (Inside U.S. Trade, May 1).
 
But like the Finance version, the Ways & Means bill addresses the evasion of antidumping and countervailing duties, albeit by a different process. The Finance version contains the ENFORCE Act that sets deadlines for Customs and Border Protection in handling evasion complaints, while the House designates Commerce to handle this task.
 
Resistance to those trade remedy changes seems low key so far, according to sources. The Emergency Committee on American Trade has sent a letter to Congress expressing its opposition to the changes. Separately, the Retail Industry Leaders' Association and the National Retail Federation are circulating a letter for signatures that criticizes both ENFORCE and the Leveling the Playing Field Act (see related story).
 
The customs bill also contains a controversial amendment pressuring Commerce to investigate undervalued currencies as countervailable subsidies. One pro-TPA lobbyist said some senators may want to ensure that the customs bill comes up for a vote along with TPA because they seek the passage of that amendment. This likely to be true for senators like Portman who support TPA, but want to be sure that currency manipulation is addressed at the same time.
 
Ways & Means Ranking Member Sander Levin (D-MI) on May 7 cast doubt on the likelihood that the amendment will make it into the customs bill (see related story).
 
The steel industry source said that the differences in the customs bills passed by the Finance and Ways & Means committees would have to be worked out in advance of a final House and Senate vote on TPA to avoid a conference. He said the "whole reason" that TPA, TAA, customs authorization and trade preference programs were introduced as four separate, but clearly related bills was to give the leadership the option to create a package that will attract sufficient votes for TPA. 
 
 
 
 
EU Trade ministers support proposals for investor-state dispute settlement
The Baltic Course
8 May 2015
 
On 7 May 2015, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Edgars Rinkevics chaired the meeting of the EU Foreign Affairs Council (GAC) in Brussels. The Council discussed progress in negotiations on TTIP, the transatlantic trade and investment partnership with the United States, with a focus on investor-state dispute settlement (ISDS).
 
It encouraged the Commission to maintain its efforts for achieving meaningful progress across all three components of the agreement by the summer of 2015.This will enable the negotiators to prepare the ground for tackling more delicate political issues after the summer.
 
The Council discussed ideas for ISDS provisions in the light of a paper presented by Commissioner Cecilia Malmström. It broadly welcomed the Commission's paper and its suggestions.
 
"Defining a common position on ISDS will allow us to inject new momentum into TTIP and to engage fully with the US in all areas of negotiation", said Edgars Rinkevics, minister for foreign affairs of Latvia and President of the Council. "It will enable us to make every effort to conclude negotiations on an ambitious, comprehensive and mutually beneficial agreement."
 
WTO ministerial conference
The Council discussed preparations for the next WTO ministerial conference, to be held in Nairobi in December 2015.
 
To define the structure of a deal in Nairobi on the WTO's Doha Development Agenda (DDA), it reiterated the need for a comprehensive, realistic, feasible and balanced work programme.
 
The Council welcomed trade liberalisation efforts being pursued in parallel to the DDA talks, in particular negotiations on an environmental goods agreement.
 
Eastern Partnership meeting on trade
EU trade ministers met their counterparts from Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Moldova and Ukraine for the first Eastern Partnership ministerial meeting on trade.
 
"Trade is an essential dimension of our partnership with our eastern neighbours", said Mr Rinkevics. "Today's meeting was a first step in a process that will contribute to strengthened cooperation, taking account of the diverse interests of our partners with regard to their trade relations with the EU".
 
The ministers assessed achievements to date, as well as the opportunities and challenges for developing a successful trade dimension to the partnership. They discussed preparations for an Eastern Partnership summit in Riga on 21-22 May 2015 and an ongoing review of the EU's European neighbourhood policy.
 
 
 
 
TTIP: les négociations au point mort, selon Paris
9 May 2015
Agence France Presse 
   
Les négociations en vue d'un nouveau traité commercial entre les Etats-Unis et l'Union européenne, le TTIP, "n'avancent pas", a déclaré vendredi le secrétaire d'Etat français au Commerce extérieur Matthias Fekl, se montrant toutefois plus attaché au contenu des discussions qu'à leur calendrier.
 
"Pour l'instant ça n'avance pas, (mais) je ne considère pas qu'on entre dans une négociation en disant il faut conclure le plus vite possible et à tout prix, et je ne dis pas non plus que ce sera nécessairement raté, il faut à chaque étape défendre nos intérêts", a souligné M. Fekl, interrogé en marge du deuxième symposium mondial des conseillers du commerce extérieur français à Miami (Floride, sud-est).
 
Le secrétaire d'Etat a précisé que la commissaire européenne qui avait rendu compte au conseil des ministres européens du Commerce du dernier cycle de discussions, tenu en avril à New York, avait fait état d'une absence d'avancée.
 
L'ambassadeur de France aux Etats-Unis Gérard Araud a déclaré de son côté au symposium que "cette négociation deviendra difficile en 2016 et 2017", estimant un déblocage improbable avant la présidentielle américaine de novembre 2016.
 
Il a aussi appelé les entrepreneurs rassemblés à "faire entendre leurs voix" en faveur des négociations, qui suscitent des critiques de part et d'autre de l'Atlantique.
 
"Ce serait une simplification très importante" pour les producteurs et exportateurs français, a souligné pour sa part M. Fekl.
 
Parmi les points auxquels la France est particulièrement attachée, il a mentionné les origines géographiques, l'ouverture des marchés publics ainsi que "le respect des préférences collectives: il faut que chaque Etat puisse continuer à mener des politiques de santé, des politiques d'environnement et des politiques d'exception culturelle qu'ils souhaitent".
 
Quant à la transparence des négociations sur le TTIP (Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, en français TAFTA), il a assuré s'attacher à y associer les ONG, les syndicats et les organisations professionnelles "de bout en bout".
 
 
 
 
Russia and China agree to join EAEC and Silk Road projects
8 May 2015
ITAR-TASS World Service
 
Russian President Vladimir Putin and Chinese President Xi Jinping signed a joint statement on cooperation on the construction of the joint Eurasian Economic Union (EAEC) and the Silk Road project.
 
The document has been approved by the leaders of the two countries on the basis of bilateral talks held in the Kremlin.
 
Earlier, Presidential spokesperson Dmitry Peskov told journalists this accord will be fundamental to the cooperation on many projects like the Moscow-Kazan high-speed railway. He noted that "the bilateral joint statement was signed by the heads of state, on cooperation in combining the construction of the Eurasian Economic Union and the economic belt" Silk Road."
 
"The Chinese Silk Road is an impressive project, of economic, geopolitical and other value," Peskov said. "It"s a very interesting, new, strategic substance of our bilateral relations," he added, and went on to say that the Valdai Discussion club has been studying this project for a long time.
 
Peskov confirmed that after today"s talks, the Russian President and the Chinese President, who arrived in Moscow on an official visit, are planning to sign "quite an impressive package of documents signed in the presence of leaders or by the leaders themselves during the visit or on its sidelines."
 
According to him, "this is the case of when leaders voice their intentions about acting in unison in terms of joining the Eurasian Economic Union and the Chinese Silk Road. In his opinion," it is quite an important thing, because here, for example, we have that the Ministry of Transport is signing an agreement today on the Moscow-Kazan high speed railway."
 
"All these plans that the Chinese have fall in line with the development of the Silk Road," Peskov added.
 
TASS reported earlier the Russian-Chinese consortium won a bid to develop the Moscow-Kazan high-speed railway. Under the agreement signed with Russian Railways the consortium is to carry out engineering, planning, area demarcation, and project documentation design for the construction of the Moscow-Kazan-Yekaterinburg high-speed link in 2015-2016.
 
The Moscow-Kazan High Speed Railway’s total length will stand at around 770 kilometers. Trains may go at a speed of 350-400 kilometers per hour, and the time en route between the two cities could be 3-3.5 hours against the current 14 hours.
 
The Moscow-Kazan railroad may later be extended to China, connecting the two countries across Kazakhstan. The transport scheme could become part of the route of a new Silk Road project, which is aimed at tying China with the European and Middle Eastern markets.
 
The total cost of the Moscow-Kazan high speed railroad project amounts to 1.068 trillion rubles ($21.4 bln)
 
EAEC Treaty was signed on May 29 2014 in Astana. The treaty is the basic document that defines the agreement of Russia, Belarus and Kazakhstan to create the Eurasian Economic Union in order to enhance integration, eliminate barriers to the free movement of goods, services, capital and labor, develop coordinated, coherent and unified policy in key sectors of the economy. It also provides revisions to the norms of the CU and CES with the rules and regulations of the WTO.
 
The new Customs Code is planned to come into effect as of January 1, 2016. The document has been developed as the Customs Union of Russia, Belarus and Kazakhstan is being transformed into the EAEC in 2015.Kyrgyzstan plans to sign the agreement in May of this year.
 
 
 
Services in Bilateral, Regional and Plurilateral Negotiations - Implications for LDCs 
8 May 2015
All Africa
 
Bilateral, regional and plurilateral negotiations on services trade, and their implications for least developed countries were the subject of a seminar that brought together international experts, private sector representatives and Geneva-based LDC delegates at World Trade Organization headquarters last week.
 
The seminar, the fifth in a series on international services trade rules and negotiations organized by ITC in collaboration with the LDC Group, and sponsored the Australian government, looked at negotiations on bilateral free trade agreements (FTAs), regional trade agreements (RTAs) and the recently initiated plurilateral Trade in Services Agreement (TiSA).
 
Reviewing trends in how trade agreements deal with services, Andrea Spear, a former Australian services negotiator, led participants through the basic foundations of services chapters in FTAs and RTAs, for instance, how they deal with different modes of supply, or whether they identify sectors in which to make market-opening commitments (a so-called 'positive list' approach) or whether they designate sectors to shelter from international competition (a 'negative list').
 
Participants noted that while a negative list approach may suit well-regulated services sectors, a positive list approach such as that in the WTO General Agreement in Trade in Services (GATS) could be more appropriate for countries with under-regulated sectors and subsectors.
 
Recognising the challenges that LDCs encounter in services negotiations at all levels, Rudolph Adlung, a former Counsellor in the WTO's Trade in Services Division, highlighted the complex interaction between GATS 'mode 3' (covering commercial presence in a country related to services provision) and the investment chapters in FTAs or Bilateral Investment Treaties (BITs).
 
Over 60% of world stock of foreign direct investment (FDI) is in the services sector, and countries have signed around 2,900 BITs, under which signatories accord protections to foreign investors originating from partner countries.
 
For LDCs, Adlung noted, sectoral coverage in BITs is much higher (covering an average of 130 of the roughly 160 sub-sectors designated in WTO rules) than multilateral mode 3 commitments under the GATS (for which the average is 17 sub-sectors). While liberal investment regimes are in a country's economic self-interest, he suggested that important issues in BIT negotiations needed to be further clarified, such as the role and scope of Investor-State Dispute Settlement.
 
A key issue throughout the seminar was 'mode 4', temporary cross-border labour movement referred to in services jargon as the 'movement of natural persons', and one of relatively few services sectors in which LDCs have substantial export interests. Joy Kategekwa of the WTO's Development Division discussed possibilities for broadening the scope and categories of mode 4 to better reflect LDCs' priorities and interests, drawing on examples from Africa and the Caribbean.
 
Adrian Njau, a trade economist at the East African Business Council (EABC), shared with delegates the example of how business people had successfully joined forces to advocate for freer movement of services suppliers across the East African Community (EAC).
 
When the discussion turned to opportunities that services negotiations present specifically for LDCs, Pascal Kerneis, Managing Director of the European Services Forum (ESF), argued that LDCs need more liberal services trade regimes to attract foreign investment so as to better integrate into Global Value Chains (GVCs). Contrasting the Trade in TiSA talks with the GATS, he pointed to growth in the share of services in Gross Domestic Product as well as in value addition through global supply chains.
 
These changes had forced a rethink on how development considerations figure into services negotiations in the years since 1995, when the WTO agreements entered into force, he suggested. Kerneis said that while a WTO waiver allowing Members to discriminate in favour of LDC services providers could help give LDCs better access to markets, it would best be complemented by more open, competitive services markets in the LDCs themselves.
 
Key lessons for LDCs emerging from the seminar:
- Services negotiations are evolving, and LDCs should be actively involved in order to capture emerging opportunities.
- Private sector input is valuable at all stages of services negotiations.
- Sound data and research on services trade, internal and external market barriers, and market potential are needed to underpin negotiating positions and strategies.
- Governments need to prioritise services sector development by instituting and enforcing the appropriate regulatory environment and improve transparency to help attract investment.
- Regional regulatory cooperation can stimulate trade and growth.
 
The sixth and final seminar is titled 'Whence the Multilateral Services Agenda?', and is scheduled for late May. 
 
 
 
 
Stronger partnerships essential for robust deliverables on TFA implementation
The Financial
8 May 2015
 
The International Chamber of Commerce (ICC) joins forces with the World Bank and the United Nations (UN) on ratification and implementation of the World Trade Organization’s (WTO) Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA).
 
During its annual meeting in Geneva, the Global Facilitation Partnership for Transportation and Trade (GFP) identified private sector engagement as vital for effective implementation of the agreement, according to ICC.
 
The GFP brings together ICC, the World Customs Organization (WCO), the World Bank, the International Trade Center (ITC), the UN Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) and the UN Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) to achieve significant improvements in transport and trade facilitation.
 
Gathering at UN Headquarters in Geneva on 22 April, over 150 representatives of governments, private sector, international organizations and trade experts discussed the role of the business community in the implementation of the TFA. The meeting reinforced the numerous benefits the agreement will bring, in particular to small- and medium-sized enterprises and developing countries. By implementing the TFA many developing countries will increase their capacity to handle and grow their share of international trade and attract foreign direct investment (FDI).

Implementing the TFA
 
Since its adoption by WTO members in November 2014, thus far only Hong Kong, Mauritius, Singapore and the United States, have ratified the TFA. Ratifications from108 WTO members are needed for the agreement to enter into force.
 
Donia Hammami, ICC policy manager in charge of customs and trade facilitation, highlighted four key characteristics for a successful approach to TFA implementation: business engagement, ambition, speed and a coherent approach to implementation.
 
Applauding the 55 countries that already submitted their Category A commitments to the WTO Ms Hammami said: "Although many of the TFA provisions are to be implemented on a "best endeavors" basis, the message to governments is simple: the more you embrace the trade facilitation agenda, the more you give a leg-up to your local businesses in global markets".
 
Category A provisions are to be implemented upon entry into force of the TFA. In order to capture the full benefits of TFA provisions, ICC recommends a harmonized implementation of TFA articles and identifies the World Customs Organization's Mercator Programme as a useful guideline for a harmonized approach to implementation. While emphasizing the need for multistakeholder dialogue on the national level, Ms Hammami said: "In making coordinated border management a reality, trade facilitation would need to be championed by all agencies and stakeholders involved."

Private sector engagement
 
In its global advocacy efforts ICC has always underscored the importance of understanding the border challenges businesses face to enhance national competiveness. Fostering private sector participation to facilitate practical feedback is instrumental to ensure government solutions fit practical needs and enhance trade flows rather than being burdensome for businesses.
 
In Geneva, the GFP's members agreed to encourage private sector involvement, including SMEs, in their trade facilitation efforts. In its outcome document the GFP declared the establishment of national committees on trade facilitation an important step to safeguard regular consultation with private sector representatives in order to identify legislative gaps and bottlenecks. Furthermore, the GFP partners will provide technical support and capacity building to assist in the implementation of the WTO TFA in developing countries.
 
 
 
 
Business Travel Will Save Kenya's Tourism 
8 May 2015
All Africa
 
TWO authoritative sources have this past week sounded the alarm about the deterioration of Kenya's traditional tourism sector in the face of insecurity and adverse foreign travel advisories over the last year-and-a-half.
 
The Kenya Association of Hotel Keepers and Caterers and the Economic Survey 2015, a publication of the Kenya National Bureau of Statistics, had very bad news indeed to communicate.
 
The KAHC reported that about 40,000 workers in the tourism industry stand to lose their jobs by the end of this month.
 
Meeting at the Mombasa Serena Beach Resort & Spa, KAHC members said at least 23 hotels have closed since last year and more will close in the near future.
 
The KAHC Mombasa branch chairman Harald Kampa observed grimly; "Occupancies have dropped from an average of 50 per cent last year to less than 20 per cent across the region, with the South Coast and Malindi and Watamu areas hardest hit".
 
The Economic Survey 2015 reported that tourism, a key driver of the economy, suffered such a severe slump in 2014 that it actually dragged down growth.
 
At Easter, the Garissa University College terrorist attack happened, killing 147 people - 142 of them undergraduate students - and injuring 79. A new round of travel advisories was issued. The way things look now, it almost goes without saying that the 2015 tourism high season will go the same way as 2014 - down.
 
Two consecutive years of declining tourism are a terrible prospect. Security must be demonstrably improved and the good news flashed around the world, particularly where the traditional tourists come from. Kenya's war on terror must become one of prevention being better than cure, with the security forces and agencies acting on actionable intelligence.
 
At the same time Kenya must do all in its prodigious power and prowess to develop the business tourism segment of Meetings, Incentives, Conventions and Exhibitions. While traditional holidaymakers will always comprise the mainstay of the tourism sector, Mice or business tourism promises to introduce a whole new dimension to the industry in this country.
 
Kenya is uniquely well-positioned and well-endowed to make business tourism a roaring success and a major contributor to the economy.
 
Looking at the business tourism vistas and opportunities open to Kenya from the vantage point of the Kenyatta International Convention Centre, I confidently say I know whereof I speak. Let me cite just one example that I am sure is but the first of many. I refer to the first World Trade Organization Conference in Sub-Sahara Africa to be held in Nairobi in December.
 
This premier business tourism event's statistics are awe-inspiring. It has attracted 7,000 delegates and will inject Sh4.08 billion into the economy.
 
The Mice sector will be a key part in getting Kenya's tourism sector back on its feet. Business tourists are much easier to secure in terms of protection from insecurity than individual holidaymakers. Mice venues enjoy the closest thing to maximum security that is available in most country venues, including Kenya. What's more, diplomatic advisories are not necessarily aimed at Mice tourists, whose forays and itineraries include essential matters and travel.
 
The acronym Mice refers to a whole dimension of group tourism. It is also referred to as the meetings or events industry.
 
Mice is highly specialised, indeed a niche.
 
Mice impact everything from travel-selling professionals, national tourism boards, tourism trade associations to tour operators and transfer companies. Also in this business tourism catchment area are convention centres, such as KICC, corporate business planners and hotels.
 
Seaborne conventions, for instance on cruise ships, are also part of Mice business tourism and Kenya is uniquely well-positioned and naturally well-endowed to serve this niche-within-a-niche.
 
Unlike conventional individual holidaymaking, Mice business tourism is planned in the greatest detail beforehand, even years ahead. The organisational and planning dynamics of business tourism - including security and insurance - are planned with what I would not hesitate to describe as military precision.
 
Kenya is the home of hospitality in our region. We have the expertise and venues to suit any Mice business tourism event, big or small.
 
Kenya offers a stunning variety of world-famous attractions and backdrops, including the eighth wonder of the world, that is the great migration of plains animals in the Masai Mara.
 
As the WTO event in December clearly demonstrates, we can easily host gatherings of more than 5,000 delegates.
 
As the Mice industry kicks in and helps restore Kenyan tourism to its feet, this beautiful country of ours will become not only a place to meet but the ideal location in our region in which to do business.
 
