Afghanistan gets clearance to join WTO
U.S., EU air concerns at WTO about Nigeria's forex curbs
China warns WTO its cheap exports will soon be harder to resist
G20 nations must switch big subsidies from fossil fuel to renewables-report
China serves notice to WTO members over complaints about its cheap exports
Executive orders bring food duties in compliance with WTO waiver 
IAF ISTANBUL – Cotton shortage unlikely despite demand exceeding supply
Structural reforms and global cooperation
European Commissioner for Trade: We decided that DCFTA would come into force, and Russia will have to accept that
The TTIP: A Challenge to China's Hegemony Dream on the Global Stage?
 
Afghanistan gets clearance to join WTO
GENEVA, Nov 11 (Reuters) - Afghanistan agreed terms to join the World Trade Organization with the trade body's existing 161 members on Wednesday, 11 years after it first applied for membership, the WTO said in a statement. Trade ministers will officially approve the terms of Afghanistan's accession to the global trade club at a meeting in Nairobi next month, and it will become a member 30 days after it ratifies the deal, which it will need to do by June 30, 2016. "Our country's accession to the WTO will serve as a catalyst for domestic reforms and transformation to an effective and functioning market economy that attracts investment, creates jobs and improves the welfare of the people of Afghanistan," the WTO statement quoted Afghan President Ashraf Ghani as saying. Reviving the economy is just one of the challenges facing Ghani's unwieldy national unity government, which has come under growing pressure because of deteriorating security. On Wednesday he appealed for calm as one of the biggest demonstrations in years marched through Kabul, demanding action after the beheadings of seven members of the ethnic Hazara minority. The WTO is set to expand from 161 to 164 members, with Kazakhstan set to become the 162nd on Nov. 30, and Liberia having recently agreed its membership terms. Liberia and Afghanistan both negotiated their WTO entry after a special deal introduced in 2011 to help least developed countries join the Geneva-based world body. Six other countries are eligible for the same deal and are negotiating to join, including Sudan, Ethiopia and Equatorial Guinea. Other countries that are not yet members include Algeria, Belarus, Iran, Iraq, Libya, Serbia and Uzbekistan. (Reporting by Tom Miles; Editing by Catherine Evans)
 
U.S., EU air concerns at WTO about Nigeria's forex curbs 
11 November 2015 16:00, By Tom Miles, GENEVA, Nov 11 (Reuters) - The United States and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union have raised concerns at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization about HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Nigeria's central bank curbs on access to foreign currency, a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO official said on Wednesday. The bank, seeking to conserve its dollar reserves, said in June that importers could no longer get hard currency from the interbank market to buy 41 items including rice, cement, private jets, steel products, plastics and rubber, soap, cosmetics, furniture and Indian incense. At least nine HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO members raised concerns about the trade-related impact of the rules at a meeting of the WTO's Council for Trade in Goods on Tuesday, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO official said. Nigeria's representative at the meeting said the Nigerian trade ministry was also very concerned and had requested a rollback or standstill of the policy as soon as the bank announced it, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO official said. The U.S. representative at the meeting expressed "strong concern" about the effect on U.S. exports such as agricultural goods, plastics, aircraft and aircraft parts and metal and metal products, adding that the affected exports were worth $500 million in 2013 and 2014, the official said. The U.S. trade official also said the central bank had justified its action by saying it was "in order to encourage local production of these items", which revealed its protectionist motivation. She added that it was damaging the Nigerian economy and would have the opposite of the intended effect, but the Central Bank had tightened the measures in the last few months. "We are unaware of any effort by Nigeria to justify the measure at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO," the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO official quoted the U.S. representative as saying to the meeting. The EU official at the meeting said Nigeria also seemed not to have sought approval from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" International Monetary Fund for its foreign exchange curbs, and said they were having a significant impact on trade. Other countries that had concerns about the curbs were Thailand, which was worried about agricultural shipments, Norway and Chile, which were concerned about fish, and Switzerland, Uruguay, Iceland and Malaysia, which were worried about the "systemic" impact. The Nigerian official at the meeting said the bank should have had consultations with stakeholders beforehand, including the Nigerian trade ministry, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO official said. He hoped his country's appointment of a new cabinet, which was taking place on Wednesday, would include assignment of a minister who could talk to the bank about the issue. (Reporting by Tom Miles; Editing by Tom Heneghan) 
 
China warns WTO its cheap exports will soon be harder to resist
November 12, 2015, Free Malaysia Today, GENEVA: China has served notice to World Trade Organization members including the European Union and United States that complaints about its cheap exports will need to meet a higher standard from December 2016, a Beijing envoy said at a WTO meeting. Ever since it joined the WTO in 2001, China has frequently attracted complaints that its exports are being “dumped”, or sold at unfairly cheap prices on foreign markets. Under world trade rules, importing countries can slap punitive tariffs on goods that are suspected of being dumped. Normally such claims are based on a comparison with domestic prices in the exporting country. But the terms of China’s membership stated that — because it was not a “market economy” — other countries did not need to use China’s domestic prices to justify their accusations of Chinese dumping, but could use other arguments. China’s representative at a WTO meeting on Tuesday said the practice was “outdated, unfair and discriminatory” and under its membership terms, it would automatically be treated as a “market economy” after 15 years, which meant Dec. 11, 2016. All WTO members would have to stop using their own calculations from that date, said the Chinese envoy, whose name was not given by a WTO official who spoke to reporters about the meeting. Dumping complaints are a frequent cause of trade disputes at the WTO, and dumping duties are even more frequently levied on Chinese products. In September alone, the WTO said it had been notified of EU anti-dumping actions on 22 categories of Chinese exports, from solar power components to various types of steel products and metals, as well as food ingredients such as aspartame, citric acid and monosodium glutamate. The EU was also slapping duties on Chinese bicycles, ring binder mechanisms and rainbow trout. From the end of next year, such lists would need to be based on China’s domestic prices “to avoid any unnecessary WTO disputes”, the Chinese representative said. More than 20 percent of the 500 disputes brought to the WTO in its 20 year history have involved dumping, including several between China and the EU or the United States in the last few years.
– Reuters
 
G20 nations must switch big subsidies from fossil fuel to renewables-report
Source: Thomson Reuters Foundation - Thu, 12 Nov 2015, By HYPERLINK "http://www.trust.org/profile/?id=003D000001bJztOIAS" Chris Arsenault
TORONTO, Nov 12 (Thomson Reuters Foundation) - G20 members are spending $452 billion a year subsidising fossil fuel production - nearly four times global spending on renewable energy subsidies - despite pledging to phase out fossil fuel support to tackle climate change, a new report said on Thursday.
Global subsidies for renewable energy production amount to just $121 billion a year, the Overseas Development Institute (ODI), a UK-based think-tank, and research group Oil Change International said in their report. The much greater support given to fossil fuels than to clean energy technologies by the G20, the world's biggest economies, makes it harder to cut greenhouse gas emissions and slow climate change, said the report issued before the G20 summit in Antalya, Turkey, on Nov. 15-16. "G20 governments are paying fossil fuel producers to undermine their own policies on climate change," the ODI's Shelagh Whitley said in a statement. "Scrapping these subsidies would rebalance energy markets and allow a level playing field for clean and efficient alternatives." G20 countries backed calls to phase out fossil fuel subsidies at meetings in 2009 and 2014, but are not making significant progress, the report said. G20 governments should adopt strict timelines for phasing out fossil fuel subsidies and transfer government financial support to greener forms of energy, it said. Subsidies to oil and coal producers include direct payments such as grants, loans and equity, tax credits, and price supports, according to the World Trade Organization (WTO).
The report said money provided by G20 governments for fossil fuel production in 2013 and 2014 included nearly $78 billion a year in national subsidies, state-owned company investments of $286 billion, and other public finance support valued at $88 billion. Russia had the highest national subsidies among the G20, providing almost $23 billion. The United Kingdom was the only G7 nation to significantly increase support for its fossil fuel industry, providing more tax breaks and industry support in 2015 for companies extracting oil from the North Sea - whose oilfields are in decline. Australia and Brazil each provided national subsidies of about $5 billion, including handouts for companies looking to extract fossil fuels from hard-to-reach areas. Despite calls by U.S. President Barack Obama to scrap fossil fuel subsidies, the world's largest economy spent more than $20 billion in national subsidies, the report said. Investments in fossil fuel extraction by Chinese state-owned firms were the largest of any G20 country, amounting to nearly $77 billion annually. Turkey, the G20 summit host, is giving tax breaks to support its programme of building more coal-fired plants than any other OECD country, potentially raising its greenhouse gas emissions by 94 percent over the next 15 years. Three-quarters of all proven reserves of oil, gas and coal must stay in the ground to give the world a two-in-three chance of keeping global temperatures from rising by more than 2 degrees centigrade, the threshold for major climate change, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) said last year. (Reporting By Chris Arsenault, editing by Tim Pearce.
 
China serves notice to WTO members over complaints about its cheap exports
China has frequently attracted complaints that its exports are being 'dumped', or sold at unfairly cheap prices on foreign markets
Reuters  |  Geneva  November 12, 2015 
HYPERLINK "http://www.business-standard.com/search?type=news&q=China" China has served notice to World Trade Organisation members including the European Union and United States that complaints about its cheap HYPERLINK "http://www.business-standard.com/search?type=news&q=Exports" exports will need to meet a higher standard from December 2016, a HYPERLINK "http://www.business-standard.com/search?type=news&q=Beijing" Beijing envoy said at a HYPERLINK "http://www.business-standard.com/search?type=news&q=Wto" WTO meeting. Ever since it joined the WTO in 2001, China has frequently attracted complaints that its exports are being "dumped", or sold at unfairly cheap prices on foreign markets. Under world trade rules, importing countries can slap punitive tariffs on goods that are suspected of being dumped. Normally such claims are based on a comparison with domestic prices in the exporting country.
But the terms of China's membership stated that -- because it was not a "market economy" -- other countries did not need to use China's domestic prices to justify their accusations of Chinese dumping, but could use other arguments. China's representative at a WTO meeting on Tuesday said the practise was "outdated, unfair and discriminatory" and under its membership terms, it would automatically be treated as a "market economy" after 15 years, which meant Dec. 11, 2016. All WTO members would have to stop using their own calculations from that date, said the Chinese envoy, whose name was not given by a WTO official who spoke to reporters about the meeting. Dumping complaints are a frequent cause of trade disputes at the WTO, and dumping duties are even more frequently levied on Chinese products. In September alone, the WTO said it had been notified of EU anti-dumping actions on 22 categories of Chinese exports, from solar power components to various types of steel products and metals, as well as food ingredients such as aspartame, citric acid and monosodium glutamate. The EU was also slapping duties on Chinese bicycles, ring binder mechanisms and rainbow trout. From the end of next year, such lists would need to be based on China's domestic prices "to avoid any unnecessary WTO disputes", the Chinese representative said. More than 20 percent of the 500 disputes brought to the WTO in its 20 year history have involved dumping, including several between China and the EU or the United States in the last few years.
 
Executive orders bring food duties in compliance with WTO waiver 
Kathryn Mae P. Tubadeza, BusinessWorld, 12 November 2015 -- PRESIDENT Benigno S. C. Aquino III has issued two executive orders adjusting the duties on agricultural products to make them compliant with international trade commitments.  Executive Order No. 190, signed on Nov. 5, adjusts the most-favored nation (MFN) rates of duty on certain agricultural products in the Tariff and Customs Code to reflect Philippine tariff commitments under the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO), specifically items relating to the Philippine waiver seeking special treatment for rice.  It said articles specifically listed which are entered or withdrawn from warehouses in the Philippines shall be subject to the MFN rates of import duty. Frozen swine liver shall be subject to an MFN rate of duty of 5% until June 30, 2017. Starting July 1, 2017, mechanically deboned or separated meat will be assessed at 5% to June 30, 2017. The rate rises to 40% starting July 1, 2017. Buttermilk shall be subject to an MFN rate of duty of 1% until June 30, 2017, rising to 3% from July 1, 2017. Butter will be assessed at 5% until June 30, 2017, rising to 7% starting July 1, 2017. 
Grated or powdered cheese in packages exceeding 20 kilograms will be assessed 1% until June 30, 2017 and 3% starting July 1, 2017. Duty for fresh grapes is 7% until June 30, 2017, falling to 3% by July 1, 2017. Executive Order No. 191, also signed on Nov. 5, sets duty rates duty on certain agricultural products in accordance with the Philippines' ASEAN- Australia-New Zealand Free Trade Area (AANZFTA) Tariff Commitments, also relating to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO rice waiver.  The order set a 2% AANZFTA rate of duty from 2014 to 2016 for milk and cream, not concentrated nor containing added sugar or other sweetening matter, of a fat content by weight not exceeding 1% in liquid form.  It set a 3% rate from 2014 to 2016 and a 3% rate from 2017 to 2020 and thereafter for yogurt in liquid form, whether or not condensed.  Butter and filled milk will be assessed 3% to 2016, with the rate falling to zero from 2017 to 2020. There will be no duty for processed cheese in non-grated, non-powdered form and chocolate confectionery until 2020. 
 
IAF ISTANBUL – Cotton shortage unlikely despite demand exceeding supply
Michelle Russell, Just-Style, 11 November 2015 --  While global cotton production is expected to drop significantly in 2015/16 – just as consumption is forecast to rise – the amount of cotton held in stocks means a shortage is unlikely, one industry expert has said.  “It's been a very interesting few years…with the peak in cotton prices in 2010/2011,” said Marsha Powell, Turkey programme director for Cotton Council International (CCI) and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Cotton Incorporated. “We've had five years in which cotton production in the world has exceed consumption. Only this year do we estimate cotton production to be lower than consumption.” 
Speaking at this year's International Apparel Federation (IAF) convention in Istanbul, Powell told delegates the decrease in world production of cotton looks “pretty significant” for 2015/2016. The largest decreases, she said, will take place in China, the US, India, West Africa and Pakistan.  Indeed, world cotton production is expected to fall by 9% to 23.9m tons, as significantly lower cotton prices in 2014/15 means world cotton area is projected to fall by 7% as farmers switchto more lucrative crops.  “It's not a problem though,” Powell said. “As a result of the large production over the last five years, we will have quite an excess in stocks, so there is no problem with supply. Our production deficit in 2015/16 is expected to be relatively small and easily made up by the difference in stocks we have around the world, in the US, in China and in other countries. So, expect stable prices, perhaps a little lower than normal.”  Powell said consumption of cotton has been increasing “steadily” over the last several years, and is expected to increase again, globally, this year.  China remains the largest importer of cotton, according to the CCI, importing 42% of the world's trade in cotton and accounting for over one-third of cotton used at spinning level. It also holds over 60% of the world's stocks as a result of the government's stockpiling programme.  “It's a very changing scenario year-by-year,” Powell said of the supply and demand of cotton. “A lot of increased production has meant the world has accumulated stocks, but a lot of the stocks are held in China. The amount held in stock right now can supply the world for one year and China for two years.  “Global mill use is affected by what China does,” she added. “China's mill use is much lower – that implies a weakness in global demand, but again this all has to do with Chinese policies. So we watch them very closely.”  In the last few years, China has operated very restricted access to the world market for its mills. It has a tariff-rate quota (TRQ) under HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) regulations, allowing the importation of less than 900,000 tonnes of raw fibre per year. It also has government options to import more cotton.  Since 2010/2011, cotton produced in China has been purchased from farmersby the government at aguaranteed price far in excess of the world market,and put into the country's strategic reserves. In the two following years, over 90% of cotton produced in China went into the reserve system. The price differential between Chinese cotton and the world marketmeant the internal price of cotton in China was being sold at a premium, hitting over $1 per kilo at its peak, making it difficult for its textile industry to operate effectively. According to CCI, the textile/spinning industry in China, during that period of time, reduced from around 12m tonnes to 7m.  “It contracted significantly because it was cheaper for the Chinese mills to import yarn than to produce it themselves,” Powell explained. “We've taken Turkish mills to China to help them sell yarn to China.”  In the last year, however, China's policy has changed.  “They no longer guarantee the price to the Chinese farmers, and cotton prices in China have come down. They still have their import quota, but mills are now more free to find cotton at a competitive price. So, in fact, less and less of the cotton is going into the government reserves and the world is consuming more of the Chinese cotton. And because they are importing less, that means there is more cotton for the rest of the world.”  Powell adds that as Chinese prices drop, so do world prices. “That price differential is getting closer every day.”  Currently, cotton is produced in over 70 countries, with global trade estimated at over $12bn, according to Cotton Council International. In terms of export, the US is the largest exporter, accounting for a third of the world's trade in cotton, followed by India, Australia and Central Asia.  China is the US's largest customer, purchasing around 41%, and Turkey around 15%. But the cotton industry in the US has changed in recent years, Powell explained.  “We had several years where production was higher and several years where production was lower. Our stocks in the US during that very tumultuous time really decreased. But in this current year, demand will exceed supply for the first time in several years, so we're going to be pulling out some real stops.”  Around 50% of cotton produced in the US takes places in Texas, so crops are dependent on weather conditions.  “If Texas doesn't have a lot of rain, farmers tend to abandon their production and they don't harvest their crops. So we watch the weather very closely in Texas and we look at the abandonment rate per acreage. A couple of years ago we had some very bad years with high drought conditions, but this current yearwe've had a fair amount of water. So we don't see a strong abandonment for Texas. “We have an increase of 80% this year in US end stocks, so based on history, that suggests that US cotton prices should decrease, which is good news for the mills.” 
 
Structural reforms and global cooperation 
By HO MENG KIT , Structural reforms and global cooperation, Business Times Singapore, 12 November 2015 -- These are urgently needed now to boost worldwide economic growth. 
FROM Sept 3 to 5, business leaders from the world's top 20 economies gathered in Ankara, Turkey, for the annual Business 20 (B-20) Conference to finalise their recommendations for the annual HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Group of 20 (G-20) leaders' meeting in November. The B-20 is the forum through which businesses produce policy recommendations for G-20. Singapore is privileged to be part of both the B-20 and G-20 this year as a guest country. I was privileged to represent the interests of the Singapore business community at the B-20. 
One may ask, why would our businesses, local or foreign-owned, be interested in fora such as the B-20 and G-20? The key reason is globalisation and the increasing inter-linkages of economies around the world. Our businesses are increasingly dependent on the performance of the global economy. Collectively, the G-20 economies account for about 85 per cent of the global economy, 80 per cent of world trade, and two-thirds of the world's population. These facts underline the importance of the G-20 platform to enable global growth and jobs creation. The existence of the B-20 reflects the key role that businesses play as one of the main drivers of growth.  The current global economic outlook is weak and uncertain. Although it has been seven years since the global financial crisis, world economic growth has yet to recover to its pre-crisis trajectory. Job creation remains sluggish in many countries. This one-two punch - bolstered by recent financial volatility - is making millions of people around the world feel hopeless about the prospects of a prosperous future. Together with the other B-20 participants, the Singapore business community does not accept this status - not least given the hardship it means for many families, communities and societies, including Singapore. We must do more to ensure communities have a chance to thrive and flourish now and in the decades ahead. This will require structural reform in many countries. It will also require the sustained cooperation of governments across many countries working in collaboration with businesses and civil societies on four core initiatives which, taken together, will provide a much needed boost to growth and jobs. * First, ratify the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization's (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA) by the 10th WTO Ministerial Conference in Nairobi in December 2015 or earlier 
Concluded at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's 2013 Bali Ministerial Conference, the TFA will remove unnecessary delays and red tape when moving goods across borders - factors that increase the global cost of trading internationally by about 12 per cent. The TFA breaks new ground by allowing developing and least developed countries to determine when they will implement the individual provisions of the Agreement, based on their capacity to do so. They can also receive technical assistance to help them implement the various provisions. Taken together, the ratification of the TFA will reduce complications and costs associated with the roughly US$24 trillion of goods and services traded each year. Right now, every member of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO supports the TFA. However, only half of the 108 members needed to ratify the agreement have done so. Singapore ratified the TFA in June 2014. A number of Singapore's key trading partners - for example, Indonesia, India, Vietnam and the Philippines - have not ratified the TFA yet. It will open new markets for many businesses by easing border processing and reducing customs costs, leading to increased investments and employment. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD estimates that the cost reduction potential of trade facilitation will reach almost 13-15 per cent of trade costs for countries with low to middle-income levels. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Peterson Institute for International Economics estimates that trade facilitation improvements can result in the creation of 21 million jobs globally, with developing countries gaining 18 million jobs and developed countries, 3 million jobs.We urge all governments that have not ratified the agreement to act now. 
* Second, commit to the rollback on protectionist measures 
Numerous reports show that many G-20 governments have not adhered to their commitment made in 2008 to refrain from raising new barriers to trade and investments, imposing new export restrictions, or implementing WTO-inconsistent measures to stimulate exports. About 3,800 protectionist measures have been introduced by G-20 governments since 2008, and the number is growing. Some examples introduced recently include Indonesia's requirement for all importers of smartphones to manufacture in Indonesia or have their import licences revoked, Russia's decision to grant 15 per cent contract price preferences to bidders of its public procurement projects that comply with local content requirements, and India's recent change in its Food Safety Regulations requiring labelling of foodstuffs directly on packaging instead of on stickers.  Reversing all barriers introduced between 2008 and 2013 will increase global exports by at least an estimated US$460 billion - equivalent to 2.5 per cent of current exports. This will result in an increase of US$423 billion in global GDP and 9 million jobs worldwide. This excludes the gains from reversing new measures introduced in 2014 and the significant additional benefit of withholding the introduction of any new trade barriers. We call on all global leaders to demonstrate leadership by rolling back protectionist measures and advocating broad opposition to such measures.
* Third, develop country-specific infrastructure investment strategies linked to growth aspirations, and improve the infrastructure investment ecosystem to facilitate the development of infrastructure as an asset class 
Many economies require extensive infrastructure, including transportation, power, water, and telecommunications. While spending on such infrastructure totals some US$3 trillion annually, there is simply not enough being invested. In fact, the world is projected to face a global shortfall in infrastructure spending of US$15-20 trillion by 2030. While governments can close this gap with funding commitments, the private sector plays an essential part in financing and completing these projects. Infrastructure investment can be a powerful way to boost growth. Governments can assist by developing clear, credible and comprehensive infrastructure project roadmaps linked to their growth plans, and improving the infrastructure investment ecosystem to facilitate the development of infrastructure as an asset class. 
Infrastructure investments in our region will lead to better connectivity and regional integration. Singapore has a role to play in facilitating regional infrastructure investments as a major financial centre and as a centre of expertise in capacity building, with many companies here excelling in projects and operational management. 
* Fourth, redesign global small and medium-sized enterprise (SME) policymaking practice and improve SME access to financing 
SMEs are important to the world economy, as they account for 60 per cent of the world's workforce and 50 per cent of global GDP. The major problems faced by SMEs generally include access to international markets, finance, entrepreneurial skills and talent management, innovation ecosystems, and their ability to comply with business regulations. There is scope for a global platform that provides advocacy, advisory, and technical services for SMEs. It is with this in mind that the World SME Forum was founded by the Union of Chambers and Commodity Exchanges of Turkey (TOBB) and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" International Chamber of Commerce (ICC) as an independent not-for-profit organisation aimed at improving the overall growth and impact of SMEs globally. SBF welcomes and supports the establishment of the World SME Forum and we call on various governments to support it. In addition, SMEs often face limited access to financing. They find it difficult to obtain financing due to a lack of reliable credit information, few alternative (non-banking) financing options, and limited tools to mitigate credit risks. Therefore, we support the creation of a new regulatory environment that improves financing alternatives (both private and public), including supply chain finance, crowdfunding and peer-to-peer finance, venture capital and private equity capital investments in SMEs, and SME asset securitisation. Taken together, these four initiatives provide a strong foundation for building stronger and more sustainable growth over time - growth that will improve the lives of people everywhere. While each initiative will be beneficial on its own, the combined impact would produce powerful synergies capable of energising growth and dramatically increasing job opportunities across the globe. The urgent goal now is to boost economic growth and create more jobs. Global leaders, including those from the G-20, need to cooperate and take decisive action, especially in implementing structural reform, to put growth back to its pre-crisis trajectory. Singapore and Singapore businesses stand to benefit from global growth. We stand together with the rest of the global business community, to help implement the above agenda. We urge all leaders and public officials to join us. Together, we can build a brighter future for the communities, families, and individuals that are counting on us to lead. 
* The writer is chief executive officer of the Singapore Business Federation (SBF), which has a membership of more than 21,500 companies and major trade association and chambers 
Reversing all barriers introduced from 2008-13 will increase global exports by at least an estimated US$460 billion. 
 
European Commissioner for Trade: We decided that DCFTA would come into force, and Russia will have to accept that
11.11.2015 | 13:45, by Iryna Somer, Ukrainian Independent Information Agency -- European Commissioner for Trade Cecilia Malmström has told UNIAN ahead of her visit to Ukraine about the advantages of DCFTA for the Ukrainians and Europe’s planned actions toward Russia given it pursues with implementing new sanctions against Ukraine due to DCFTA coming into force. 
REUTERS
Commissioner Malmström will visit Ukraine on November 12-13 to meet the Prime Minister, the President, the Minister for Economic Development and Trade, and the Foreign Minister. Implementation of the Ukraine – EU Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area from January 1, 2016, will be on the top agenda of Ms Malmström’s visit. Ahead of her visit Cecilia Malmström has told UNIAN what the advantages are of the DCFTA for the Ukrainian producers, what should be done to make the Ukrainian products competitive on the European markets, and how the consumers will profit. She also stressed the need for the Ukrainian authorities to take practical steps in the implementation of important reforms and elaborated on the actions of the EU toward Russia, which shows concern over the Ukraine-EU DCFTA. What is your agenda and what would you like to achieve during this visit? It is a trip to show support to Ukraine and to discuss the upcoming implementation of the DCFTA. In this regard I have my second question about DCFTA. Is there general understanding what kind of products can be interesting and will be successful at the EC market? Is there a prognosis on how Ukrainian import to the EU can grow or not grow in the nearest five to ten years? It is very difficult to make those prognoses, bearing in mind a difficult situation in Ukraine and arm-wrest you’re having in so many parts of your country. We opened up for autonomic trade preferences already a year ago, so that has been an allowance of Ukrainian product already in the European market. We will now open up for more economic integration, taking away other obstacles and non-tariff barriers, which will facilitate for Ukrainian products to come in. It depends of course, on what is competitive. You have quite competitive agriculture production. I would imagine that it will be the in the focus, but it can also be machinery or pharmaceuticals. It is very hard to say. What we do know also is that the two other countries who have implemented DCFTA – Georgia and Moldova, specially, Georgia, after one year we see very-very positive development in growth and increased trade between the EU and Georgia. Slightly less in Moldova, but there is also a positive trend there. Despite preferences, which EU gave to Ukrainian products, this year we see that Ukrainian export to the European market decreased by more than 30%. Why do you think it happened? Ukrainian exports have fallen globally, not just towards us, and that is because of a lot of external factors - the Russian embargo, the war that is going on in your country and a general economy as itself, prices going down globally on some of your export products – metals, oil, agriculture products – also play into it. I can’t promise, of course, that from January 1 everything will change overnight, but we will engage in a long term partnership, facilitating for Ukrainian products to enter, working with you to help you to have a stronger economy, helping you to rise standards of your products, as sort of high quality stamps, so they can be exported not only to Europe, but also to other countries in your neighbourhood and making sure that you do the reforms that are needed, also to make full use of the Agreement. I have almost the similar question but regarding the European export to Ukraine. Are there any prognoses how it can change the Ukrainian market? Can it influence the prosperity of the Ukrainians? I think in two ways it will be good for you. First, if your consumers, the people of Ukraine,  have more access to more products, it is good for them and, hopefully, some of them, because of tariffs, will be cheaper. That is good. They will have more choice, more products at the lower cost. And then, of course, you can ship without tariffs and other barriers all kinds of machinery you could use to rise the technological advancement in your agriculture. For instance, you can use your markets internally in a better way; it is a sort of advance in the value chain. For instance, in the agriculture. This will open new possibilities. We have seen that in Georgia as well. What are your expectations of the outcome of the trilateral consultation regarding Russian concern over the DCFTA entering into the force? We’ve already had many-many meetings at the technical level, also at the ministerial level, and it will be one more very soon. We do not have a date yet. Our expectations are that Russia will refrain from putting more sanctions and from withdrawing their preferences that Ukraine has in the CIT agreement with them, and that they will allow for DCFTA to enter into force as we decided it will, and Russia will have to accept that. We have said that, if Russia has particular concerns of a practical character when it comes to the implementation of the Agreement (veterinary certificates, some [kind of] collaboration), I mean very technical but important issues, we are willing to help Russia. So far we have not reached an agreement on this sensitive issue but we are still optimistic that we can find a way. But we’ve already heard a recent statement of Russian Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev that Russia will increase levels of customs-tariff protection against Ukraine, and it will impose other economic sanctions. Do you really believe that you can reach an agreement with the Russians? We have to at least try. We will be trying. But I have full support of all member states including the Commission, and your government has repeated this as well – the Agreement will enter into force from January 1 next year whatever Russia says. If we have an agreement with them before – [it’s] fine, but it [the Agreement] will enter into force anyway. Regarding the Russian proposal concerning the cooperation, which could lead to the formalization of EU-Eurasian Economic Union relations... What is your opinion on this and under which condition will it be possible for the EU to recognize the Eurasian Economic union? First of all, we need to make sure that the Minsk agreement is implemented fully and that the EU-Ukraine DCFTA will apply and that Russia does not do any measures towards Ukraine. Then we have quite a lot of problems in the WTO with Russia, so we need to solve them. All of this is conditions, before we can engage in a more formal way with the Eurasian Union. Coming back to the DCFTA, what kind of mistakes the Ukrainian business and government make when entering into the EU market?  What must be done to avoid such mistakes? I’m not sure if I can give an example of any mistakes. It is always, of course, difficult to enter into a new market, you have to be competitive and you have to have products that are in demand. There is definitely a potential for Ukrainian products, especially in the agriculture sector, but also in the other [sectors]. Reforms in Ukraine are necessary as well. Because, if you want to attract European investment which you need for jobs (and the European companies want to invest in Ukraine) a predictable business environment is needed. You need to make sure that the Ukrainian side’s fight against corruption is progressing, that there are predictable, good, transparent, non-discriminatory conditions for business to act, in order to make a good investment environment. This will take time, and we will help you, but this needs to be done, and this can be done only by Ukraine. Talking about European producers and companies, can Ukraine become a new production platform for EU producers because of cheap labor? No, I don’t think this is what we are looking at. You have human capital, you have technical knowledge, highly educated people and specialists in many fields. So I don’t think you should seek to compete because of cheap labor rather than seek to compete because you have skills and products and an attractive market. What we see is that it has a huge potential to grow. We will organize, together with Business Europe, a business event here in Brussels at the beginning of next year, where I will make inaugural speech in order to try to see if we can promote cooperation between European and Ukrainian companies and talk about investment in Ukraine. It will be in February. Can Ukrainian and European businesses coordinate their efforts in order to be successful? It is not for us to say but for businesses to discover what to do. What Ukrainians need to do is to continue the reform path, fight against corruption, [create] good business climate. A business forum can be one opportunity for companies to meet and exchange views to see how they can cooperate.
Iryna Somer (UNIAN, Brussels)
Translated by Yevgeny Matyushenko (UNIAN)
 
The TTIP: A Challenge to China's Hegemony Dream on the Global Stage?
The Huffington Post, Posted: 11/11/2015, HYPERLINK "http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/april-xiaoyi-xu/" April Xiaoyi Xu, Freelance Writer -- The Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) has sparked much controversy. Noticeably, instead of focusing on reducing tariffs, the TTIP proposes to align the U.S. and EU's currently incompatible rules and regulations. Although opposition is voiced most loudly in several EU countries where citizens strongly wish to maintain their high standards in industries such as food and beverage, the TTIP would also have significant impacts internationally. This article focuses on its impacts on China. Although China had relatively lagged behind the MEDC's including many EU countries and the United States in terms of its initial infrastructure, advanced materials, R&D, and policy frameworks in the past decades, one should not rule out the possibility for China to catch up and become the next hegemon. Among the reasons why the Chinese are optimistic that China may surpass the U.S. in the next decades is that since it joined WTO in 2001, China has strived to be at the winning end of the WTO. For years, the label "Made in China" has sounded derogative in its connotation of low-quality manufacturing using cheap labor sources. However, the Chinese government, ambitious to make China the world's next hegemon after the United States, has recently devoted increasing attention to alter the situation. Instead of attempting to keep profiting from its status as the world's largest manufacturing economy, China has strategically shifted its focus to introducing better technology and tighter regulations. These are done partly through the government's recent introduction of new policies that encourage technological innovation, economic structure transformation, domestic branding, corporate governance, research and development (R&D), and its further strengthening of trade partnerships with other nations or regions. Examples of such policies include "Made in China 2025" and "One Belt One Road (OBOR)". Further, the country imposed stricter standards and tighter regulations in areas including food safety and advertising earlier this year, further demonstrating a readiness and determination to lead as the next hegemon not just within the BRICs community or amongst members of the new China-initiated Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB), but also internationally.  It is rather ironic that simultaneously as the EU faces the possible need of loosening its rigid regulations such as food safety policies that are so integral to the region's proud identity per the TTIP, China is working hard to tighten them. For China, the TTIP may threaten to reduce its competitive advantages. Already, one could observe that Chinese costs of production are not as cheap as they were, with rising costs in China combined with pressures posed by offers of relatively cheaper production costs in less developed nations. With the EU's possible deregulation per the TTIP, the picture may look less optimistic for China. Despite that tariff reduction between the U.S. and EU countries is not the primary target of the TTIP, one should observe that such trade barriers are already low. The further reduction in trade barriers through deregulation could be seen as a geopolitical strategy employed by the U.S.: one that can threaten China's hegemony dream by increasing China's costs of participating in globalization. If the TTIP were to be passed, China might need to brainstorm even more effective approaches to incentivize European countries to further trade with itself, when EU nations could trade with the United States with lower transaction costs enabled by the reduced regulatory barriers and already low tariffs. Of course, the future does not look entirely pessimistic for China in terms of its position in the world, nor has the question of "Will China's hegemony dream be diminished by the TTIP?" got a black and white answer. In fact, the situation between China and the United States in terms of obtaining (for China) or securing (for the U.S. in the current stage) global hegemony may resemble an intense tug of war where one cannot clearly predict future outcomes. We should recall that simultaneously as the United States attempts to secure more successful years as the most prominent global leader using means including the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) and the TTIP, China has already started to brainstorm creative ways to advance its hegemony dreams. China's recent plans in increasing the number of investments in, and cooperation with the United Kingdom and the aforementioned examples of the AIIB and policies including "Made in China 2025" and "One Belt One Road" may prove to be effective in allowing China to execute further trade agreements with existing partners, or initiate new agreements with other nations. Whilst these approaches may not bring significant benefits to China in the immediate short term, they may allow China to move a few steps closer in fulfilling its hegemony dream in the medium to longer time frame.
The TTIP challenges the established international system (e.g. the WTO) and the norm of path dependency where international systems are usually hard to be reshaped. This raises important questions for all: What will happen if multilateral trade agreements no longer go through the WTO? Who should be the hub of all these trade agreements? Who will make the rules on the global stage, and what rules will be there? It may take years to see whether the TTIP and TPP mean less power and future influence for China on the global stage, especially in relation to the United States. Perhaps, only time will tell.
 
END


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.