U.S. Pressures China, India on Subsidies
 
Path unclear for Doha as Nairobi inches closer
 
Free trade treaty ratification rests squarely on Executive
 
China continues to promote world trade
 
China and Georgia Start Free-Trade Talks
 
Armenia Presses for Free Trade With Iran
 
Steel import duty may be hiked further
 
WTO Members Notify Preferential Measures Under LDC Services Waiver
 
Mooted free-trade area seen boosting intra-African minerals trade flows
 
Belarus' fast accession to WTO welcomed
 
The GOP’s Donald Trump nightmare may soon get a whole lot worse
 
When there's no happily ever after to trade talks
 
 
 
U.S. Pressures China, India on Subsidies
 
BNA 
By Bryce Baschuk
 
Sept. 10 — The U.S. asked China and India, in a document released by the World Trade Organization, to explain how their respective cotton policies do not distort international trade markets.
 
The U.S. urged China to defend its nearly $6 billion in direct cotton subsidies and its 11.6 million metric ton cotton inventory that represents 57 percent of the global stockpile of cotton, according to the International Cotton Advisory Committee (ICAC).
 
The U.S. asked India to explain why it raised its minimum support prices for cotton in 2015 despite reduced import demand in China, falling world prices and near record Indian production of cotton. The U.S. also urged India to take steps to ensure that the release of its cotton stocks does not further exacerbate international cotton markets and avoid exporting cotton at below the cost of procurement in order to reduce its stocks.
 
Members plan to discuss China's and India's cotton policies, among a host of other agriculture issues, at a two-day WTO Agriculture Committee meeting scheduled for HYPERLINK "x-apple-data-detectors://5" Sept. 24 and 25 in Geneva.
 
Cotton Products
 
The U.S. queries come as WTO members seek to advance their decade-long effort to reduce and eventually eliminate trade-distorting domestic support and export subsidies for trade in cotton products.
 
The four African nations of Benin, Burkina Faso, Chad and Mali launched the effort in 2005 as they sought to prevent richer nations from damaging their economies through harmful domestic subsidies.
 
The negotiations have since languished and WTO members failed to agree to reductions in cotton subsidies and trade barriers at their last ministerial conference in 2013.
 
Last month, the outgoing chairman of the WTO Committee on Agriculture in Special Session, ambassador John Adank, said “there can be no doubt that cotton will need to be part of any outcome” at the WTO's mid-December ministerial conference in Nairobi, Kenya.
 
No Response from China
 
The U.S. delegation resubmitted several questions that it said China had failed to respond to during the last WTO Agriculture Committee meeting in June.
 
The U.S. asked China to explain why it continued to “significantly under-fill the substantial” tariff-rate quotas for wheat, corn and rice that it established in its WTO accession package.
 
The U.S. delegation reiterated its concern that the Chinese government was not being transparent in its WTO notifications because it did not include market price support calculations for corn, soybeans, and rapeseed in 2009. The U.S. also asked China to revise its “incorrect” calculation of market price support for rice.
The U.S. asked China to detail all of its major agricultural infrastructure programs related to the government's Agricultural Comprehensive Development Program and clarify how they adhere to the WTO's Agreement on Agriculture.
 
The U.S. delegation urged China to explain the “substantial” increase in its natural disaster relief payments between 2005 and 2010 and to justify the expansion of China's environment program expenditures.
 
The U.S. said China's inclusion of negative market price support in its product-specific aggregate measure of support declarations represented a “a serious concern and should be reported as a zero.”
 
Questions for India
 
The U.S. delegation also resubmitted a series of questions that it said India did not respond to following the June WTO Agriculture Committee meeting.
 
The U.S. said it was concerned that India had introduced a new export subsidy program in 2014 for a number of agricultural products under the Merchandise Export from India Scheme (MEIS). The U.S. asked for specific details about the government's expenditures under the MEIS program and what products were targeted in the scheme.
 
The U.S. said India's reported external reference prices for wheat that appeared “quite high” compared to other WTO member filings and asked for further data to justify its calculations.
 
India provided data on the quantities of wheat exports that differed from statistics provided by the U.S. on the Food Corporation of India, the U.S. delegation said. The U.S. asked India to account for the disparity and provide the source of the data that it provided.
 
The U.S. repeated its earlier queries about India's market price support policies and the methodologies used to calculate the quantity of India's past and current levels of support.
 
Path unclear for Doha as Nairobi inches closer
 
By Victoria Guida, POLITICO
09/11/15, 12:01 PM EDT
 
World Trade Organization members return from summer holiday next week to prepare for what could be their last chance to salvage the comatose Doha round of negotiations, but they could wind up just picking up the scraps.
 
Major WTO economies, including the United States, European Union, China, India and Japan, will huddle in Geneva from HYPERLINK "x-apple-data-detectors://8" Sept. 15-16 to develop a basic picture of what kind of deal ministers could reach. But the global trading body still hasn’t reached consensus on whether it should continue pursuing a deal that would cover all three pillars of the Doha agenda as initially conceived in 2001 — agricultural goods, industrial goods, and services — or cut their losses and stitch together whatever remnants they can.
 
“I think the next couple of weeks are critical, especially between now and the ministers’ meeting in Istanbul,” Deputy U.S. Trade Representative Michael Punke told POLITICO, referring to the G-20 trade ministers’ meeting HYPERLINK "x-apple-data-detectors://9" Oct. 5. “We don’t have very much time, and if we don’t get off to a good start between now and then, then it’s very hard to imagine this is going to come together in a positive way.”
 
The U.S., European Union, Japan and some other developed and developing countries say the talks should focus only on the narrow band of issues that could realistically garner a consensus by a meeting of all of the WTO ministers in Nairobi this December. Those could include transparency commitments, such as in trade remedy investigations, as well as benefits for least-developed countries and a ban on agricultural export subsidies. India is also likely to raise the issue of food security.
 
"The two choices are a dramatically recalibrated package and nothing, so that’s the blunt harsh reality," Punke said.
 
Although India lobbied successfully last year for an exemption shielding its food stockpiling program from a legal challenge at the WTO until members agree to a permanent solution to its food security concerns, New Delhi could choose to hold up the talks over the issue, a senior official involved in the negotiations said.
 
Meanwhile, some foreign diplomats in Geneva say a mini-agreement isn’t necessarily easier to reach than mega-deal.
 
“In both cases, it’s about striking a balance,” an official said, adding that members have pushed back against abandoning a larger package and still don’t agree on what a partial agreement should contain. “It's more likely we get nothing than a small package.”
 
But former Deputy U.S. Trade Representative Miriam Sapiro, who was in Geneva last week, said it’s unclear whether there's enough time for anything more.
 
“It’s going to be a challenge to get from where things are now to a better place,” Sapiro said in an interview. “I think it’s too early to tell. A small package is unlikely to satisfy some of the players, but it’s also not clear there’s time to put together a big package right now.”
 
Washington is more focused on closing out the 12-country Trans-Pacific Partnership than reaching a deal in the Doha talks and isn’t pushing for much in the latter, Geneva sources say. The senior official noted that developed countries are already seeing gains from regional and bilateral agreements, which are also more likely to get done, taking enthusiasm away from multilateral negotiations at the WTO that have been stalled for 14 years.
 
In addition, WTO countries aren’t offering anything the U.S. really wants, making it unlikely Washington will respond to overtures with any concessions of its own.
 
Still, not all WTO members have abandoned the idea of a larger package. On agriculture and non-agricultural market access, the most realistic outcome would be to place a cap on overall tariffs or domestic agriculture subsidies without affecting current policy, some Geneva diplomats say.
 
“Without closing debate to other alternatives, there appears to be support for reductions based on the overall bound tariff average,” the African, Caribbean and Pacific nations group said in a proposal July 30. “This approach shall ensure an overall balance in the level of ambition between agriculture and NAMA, respect for the principle of less than full reciprocity and should not lead to a situation where developing countries would apply disproportionate levels of tariff reduction compared to other WTO members.”
 
Developing countries see agricultural discussions as a high priority, while developed nations are more likely to value non-agricultural market access, giving rise to the ACP group’s emphasis on striking a balance between those two pillars.
 
A joint summary of the talks from Canada and Australia also implies it’s unlikely members will reach agreement on the broad area of trade in services. A bullet-pointed list on the subject is filled with such items as “No consensus on process or timing of negotiations," "No progress on substance," "Calibration necessary" and "Ambition unclear."
 
One Geneva source said many of the developing countries want to hold off on the services negotiations until the agriculture talks get done, which would leave little time to conclude the services discussions before the meeting in Nairobi.
 
Even if the Doha talks fall apart, however, Nairobi might not be a total failure. Members are optimistic about finishing the updated Information Technology Agreement, whose participants are negotiating how quickly tariffs on the newly expanded list of tech products will go to zero.
 
Countries also could reach a milestone in the Environmental Goods Agreement talks, in which the U.S. and other nations are currently vetting how the elimination of tariffs on the proposed green goods would affect members’ markets.
 
WTO members are also aiming for two-thirds of the countries to ratify the Trade Facilitation Agreement so that it can take effect by the ministers' meeting in December. The European Parliament approved the TFA on Thursday, bringing the global trade body closer to that goal.
 
Free trade treaty ratification rests squarely on Executive
 
September 10, 2015 - 9:32AM 
Don Rothwell
 
The government has a number of options to get the contentious China Australia Free Trade Agreement over the line.
 
As debate continues to swirl over the China Australia Free Trade Agreement some of the fundamentals of the way in which Australia engages in treaty-making have been forgotten. A closer assessment of the processes applied within the Australian government to treaty-making, including the role of the Parliament, suggests that the Abbott government has in fact a number of options available to it to ratify the agreement and see it successfully enter into force before year's end.
 
The negotiation of treaties in Australia rests exclusively with the Executive under the constitution. There is no formal role for the Parliament in this process, nor is there a formal role for the states or other interest groups such as industry bodies or the unions. In the case of some particular treaties, it may well be prudent for the government to undertake wide-ranging consultations, and Trade Minister Andrew Robb frequently notes that such discussions did take place between the Abbott government, the ACTU and other peak unions during the  free trade agreement negotiations.
 
    The Abbott government is not bound by what the Joint Standing Committee on Treaties says in its report. The committee's finding and recommendations can be ignored.
 
Once a treaty has been drafted, in most cases the government first signs and then ratifies the agreement. The China-Australia Free Trade Agreement was signed in Canberra by both Australia and China on June 15, 2015, but it will only enter into force and become legally binding once both countries have ratified the treaty, which is a separate process. Treaty ratification is also an act of the Executive in the Australian system. Importantly, there is no requirement that the Parliament (including the Senate) ratify the treaty. Therefore any suggestion that the Senate needs to ratify the treaty, as is the practice in United States, is not accurate.
 
Nevertheless, in 1996 the Howard government introduced reforms to Australia's treaty-making processes which remain in place today. The Joint Standing Committee on Treaties, a parliamentary committee, conducts inquiries into treaties that Australia has under review and receives submissions on whether the government should move to formal ratification. The practice of the committee has been to issue reports into treaties under consideration and make recommendations as to treaty action. Only very occasionally has a treaty not been recommended for ratification.
Advertisement
 
The China-Australia Free Trade Agreement was tabled by the committee HYPERLINK "x-apple-data-detectors://14" on June 17, public hearings were held in August and September and the committee is scheduled to report HYPERLINK "x-apple-data-detectors://15" on October 19.However, and most importantly, the Abbott government is not bound by what the committee says in its report. The committee's finding and recommendations can be ignored, which has occurred in the past, or they can be taken into account by the government as it moves towards ratification.
 
A limiting factor for a government may be that the treaty requires legislation to enable certain provisions to be given effect under Australian law, and this is the case with the China-Australia Free Trade Agreement. Accordingly, the Abbott government is mindful that it needs to ensure passage of legislation through the Parliament to give effect to the treaty. This is where the concerns raised over the treaty by Labor become an issue as Senate endorsement of the implementing legislation could be blocked.
 
Traditionally the practice in Australia has been to await passage of the implementing legislation before ratifying the treaty, but this could be dispensed with, as formally it is not required for the purposes of ratification. Nevertheless, it does pose a risk for a government that may subsequently find itself unable to meet its treaty obligations if the relevant laws are blocked in the parliament.
 
What options then does the Abbott government have then with respect to the free trade agreement? First, following the committee report it could move towards ratification without waiting for legislation to be passed by parliament. This strategy runs the risk that aspects of the treaty may not be given effect to under Australian law, which China would rightly object to. Second, following the  committee report the government could press ahead with the passage of legislation, but given some of Labor's objections this may be difficult to achieve without cross-bench and Greens Senate support. Nevertheless Labor's Treasury spokesperson, Chris Bowen, has hinted that Labor may be open to negotiating on the terms of the legislation, presumably to provide better safeguards for Australian workers.
 
If that is the case, this hurdle could be cleared. After the committee reports the government could also seek to renegotiate aspects of the free trade agreement. While this is certainly possible from a treaty law perspective, and the government may be able to justify this approach based on committee recommendations, this depends upon China being agreeable to a renegotiation, which may be doubtful. An alternative may be to seek to reach certain agreed understandings with China on some of the contentious aspects of the free trade agreement by way of side letters or accompanying memorandums of understanding.
 
These additional instruments could be negotiated relatively informally and would play an important role in how Australia and China go about interpreting critical aspects of the agreement, thereby providing more certainty over some contentious aspects of the trade deal. Bearing in mind that the free trade agreement will more than likely outlive the Abbott government, this may not only be the best option available to ensure ratification but to also avoid any future disagreements over the treaty's interpretation.
 
Donald Rothwell is Professor of International Law and deputy Dean at the ANU College of Law at the Australian National University.
 
China continues to promote world trade
 
HYPERLINK "http://cctv.com/" CCTV.com
09-10-2015 15:52 BJT
 
By Liu Heguang  deputy director of Foreign Agricultural Economy and Trade Institute of Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences
 
China, the world's second biggest economy with the world's largest population, has become the 16th member to accept the Trade Facilitation Agreement of the WTO (World Trade Organization) recently.
 
In order to promote world trade facilitation, China has pushed for negotiations to accelerate its implementation. Initiated in October 2004, negotiations have progressed very slowly with an agreement formally approved at the Bali ministerial conference in December 2013.
 
However, the agreement has not taken effect as scheduled on July 31, 2014, because India has insisted on resolving food safety problems. In November 2014, the United States and India have agreed on trade facilitation and then the WTO General Council passed the agreement and launched it into acceptance procedures.
 
The agreement can come into effect if two thirds of members accept it. This is the first multilateral trade treaty endorsed by the WTO.
 
China remains positive about negotiations. Beijing had participated in the making of eight proposals including: trade regulations, risk management, follow-up inspections, priority areas, technology aids, capacity building and more, putting forward plans to help the Doha Round equitable development go into effect.
 
China submitted the implementation plan on June 30, 2014. The Chinese government believes the trade deal will lower costs and drive global economic growth. As the first developing country to accept the agreement, China has played an exemplary role.
 
China has carried out policy reforms for free trade zones in Shanghai, east China, Tianjin, north China, Guangdong and Fujian, south China. In a bid to clear trade barriers and create convenient customs procedures, Beijing has boosted modernization of the port management system nationwide, which demonstrates China’s sincere efforts to promote world trade.
 
China and Georgia Start Free-Trade Talks
 
September 10, 2015 - 11:51am, by Giorgi Lomsadze
 
The duel between the West and Russia for the Caucasus might just be becoming a truel. In its continued fervor to embrace China and attract Chinese hunger for global investment and exports, Georgia has launched talks on free trade with Beijing.
 
“Our main goal is to make the most prudent use of our strategic location,” said Georgian Prime Minister Irakli Gharibashvili on September 10 at the World Economic Forum in the Chinese city of Dalian, where the Georgian leader met his Chinese counterpart, Li Kepiang.
 
Dalian is on the ancient East-West trade route known as the Silk Road, which China is looking to bring back to life by investing in transportation and energy infrastructure along the way.
 
“Georgia is Europe’s natural gateway to Asia, as it is Europe’s eastern most [syc] point both by land and sea,” Gharibashvili elaborated in a September 10 op-ed in the English-language China Daily, seen as a Beijing mouthpiece.
 
In his commentary Gharibashvili went through the selling points for Georgia as a critical hub in the Chinese government’s transnational project for integrating Chinese and Eurasian trade and investment.
 
With its economy still struggling for a breather, Tbilisi hopes that Georgia’s investment-friendly tax policy and free-trade agreement with the European Union will encourage more Chinese business to provide a much-needed financial boost. Gharibashvili’s office said that Chinese officials will visit Tbilisi in mid-October for a Silk Road conference.
 
The event would be the second such get-together in nearly as many months. In late August, Tbilisi hosted a gathering of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, seen by some as a Chinese rival to the World Bank and the IMF. The 57-member bank picked its president, former Chinese Finance Minister Jin Liqun, in Tbilisi on August 25.
 
With its plans for Georgia, China is coming to a region aflush with complex, criss-crossing economic and geopolitical torrents. Georgia is potentially the first country in the South Caucasus to strike up free-trade relations with the world’s largest economy, while already having a free-trade deal concluded with the EU. Neighboring Armenia has tied itself to Russia by sharing a customs zone. Hydrocarbon-rich Azerbaijan alone claims that it shuns economic clubs.
 
Armenia Presses for Free Trade With Iran
 
Fri Sep 11, 2015 7:37
 
TEHRAN (FNA)- Officials in Yerevan announced that the Eurasian Economic Union (EEU) has accepted their proposal for endorsing a Free Trade Agreement (FTA) with Iran.
 
Armenia and Iran have for years discussed ways of removing or at least reducing tariff barriers in bilateral trade. Armenia is no longer allowed to negotiate bilateral free-trade deals due to its membership in the EEU, effective from January 2015. It can enter into such arrangements only together with Russia and the three other ex-Soviet members of the bloc, Massipost reported on Friday.
 
“About three months ago, we formally appealed to the Eurasian Economic Commission and all member states, proposing the start of a process of creating a more liberal trade regime between the EEU and Iran,” Deputy Foreign Minister Shavarsh Kocharian told journalists. He linked the proposal with Iran’s landmark nuclear agreement with the United States and other world powers envisaging a gradual lifting of international sanctions against Tehran.
 
Yerevan’s initiative is clearly motivated by a desire to facilitate Armenian manufacturers’ access to the vast Iranian market that has long been protected by very high import duties.
 
According to official statistics, Armenia’s trade with Iran stood at a relatively modest $291 million last year. Armenian imports of Iranian goods accounted for 70 percent of that figure.
 
Iran and Armenia have taken major strides towards widening and deepening of their relations in recent years, particularly in the economic sector.
 
In his meeting with Armenian Energy and Natural Resources Minister Ervand Zakharyan in Armenia's capital last June, Iranian Deputy Foreign Minister for Asia and Oceania Ebrahim Rahimpour underlined the need for the further expansion of economic cooperation, specially increase in power exchanges between the two countries.
 
The Armenian energy minister pointed to the Yerevan-Tehran energy cooperation, and said, "The annual power exchanges of Armenia and Iran currently exceeds 1 billion KW/H and we hope that the figure will considerably increase after the launch of the third electricity transmission line between the two countries.
 
Zakharyan reiterated that the construction of the third transmission line for power exchanges between Armenia and Iran will begin in less than two months and will be accomplished by 2018.
 
In his meeting with Armenian Foreign Minister Eduard Nalbandian, the Iranian deputy foreign minister discussed broadening of parliamentary ties and implementation of joint projects.
 
"We have many pending projects in Armenia that we hope will become operational very soon," Rahimpour said during the meeting.
 
He pointed to the good relations between Tehran and Yerevan, and said, "We have many capabilities for investment and rendering technical and engineering services to Armenia."
 
 
Steel import duty may be hiked further
 
By Subhash Narayan           Sep 10 2015 , New Delhi
 
Integrated players cheer while SMEs cry foul
 
The government may further raise the import duty on steel, the third time in last four months, to provide additional cushion to the domestic industry that is fast losing market share to cheaper steel originating from China, Japan, Russia and South Korea.
 
Sources in the government said the finance ministry is set to raise the duty levels on flat steel products such as hot rolled and cold rolled coils by 2.5 per cent to take the total import duty on the product to 15 per cent.
 
This is the peak level to which import levies can be increased by the government.
 
The finance ministry had raised the peak customs duty rate on steel to 15 per cent from 10 per cent in Budget 2015-16 as an enabling provision for the future changes in rate.
 
This has provided a leeway to further increase import tariff on steel without having to worry about restrictive provisions of the World Trade Organisation (WTO).
 
“Further duty revision on steel products could be finalised this month so that some check is exercised on dumping of cheap steel into the country,” said a government official privy to the development
 
“This would also act as a deterrent till WTO-compliant measures such as provisional safeguard duty is imposed after due process,” he added on the matter.
 
Apart from increasing the duty levels on flat steel from the present 12.5 per cent to 15 per cent, the revision could also increase levy on long steel products (including stainless steel rods and bars) used by housing and constructions sectors to 12.5 per cent from 10 per cent now.
 
Finance ministry officials are likely to meet with their counterparts in the ministries of steel and heavy industry over the next few days to discuss the contours of fresh duty revision in the wake of the rough weather being faced by the domestic steel industry on account of cheap imports.
 
The proposal on a fresh duty hike would be the third in less than four months for the steel sector. Faced with changed market dynamics, the government HYPERLINK "x-apple-data-detectors://29" on June 16 raised the import duty on flat steel products (hot rolled and cold rolled coils) to 10 per cent from 7.5 per cent level.
 
In the case of long products, used by housing and constructions sectors, the duty was raised from 5 per cent to 7.5 per cent. It further raised duty on certain steel grades by 2.5 in August month as part of the efforts to prevent serious injury to the domestic steel sector.
 
Apart from duty revisions, in June, India also slapped anti-dumping duty of up to $ 316 per tonne on imports of certain steel products from three countries, including China. This week, the Directorate General of Safeguards (DGS) recommended imposition of a provisional 20 per cent safeguard duty on imports of hot rolled coil steel for a period of 200 days to protect the domestic industry from a surge in cheap steel imports.
 
“The proposal for a fresh duty increase by the finance ministry is a welcome step as it would give some respite to the domestic industry facing an onslaught of steel dumping. But government should also quickly apply other WTO compliant interventions to save the industry from an impending crisis,” said JSW Steel joint managing director and group CFO Seshagiri Rao.
 
Even with current duty levels, flat steel products from China, Japan, Korea and Russia entering Indian markets are cheaper by Rs 1000 to Rs 1,500 than comparable domestic steel products. This problem has arisen as steel is being sold in India at rates below its selling price in origin nation.
 
For example, steel is priced around $ 500 a tonne in Japan but the same steel is reaching Indian shores at prices ranging between $ 350-360 (cost and freight C&F) a tonne without any duty as India has a comprehensive economic partnership agreement (CEPA) there. Similarly, steel from China is coming at $ 320 –330 a tonne.
 
“Duty revision and increase is one of the important steps to check dumping of steel but more efforts would be required contain the situation,” said Koushik Chatterjee, group executive director (finance and corporate), Tata Steel.
 
“While fiscal measures are important to counter dumping of steel into the country, the government should also look at revising some of the trade agreements it has with countries such as Korea and Japan that allows steel imports at lower duty,” said a senior official of SAIL who did not wish to be named.
 
Hot rolled coil is the primary product being produced by integrated steel players. The dumping of steel resulted in inventory build-up by domestic companies (for HRC of width 600 mm or more). From a level of 6.36 lakh tonne in 2013-14, the inventory of this grade of steel has gone up to 6.57 lakh tonne at the end of Q1 FY 16.
 
 
WTO Members Notify Preferential Measures Under LDC Services Waiver
 
9 September 2015  Bridges
 
Over the past few weeks, Turkey, the US, and Mexico have joined the list of WTO members who have notified the Council for Trade in Services (CTS) their preferential measures in support of least developed countries’ (LDCs) services and services suppliers.
 
These new submissions come on top of the notifications made by the end of July by eleven WTO members of the preferential measures that they would offer as part of efforts geared towards the operationalisation of the global trade body’s LDCs “Services Waiver” adopted in 2011.
 
To date, the other notifying members include Canada, Australia, Norway, Korea, China, Hong Kong, Chinese Taipei, Singapore, New Zealand, Switzerland, and Japan. The European Union and Chile reported in July that their notifications would be submitted as soon as their domestic procedures are completed.
 
Once the Council has been notified, members can implement preferential treatment related to market access. Preferential treatment regarding any other measure must receive approval by the Council.
 
Other members are being urged to notify their preferences, particularly ahead of the WTO’s Tenth Ministerial Conference, which will take place in Nairobi, Kenya in December, with many LDCs saying they hope to see the implementation of the outcomes of the wider ”Bali Package” approved at the last ministerial two years ago.
 
Some commentators say that once a “critical mass” of notifications have been secured, the next step will consist in translating the offers into real LDC services exports.
 
“Turning these preferences into real market opportunities will require LDCs to confront their supply side capacity constraints and reform their domestic regulatory framework,” commented one observer.
 
“Market access alone will not generate the desired results from the waiver. It should be accompanied by policy and regulatory reforms on the part of the LDC and changes in domestic regulation of preference granting countries,” said Darlington Mwape, Senior Fellow at the International Centre for Trade and Sustainable Development. (Editor’s note: ICTSD is the publisher of Bridges Weekly.)
 
On the table
 
United States
 
The US has indicated that it will provide more favourable treatment to LDCs in a number of business services, such as foreign legal consulting services, accounting, auditing, engineering services, research and development, technical testing and analysis services, and other business services including translation and interpretation services. Also included in the 4 September notification are mailing services, special design services, entertainment production and distribution, environmental services, physical well-being services, road freight transport, and cargo handling services with the exception of maritime or air transport services, among others.
 
In all of these sectors and subsectors, the US would allow the supply of services “without limitations” from the territory of an LDC into the US or directly to a service consumer in the US. Subject to certain conditions, the supply of services could be operated through commercial presence in the US or through the presence of natural persons in the US for the purpose of the service.
 
While some sectors/subsectors are notified on a country-wide level, others are covered on a state-by-state basis. For example, foreign legal consulting services granted access without limitations in some states, while permitted only subject to an in-state office requirement in others or not permitted at all.
 
China
 
China, reiterating in its notification the great importance it attaches to LDC development, says that it will provide preferential treatment to LDCs in the following areas: capacity building and comprehensive assistance; authorised destination status; and market access.
 
Under capacity building, China has announced the intensification of training programmes on medical services, tourism services, and software and information technology services. China will also continue to assist LDCs in the construction of their services facilities as well as infrastructure essential to services, including roads, ports, railways and telecommunication networks.
 
Regarding market access, this has been expanded under Mode 3 and Mode 4 to allow for the entry of “business visitors” for up to six months and the establishment of wholly foreign-owned enterprises and joint venture enterprises.
 
Norway
 
Norway announced that its preferential treatment is being made in sectors and modes of supply across the board, including areas of particular export interest to least-developed countries, as set out in the LDC collective request issued a year ago. It refers to expanded access for business visitors, contractual service suppliers, and independent professionals. Norway will further allow access to a number of specific services sub-sectors including computer-related services, communications, finance, education, transport, and construction and engineering related services, among others.
 
Canada
 
Canada’s treatment for least developed country services and services suppliers in areas identified in the LDC collective request are extensive. It covers the temporary movement of natural persons, otherwise known as Mode 4, providing temporary entry for certain categories of business persons free from economic needs and labour market tests. As part of capacity building efforts, it makes reference to the facilitation of students through work permits and scholarships. Canada also provides LDCs with more extensive liberalisation commitments in the area of financial services. Other provisions cover the cultural sector, double taxation and tax refunds, transport, and logistics-related services and intellectual property.
 
Singapore
 
Singapore, in its notification to the CTS, announced that it will provide preferential treatment by way of market access for Mode 2 (consumption abroad) and Mode 3 (commercial presence) in the following sub-sectors: laundry collection services, textile and fur product cleaning services, dry cleaning services, pressing services, and dyeing and colouring services.
 
The other members that have made submissions to the CTS have notified similar preferences, including expanding access for the temporary movement of business people (Mode 4) from LDCs for a range of services professions and occupations; waiving fees for business and employment visas for LDC persons; not imposing economic needs and labour market tests for LDC members; and extending the duration of stay of LDC professionals in the markets of preference-granting members.
 
Enhancing LDC participation in world services trade
 
These notifications build upon the outcome of a high-level meeting held in Geneva this past February, where 25 WTO members indicated concrete sectors and modes of supply under which they intend to provide preferential treatment to LDCs’ services and services suppliers. It was decided that indications of preferences stated then would have to be followed up by formal notifications to the CTS specifying the actual preferences.
 
Members agreed in February that they should endeavour to do this by 31 July at the latest, though preferably at the earliest possible opportunity. (See Bridges Africa, 9 February 2015)
 
The LDC Services Waiver, adopted in 2011 at the Eighth Ministerial Conference in Geneva, Switzerland allows developing and developed country members to provide preferential treatment to services and service suppliers from LDCs. This effectively permits them to derogate from the Most-Favoured Nation principle as provided for in the WTO’s General Agreement on Trade in Services, where members are obligated to provide non-discriminatory treatment to services and service suppliers of other WTO members. The waiver will expire in 2026 – that is, 15 years from its adoption on 17 December 2011.
 
However, as no member made use of the LDC services waiver between 2011 and the Bali Ministerial Conference in December 2013, WTO members were further encouraged in Bali to “operationalise” the waiver so that least developed countries could effectively harness potential economic benefits from the waiver.
 
In July 2014, the LDC Group submitted a collective request regarding the preferential treatment it wanted to see for LDC services exports. The collective request featured various types of requests, ranging from horizontal measures to very specific sectoral ones. These included, among others, measures in the areas of tourism, banking, transport, education, information and communication technology (ICT), business process outsourcing (BPO), and creative industry services. (See Bridges Africa, 25 July 2014) 
 
The role of trade in services in global trade is growing exponentially, with WTO figures suggesting that it accounts for over 70 percent of global GDP, 45 percent of global employment, and around 40 percent of foreign direct investment. Analysts note that the reality is an altogether different one for LDCs, which constitute roughly 0.6 percent of global services trade. However, at the national level services’ contribution to GDP is significant, accounting in certain cases to more than 50 percent of GDP.
 
ICTSD reporting.
 
Mooted free-trade area seen boosting intra-African minerals trade flows
 
11th September 2015 By: Ilan Solomons Creamer Media Staff Writer
 
Formal negotiations are taking place among the 54 member States of the African Union (AU) to create a free-trade zone on the continent by 2017. The AU Assembly launched the Continental Free Trade Area (CFTA) negotiations during the twenty-fifth Ordinary Summit of Heads of State and Government HYPERLINK "x-apple-data-detectors://44" on June 15, in Johannesburg, South Africa. To meet the 2017 implementation deadline, members are expected to reduce trade barriers among them by drastically reducing export and import duties and, in some cases, waiving visa requirements. Kenyan President Uhuru Kenyatta has hailed the launch of the negotiations as a critical step towards reducing poverty and doubling economic development on the continent. South African Department of Trade and Industry international trade and economic development acting deputy director-general Xolelwa Mlumbi-Peter tells Mining Weekly that the CFTA is a critical initiative aimed at opening up market access opportunities for all sectors of the South African economy, including minerals and petrochemicals. “It will enable South African products to enter the markets of other countries duty and quota free,” she points out. Mlumbi-Peter says similar production and export structures and the relative dependence on primary commodities on the continent are inhibiting factors in boosting intraregional trade. Therefore, Africa’s trade in mineral and petro- chemicals products is low, even though these products are not, “relatively speaking”, subjected to the high tariff barriers, she notes. Mlumbi-Peter states that the higher intra-trade share among nonfuel exporters in Africa supports the argument that a more diversified production base and beneficiation of minerals and petrochemicals products in Africa could provide impetus for deepening regional trade. Structural transformation – as discussed in several publications by the United Nations Confer- ence on Trade and Development – accompanied by a fostering of manufacturing development and greater economic diversification, could reinforce developmental gains for Africa, including improved intra-African trade. Mlumbi-Peter says one of the biggest benefits of the CFTA would be the conducive environment created to develop regional value chains for the mining and petrochemicals sectors. “It will also benefit other associated sectors, such as those of capital equipment and chemi- cals, if they meet the necessary rules of origin. It will also improve the investment prospects of these sectors, owing to economies of scale associated with a larger market.” However, for these value chains to be feasible, it is important that African governments use the policy space they have to promote beneficiation of natural resources at source, she points out. Further, Mlumbi-Peter stresses that it is crucial to undertake value-chain mapping that will clearly identify the potential for these value chains, based on the competitive advantages of respective countries. She highlights that it will also be important for the South African private sector to promote mutually beneficial partnerships with other Africa-based companies, which could include technology and skills transfer, supporting the productive capacities in other countries and creating value chains, when investing in other countries. This will ensure that the benefits of the CFTA are not confined to a few countries, but contribute to the sustainable development of the African continent through spillover effects, says Mlumbi-Peter. The CFTA is not limited to trade in goods. It also includes trade in services, which is important for global trade and provides a backbone for industrial development. Cost-effective, state-of-the-art services are, therefore, of the utmost importance when promoting a competitive industrial sector in Africa, she explains. A manufacturing sector requires functional and efficient trade services, hence, the importance of countries ensuring that regu- lations encourage a conducive environment for trade and investment while taking issues of public interest into account. Mlumbi-Peter says “most importantly”, the CFTA is expected to improve the movement of goods and services through better customs cooperation among African countries. “It will also result in the harmonisation of customs documentation and processes, thus enhancing trade facilitation.” She says, according to the World Bank, June 2014 Doing Business study, which measures the time and cost (excluding tariffs) of exporting and importing a standardised cargo of goods by sea, it takes on average about 30.5 days to export goods in sub-Saharan Africa. Mlumbi-Peter notes that this is significantly higher than the average for Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries of about 10.5 days. The cost to export a container is estimated at $2 200 for sub-Saharan Africa, compared with about $1 080 for OECD countries. Most of the 34 OECD member countries are high- income economies with a very high human development index and are regarded as developed countries, such as Austria, Canada, the US, the UK and Australia. Mlumbi-Peter says there is an increasing realisation among African countries that their primary minerals and fuel are not merely sources of income generation, but rather offer a platform from which to enhance greater industrial activity. “The implementation of the CFTA might require using policy tools to promote the beneficiation of resources in Africa through the development of regional value chains. “Where cross-border value chains in such beneficiation are built, we might see considerable volumes shifting to intra-Africa flows, rather than Africa third-party flows,” she states. Mining Industry Association of Southern Africa president and Botswana Chamber of Mines CEO Charles Siwawa concurs with Mlumbi-Peter. He adds that increased mineral resources commodity trading among African countries will reduce transportation costs and thereby increase profit margins for commodity traders and, ultimately, mining companies on the continent. Siwawa believes that reduced costs might also assist in making mineral resources more affordable for poorer African countries to buy and process. “Therefore, the CFTA could enable greater mineral beneficiation, as well as infrastructural and manufacturing development throughout the continent.” He says the CFTA will ultimately assist in removing the “thinking-in-silos mentality” that has blighted many African countries’ development. Research and investment advisory firm Frontier Advisory CEO Dr Martyn Davies tells Mining Weekly he believes that the CFTA is a laudable initiative. However, he says South Africa has a bit of a “schizophrenic foreign trade policy” – although the country favours free-trade agreements, very few of these have ever been realised or upheld. Additionally, South Africa’s tough visa process is making it increasingly difficult for people to enter the country. Davies points out that certain African groupings, such as the East African Community, have been very progressive in regional trade. Conversely, other regional bodies, such as the Southern African Development Community and the Economic Community of West African States have not been as successful in promoting regional trade, he notes. “A strong argument could be made that intraregional trade should be improved before continentalwide trade is made possible or considered even remotely viable.” Further, Davies highlights that there have been many discussions for several decades in the AU (and the former Organisation of African Unity) about having seamless borders and one-stop trade facilities across the continent. However, he says many African borders remain highly congested and ill equipped to handle greater trading volumes, owing to inadequate infrastructure, mismanagement and corrupt officials. Until these issues have been addressed Pan-African trade is likely to remain unachievable, at least in the short to medium term, he comments. “African governments need to do their utmost to create business-friendly environments in their respective countries . . . They should see how Asian countries, such as China, Japan, Singapore and South Korea . . . have achieved their successes. “They will certainly discover that capitalism is the oxygen of wealth creation and of successful societies,” Davies concludes.
 
Belarus' fast accession to WTO welcomed
 
MINSK, 11 September (BelTA) – Members of the World Trade Organization and its management support the idea of Belarus' accession to the organization as fast as possible. These matters were discussed during the meeting of the WTO Secretariat delegation and Belarusian Minister of Foreign Affairs Vladimir Makei, the Ministry's representatives told BelTA.
 
The delegation was led by Chiedu Osakwe, Director of the Accessions Division of the WTO Secretariat. During the meeting the sides discussed further steps to organize negotiations between Belarus and the WTO.
 
In turn, the Belarusian side confirmed its commitment to completing the negotiations on joining the WTO. It was mentioned that Belarus' membership in the WTO should contribute to export diversification and the development of the country's economy.
 
The sides agreed a roadmap to guide consequent negotiations and the necessary technical work, including modus operandi of the working group on Belarus.
 
The GOP’s Donald Trump nightmare may soon get a whole lot worse
 
By Greg Sargent September 11 at 2:51 PM
Washington Post
 
So you think Donald Trump’s demagoguery on immigration has created problems for the other GOP candidates? Well, another very ripe opportunity for Trump to make his GOP rivals even more miserable may be lurking right around the corner, and it could expose the same sort of schism between GOP elites and GOP voters that Trump’s forays into immigration policy have.
 
I’m talking about the massive global trade deal called the Trans-Pacific Partnership. Some time in the next six months — in late 2015 or in early 2016 — the participating nations may finally reach a deal on the TPP. That may well come just when the GOP primaries are heating up.
 
Virtually all of the major GOP presidential candidates, including Jeb Bush, Scott Walker, and Marco Rubio, all support the TPP, as do Republican Congressional leaders.
 
But, in a little noticed move a few days ago, Trump signaled that he might be headed in a very different direction on the TPP soon enough. After his terrific and wonderful rally outside the Capitol the other day, Trump met with Senator Jeff Sessions, and both men enthusiastically recounted that they had had a good conversation about immigration and …. trade. Said Trump: “The meeting was great!”
 
Sessions is a leading opponent of the TPP. He has warned that the TPP could harm American workers and allow China to join the deal later without the approval of the U.S. Congress; he has also said that it won’t do anything to counter Chinese currency manipulation and could facilitate the flow of “foreign workers” into the United States.
 
Trump himself railed against the TPP last June, also warning that Obama would later let China get onto the deal through the back door (because he’s weak) and more generally arguing that the TPP would make it easier for China to continue feasting out of American workers’ lunch buckets.
 
In other words, the coming debate over the TPP gives Trump the perfect opportunity to do what he’s already been doing to great effect: test the true nature of opinion among rank-and-file Republican voters, by forcing real debates out into the open on issues that had previously remained deliberately vague or walled off from real discussion by GOP orthodoxy.
 
Trump has openly called for mass deportations, forcing some of his GOP rivals to openly debate what should happen to the 11 million and revealing in very raw terms the differences between GOP voters and elites on the issue. Trump has called for hiking capital gains taxes, raising the question of whether GOP voters really support GOP dogma on tax cuts for the rich. Trump’s vow not to cut Social Security benefits — when party orthodoxy requires a devotion to cutting entitlements — has also played a similar role.
 
The TPP seems like the perfect opening for Trump to turn up the volume on his particular strain of right wing populism, which includes harmonies such as the promise of protectionism for American workers to “make America great” at a time when they are threatened by immigrants, China, and shadowy global elites. With other GOP candidates backing the TPP, this could provide another test of whether GOP voter opinion really is aligned with GOP elite opinion, this time on free trade.
 
This is also a ripe one for Trump because he’s a billionaire, which means he’ll have some measure of economic credibility among Republican voters. The other day, reflecting on the possibility that Marco Rubio (who supports eliminating capital gains taxes) might get into a brawl with Trump (who would raise them), Brian Beutler suggested: “Trump would love nothing more than for a career elected official like Rubio to lecture him about the impact tax rates have on investment and growth.”
 
Trump would probably love it if the career politicians he’s facing off against lecture him about the impact that global free trade has on the fortunes of American workers, too. Fun times ahead!
 
When there's no happily ever after to trade talks
 
 Jean-Pierre Lehmann
The Strait Times
 
Countries are not adapting to new global reality, so it's time to relook the trade deal approach
 
The history of the global trading system since the World Trade Organisation (WTO) was established in 1995 makes for a dismal narrative. Hardly any progress has been made in laying the foundations for a solid global trade architecture for the 21st century, let alone building an edifice.
 
Trade is very much at the core of globalisation. If the trade system disintegrates, globalisation will, too, and we may find ourselves back in a scenario of global divisiveness and conflict.
 
Singapore, as a nation whose spectacular growth story came from trade and whose welfare depends on trade, will suffer considerably from the consequences of renewed protectionism. Indeed, Singapore should assume a leadership role in the setting of the global trade agenda and building of the global trade framework.
 
    The failure of the global trade agenda essentially reflects an incapacity of both the established and emerging players to adjust to the new global economic realities and to fashion a reformed global trade governance structure.
 
The latest chapter in the dismal narrative was written in Maui, Hawaii, last month. Did the TPP (Trans-Pacific Partnership) effectively die there? The same question has been asked for the last decade about the WTO Doha Development Round: Is it dead? Perhaps the answer can be found from General Douglas MacArthur's farewell address to the US Congress: "Old soldiers never die, they just fade away." The same may be true of trade treaties: They never die, they just fade away into irrelevance and impotence.
 
TPP'S ODD BEDFELLOWS
 
Let me say that from the outset I was opposed to the TPP.
 
The composition of the membership seemed odd, defying logic. The 12 members - Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore, the United States and Vietnam - are a diverse and disparate group geographically, economically, politically, culturally, etc. There was also a huge anomaly as it was dominated by two giants of the world economy - Japan and the US. Indeed, as negotiators from other countries complained, the "mega-regional" in reality boiled down to a Tokyo-Washington bilateral pact.
 
Furthermore, while, of course, all trade deals have a geopolitical dimension, the TPP appeared more like a geopolitically-driven policy with a trade dimension. The exclusion of China was seen as a weapon in the US' "pivot to Asia" policy armoury, underlined by the comment made in a speech by US Secretary of Defence Ash Carter: "TPP is as important to me as another aircraft carrier."
 
The failure of the ministers to conclude TPP negotiations in Maui confirms the view that it is a non-viable proposition. A similar fate awaits the TPP's mega-regional sister, TTIP (Trans-Atlantic Trade and Investment Partnership). As nothing seems to be working, further disintegration of the global trade system will occur.
 
What I fear is that these failures illustrate what is becoming increasingly alarming - the failure of globalisation. In a speech shortly after the creation of the WTO, its director-general, the late Renato Ruggiero, said: "We lived in a divided world (during the Cold War decades); now we live in an integrated world. And an integrated world is far more difficult to manage."
 
In the Cold War-divided days when Gatt (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade), the WTO's precursor, was the international trade institution, it was run by what was called "the Quad", comprising the US, the European Union, Canada and Japan. They were fundamentally on the same wavelength, and geopolitical allies under the predominance of the US.
 
This was also a time when 85 per cent of world trade occurred between the OECD (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development) countries. Apart from the emergence of the "Four Little Dragons" (Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea and Taiwan), there were no outside players. So what the Quad decided, the rest of the membership complied with.
 
How dramatically things have changed. The failure of the global trade agenda essentially reflects an incapacity of both the established and emerging players to adjust to the new global economic realities and to fashion a reformed global trade governance structure.
 
The future of the global trading system, like the future of the world economy generally, will be determined by developments in emerging Asia - China, East Asia and South Asia. The established players, the EU, US, Canada and Japan, obviously still matter in trade volume and policy, but they are not undergoing the deep and extremely rapid socio-economic transformations that this region is experiencing.
 
With the exception of a few wealthy nations, notably Singapore, most of Asia is still at a middle-income level, with great expectations of its coming generations for future growth and prosperity. This depends greatly on the future of trade.
 
Singapore has not only accumulated great advantage from global trade but also great acumen and experience, including a very high level of policymaking professionalism, as both an Asian regional and global hub, with a great deal of knowledge stored in its universities, research institutes and think-tanks. With these attributes, and as one of the original Asian NIEs (newly industrialised economies), Singapore clearly has an important role to play.
 
Rather than joining other misguided initiatives such as TPP, Singapore should lead in seeking to restore the centre of the global trade agenda to the multilateral sphere: the WTO. This would not be a question of reviving the Doha Round - it is dead - but fashioning a revitalised and reformed structure, one that would be inclusive, equitable, sustainable and dynamic. Singapore should set up as the hub of the global trade-policy debate for the 21st century.
 
• The writer is emeritus professor of international political economy at IMD, Lausanne, Switzerland, founder of The Evian Group and visiting professor at Hong Kong University and NIIT University in India.




Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.