Europe Takes Hard Line With Greece
Key global development summit to open in Ethiopia
Business of saving the poor arrives in Addis Ababa
India warns US of dumping probe in solar panel dispute
Australia urges action over coal tests
Forum to protest against education tagged as 'service'
Pacific trade deal in sight, says Australia
A Pacific Trade Pact Could Feed a Hungry Planet
Europe and Russia Must Start Building Bridges


Europe Takes Hard Line With Greece

13 July 2015

Dow Jones Institutional News

BRUSSELS—European leaders meeting here Sunday and into the morning Monday edged closer to a new bailout deal for Greece that would require a near-total surrender of the government of Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras to creditors' demands.

A statement prepared by the currency union's finance ministers before the summit, reviewed by The Wall Street Journal, said negotiations on a new rescue couldn't start until the Parliament in Athens had passed pension overhauls and sales-tax increases, along with further financial-policy measures. The statement said the parliamentary votes would have to happen by Wednesday.

The statement foresaw Greece's financing needs rising to as much as €86 billion ($96 billion), from the €74 billion estimated on Saturday by the institutions representing Greece's creditors.

The finance ministers' statement was intended to serve as the basis of discussions for the leaders' talks, which were continuing into the morning Monday.

Despite the progress in talks, Greece's future in Europe's currency union still hangs in the balance. If no deal can be reached, the statement suggested that "Greece should be offered swift negotiations on a time-out from the euro area," although it didn't explain how such a temporary exit would work.

The sentence was placed in brackets—a sign that it wasn't backed by all 19 finance ministers—and several European officials said it may well be removed by leaders over the course of the night. Nevertheless, it made clear what is at stake in negotiations.

Passing tough new bailout measures through Greece's Parliament could split Mr. Tsipras's left-wing Syriza party, which in turn could trigger fresh elections. And there was no answer yet on how Greece would make a €4.2 billion interest and bond payment to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Central Bank that is due July 20.

The level of detail in the finance ministers' four-page statement underlined how much political goodwill Greece and Mr. Tsipras have lost during more than five months of often-acrimonious discussions.

"The most important currency has been lost, and that is trust," German Chancellor HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Angela Merkel said as she arrived for the summit. A deal to keep Greece in the currency union wouldn't be made "at all costs," she warned.

Mr. Tsipras appeared optimistic that a solution would still be reached, despite the difficult demands made by the other 18 euro countries.

"I am here, ready for an honest compromise," he said on his way into the leaders' summit. "We can reach an agreement tonight if all the parties want it."

Greek banks have been shut for two weeks, ever since Mr. Tsipras called a referendum on new austerity measures demanded by his government's creditors—the other eurozone governments and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"International Monetary Fund. The July 5 referendum ended with a resounding "no" to the measures, despite a large majority of Greeks wanting to stay in the currency union.

The measures laid out in Sunday's statement go beyond those rejected in last weekend's vote. They include changes to labor laws that would make it easier to fire workers, as well as the further liberalization of markets for products such as pharmaceuticals, milk and baked goods, the statement said. Greece also would have to privatize state assets, including the electricity network operator.

Another divisive part of the statement—also in brackets—is a call for the creation of an "external and independent fund" that would hold as much as €50 billion in state-owned assets slated to be privatized in the coming years. The proceeds of that selloff would be dedicated to reducing Greece's debt. "Such [a] fund would be managed by the Greek authorities under the supervision of the relevant European institutions," the statement said.

A similar idea, vehemently resisted by Greece, was floated in a German document. That document, the Journal reported on Saturday, also included the proposal for a "timeout" for Greece from the eurozone for "at least five years" to allow the country to restructure its debts.

The fund and other controversial elements of the plan were discussed in a smaller round during the summit Sunday evening. That breakout session included Ms. Merkel, French President Franç ois Hollande and Mr. Tsipras, along with his new finance minister, Euclid Tsakalotos.

The statement contained one possible concession to Greece, also in brackets. It said that the other eurozone countries would consider steps to make the country's debt load more manageable—but only after Greece had implemented many of the measures demanded by creditors. Two European officials said Germany and a handful of other countries, including Spain and Portugal, have raised objections to such talks.

A Greek government official said there were many problems with the ministers' statement and that the Greek government would "fight" to improve the text. Still, he expressed optimism that a final agreement would be reached.

It is unclear what a deal reached here would mean for Greece's banks. ATM withdrawals have been limited to €60 a day and no money can be transferred abroad after HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"the ECB declined to extend more emergency loans to buffer deposit outflows two weeks ago.

Greek banking officials have warned that lenders may run out of cash after Monday. Without new outside financing soon, the government in Athens may have to start printing its own money again.

The statement gave no indication of how to meet Greece's debt obligation in coming weeks. It said the government needed some €7 billion by July 20—which, along with HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"the ECB transfer, include payments to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"IMF—and an additional €5 billon in August.

Early Monday, a Greek government official said there are two issues left to resolve for a deal. One is the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"IMF's future involvement in a Greek bailout program, and the other is the privatization fund, the official said.

Nektaria Stamouli, Jason Douglas, Matthew Dalton and Todd Buell contributed to this article.

Write to Gabriele Steinhauser at gabriele.steinhauser@wsj.com and Viktoria Dendrinou at viktoria.dendrinou@wsj.com

(END) Dow Jones Newswires

Key global development summit to open in Ethiopia

Karim LEBHOUR 

13 July 2015

Agence France Presse

World leaders are meeting in Ethiopia's capital from Monday for a development financing summit presented as crucial for United Nations efforts to end global poverty and manage climate change by 2030.

The objective of the five days of talks, the third summit of its kind after talks in Monterrey in 2002 and Doha in 2008, is ambitious: laying out the ground rules for a fairer world of inclusive, low-carbon growth.

Concretely, that means deciding how to fill a colossal annual investment gap in key sustainable development sectors for developing nations -- estimated at up to $2.5 trillion annually according to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"UN's trade and development body HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"UNCTAD.

This in turn will enable the world body to push ahead with its 2015-2030 Sustainable Development Goals, which are due to be formally adopted in New York in October. There are 17 in all, ranging from ending poverty to providing universal access to sustainable energy.

The choice of Ethiopia as summit host highlights the importance of the issue for Africa, a continent which counts 33 out of the world's 49 least developed countries.

Despite concerns over its record on democracy and human rights, the country -- gripped by an appalling famine 30 years ago but now one of the world's fastest growing economies -- is seen as something as a model for development, having brought millions out of poverty and having invested heavily in infrastructure and key public services.

But preparatory talks in New York have so far failed to yield an agreement on a common summit outcome, with rich nations --- many of which are embroiled in their own financing woes and reluctant to up their aid budgets -- pushing for greater private sector involvement and for emerging economies like China, Brazil and India to share the burden.

"Many donors are questioning who should receive development aid. They tell middle income countries 'you're wealthy, you can raise your own money, let's focus on poor countries'," explained Gail Hurley, a policy specialist with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"United Nations Development Programme.

With much left to resolve during the summit, Oxfam policy advisor Claire Godfrey said success was far from guaranteed.

"What we don't want to see is platitudes and promises," she said.

"Any agreement that favours rich governments and commercial interests isn't worth the paper it is printed on. The talks so far have seen governments 'sitting on their hands' and waiting for others to make the first move."

The summit should nevertheless reaffirm the objective for rich nations to allocate 0.7 percent of their wealth to development aid for the poorest countries, something that has been rarely respected.

One of the main sticking points is the creation of an international tax organisation within the United Nations to fight against tax evasion by multinationals.

International tax rules that allow large companies to avoid tax end up costing developing countries $100 billion every year, according to Oxfam.

Rich countries, however, want decisions about international taxation frameworks to remain in the hands of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD and G20, where they control the agenda.

"To take decision-making on taxation away from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD is not only a question of principle," said Lucie Watrinet of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"CCFD-Terre Solidaire, a French development NGO.

"The measures proposed by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"OECD regarding tax evasion hardly ever take into account the concerns of developing countries, and even put them at a disadvantage."

kal/sas/ach/psr

Agence France-Presse

Business of saving the poor arrives in Addis Ababa

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Shawn Donnan

12 July 2015

At first glance Power of Nutrition looks like any modern-day charity with a laudable raison d’être. By 2020 it wants to deploy $1bn to tackle a scourge of undernourishment and stunting in the developing world, a problem experts see as a perennial drag on the world’s poorest economies.

But for the development community, which is descending on Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, this week for the most significant HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"UN development finance conference in more than a decade, the Power of Nutrition is also a symbol of a bigger trend.

The UK-based charity, launched in April this year, blurs the lines between public and private resources. It was seeded by a foundation that grew out of one of the world’s biggest hedge funds, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"The Children’s Investment Fund, and another that organises the philanthropic giving of some of Swiss bank HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"UBS’s wealthiest private clients. But the money it raises will go into a special HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Bank nutrition trust fund and will be leveraged up by matching funds from the bank and other donors such as the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"British government.

Put crudely, the Power of Nutrition offers a way for wealthy private investors to give their money to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Bank and to use its resources to scale up their potential impact. Its first $20m grant to Tanzania, due to be announced in Addis Ababa this week, is triggering $200m in HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Bank financing that will help fund a $2.7bn government nutrition programme, says Michael Anderson, chief executive of The Children’s Investment Fund Foundation.

In that lies an example of what many people see as a future in which private capital has to play a much greater role in helping the world’s poor.

Development efforts were once focused almost entirely on traditional aid and getting rich world governments to give and do more. But in a post-crisis world, in which austerity rules, the conversation has shifted to finding ways to get private investors involved whether via traditional forms of philanthropy or new financial products such as impact bonds that link investment returns to development targets.

“There is a paradigm shift going on,” is how Sir Suma Chakrabarti, president of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, puts it.

That focus on mobilising the private sector will be on display this week at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"UN conference on Financing for Development in the Ethiopian capital, where ministers from around the world will be wrestling with how to fund successors to the Millennium Development Goals due to be finalised in New York in September.

The announcements of new public commitments have already begun. On Friday the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"International Monetary Fund, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Bank, and five big regional development banks pledged $400bn in lending over the next three years. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Bank and others are also unveiling facilities for women’s and children’s health and to allow governments in the developing world to take advantage of the bank’s triple A credit rating and issue new bonds at lower interest rates.

There will also be an emphasis during the conference on helping developing economies mobilise their own public resources and improve how they collect taxes and other tasks.

But the reality is that all of those efforts will fall far short of the trillions of dollars required to deliver on the 17 goals and 169 “targets” likely to be endorsed as the successors to the MDGs. In HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"infrastructure alone, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"UN’s own estimate is that $5tn-$7tn is needed annually around the world.

The world has also changed since governments gathered in Monterrey, Mexico, in 2002 to figure out how to finance the MDGs and spent most of their time discussing how to increase aid flows.

The uncomfortable truth is that, since then, very few of the rich world’s governments have met the goal of funnelling 0.7 per cent of gross domestic product in aid to the poor world, and traditional aid flows have plateaued in recent years at about $135bn annually, according to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)"OECD.

“One reason that Addis is not going to talk very much about aid is that there is not very much to say,” says HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Charles Kenny, a senior fellow at the Washington-based HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Center for Global Development.

Meanwhile, foreign direct investment into developing economies has surged, reaching a record $681bn last year, according to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"UN. So too have remittances home from migrants, which the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Bank says were worth more than $583bn in 2014, or 3.5 times what they were in 2002.

But even bigger resources lay largely unexploited, in development terms, in the world of finance. Each year the world’s people save about $22tn and the global stock of financial assets is estimated at about $218tn by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"UN.

There are, of course, sceptics.

Foreign investors, particularly in extractive industries, have not always had a great record in places such as Africa, they point out.

Charities such as Oxfam also want more to be done on international corporate tax reform, arguing that the current global financial system disproportionately favours rich countries and businesses.

“Addis risks doing more for the global business communities’ bottom line than it does for the world’s poorest people,” says HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Winnie Byanyima, the head of Oxfam International.

The Financial Times Limited (AAIW/EIW)

India warns US of dumping probe in solar panel dispute

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Richa Mishra, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Amiti Sen

13 July 2015

Business Line (The Hindu)

Wants US to withdraw case against domestic content requirement at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO Are India and the US headed for a face-off at the multi-lateral body, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organisation? Seems so, as the on-going dispute between the two on rules guiding India’s solar power generation programme have got more bitter.

New Delhi has warned Washington that it may initiate anti-dumping investigation against solar panels imported from America if it does not withdraw its complaint against India’s compulsory domestic sourcing rules for solar power generation at the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO.

India had been dragged to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO by the US for mandating that a small fraction (about 8,000 MW of a total of 1,00,000 MW its solar projects) be created with domestic modules. It says that the clause goes against the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO rule of ‘national treatment’.

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO report soon

New Delhi’s warning, however, may have come a bit too late, as the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO panel looking at the dispute will be ready with its report next month, and it may not be “proper” to withdraw the report at this stage, those associated with the talks told BusinessLine .

“If the US withdraws its complaint now, it would be obvious to everyone that a deal has been struck with India outside the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO. This is not considered proper,” a senior Government official said.

The reasons cited for India’s late reaction is the key players in the domestic solar power generation programme — the power generation companies and the producers of solar panels and modules — have been pushing the government in different directions.

Another official said if the US does not withdraw its complaint, India could initiate anti-dumping investigations against America-based exporters of solar power generation equipment once again.

India is under pressure from domestic manufacturers for action against cheap imports has been rising.

Cheap panels, modules

While the solar panel manufacturers want the government to impose anti-dumping duties (penal duties imposed when exporter sells goods in foreign markets at prices lower than what it charges in domestic market) against cheap panels and modules flowing in from the US and China, the generating companies want imports of the cheap inputs to be encouraged.

If the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO rules in favour of the US and India is forced to remove the domestic content requirement norm, it may then have to seriously re-examine the option of imposing anti-dumping duties to protect domestic solar panel producers, the official added.

Kasturi & Sons Ltd

Australia urges action over coal tests

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Peter Ker

13 July 2015

Sydney Morning Herald

Resources- Government pushes China for leeway

Aspiring coal miner and federal MP HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Clive Palmer believes Australia should take a firmer approach to China's controversial new coal-testing regime and respond with new tariffs on iron ore exports.

The comments come as the Australian and Canadian governments continue to push China for leeway on the new testing policy, which has resulted in at least one shipment of Australian coal being turned away at the Chinese border.

Coal has traditionally been tested for ash and sulphur levels, but Chinese customs, which presides over the second-largest market for Australian coal, has started testing coal arrivals for fluorine, phosphorus, mercury, arsenic and other trace elements.

Rumours that Canada might lodge a complaint over the issue with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organisation (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO) have swept the industry in recent weeks, and when asked if it was considering such a push, a spokesman for HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Canada's Department of Foreign Affairs, Trade and Development did not rule out a formal complaint.

The Australian government was not aware of a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO complaint over the issue, and Trade Minister Andrew Robb has been tackling the matter in talks with Chinese Commerce Minister Gao Hucheng.

But Mr Palmer, whose private company Waratah Coal is seeking to develop a mine in Queensland's Galilee Basin, said Australia could be taking a firmer stance.

"They turn back some of our coal exports to give us a reminder of their market position. If Australia retaliated and put taxes on iron ore it would a different situation. We are not using what we have got to Australia's advantage."

The friction comes despite June's signing of a free-trade agreement between Australia and China, which required the immediate removal of tariffs on coking coal and the removal of tariffs on thermal coal before June 2017.

Uncertainty over the testing has prompted Australian miners to divert many shipments to other markets like Japan and Korea, where acceptance is more predictable.

As a result, Chinese imports of coal in the first five months of 2015 were 38.2 per cent lower than in the first five months of 2014, and that import slump came despite Australian coking coal production rising over the past 12 months and Australian thermal coal production falling by less than 1 per cent.

Many pundits believe the tests are meant to cut imports in a bid to support struggling Chinese miners. Citi's Shanghai-based commodities analyst Ivan Szpakowski said the tests were typically not being conducted on Chinese coal, despite the law applying to all coal.

Australia and Canada are already third parties in a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO complaint the US has lodged against China in 2015 over assistance given to Chinese exporters.

Fairfax Media Management Pty Limited

Forum to protest against education tagged as 'service'

13 July 2015

The Times of India

COIMBATORE: The All India Forum for Right to Education (AIFRTE) has chalked out a six-month plan to stage demonstrations and protests across the country against the central government, to prevent it from treating education as a 'service' in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization- General Agreement on Trade Services (WTO-GAST).

India, after having been offered to include education as a service in its agreement with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO in 2005, may commit the same to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO in the 10th ministerial meeting scheduled to be held between December 15 and18, at Nairobi.

The WTO-GAST is an agreement framed by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO in 2000, and expects its 160 member countries to commit sectors like education and health as 'services for trade'. This, if a country commits, will allow that sector to be traded for money to other member countries.

For example, if India commits for education as a service available for trade, then foreign institutions will be allowed to open their centres in India, will force students to join colleges in other countries for a higher fee, and allow teachers from other countries to enter Indian institutions and teach students.

Ramesh Patnaik, organising secretary of AIFRTE said, "The agreement calls the students as 'customers' and colleges and universities as 'service providers'. If we allow education to be traded for money to other countries, the economically backward and disadvantaged sections may lose access to education completely."

He added, "In India education is a constitutional right, and we have introduced an Act for primary and middle-school level education. But, all these will be nullified if it is termed as a service for trade."

Prince Gajendra Babu, south zone secretary of AIFRTE, said this will also reduce the powers of the apex bodies of higher education like the University Grants Commission (UGC), HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"All India Council for Technical Education, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Medical Council of India, Central Board for Secondary Education (CBSE), HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Bar Council of India, Architecture Council and other related bodies.

"If there is a problem that pertains to a university or a school or a college, the public will not be able to raise complaints with the state or the central government, or any of these governing bodies. This is because after committing to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO, we will have to follow rules set by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO for education," said Gajendra Babu.

The AIFRTE held its fourth annual meeting in June, and decided to hold a series of protests until the 10th ministerial meeting of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO at Nairobi between December 15 and 18 this year. On August 9, they will hold demonstrations and talks in educational institutions across India, on Sept 28 and Oct 2, protest at the district headquarters of all AIFRTE centres, from Nov 1 to 10, demonstrations at state headquarters and from December 13 to 18, AIFRTE will hold resistance protests in Delhi. A delegation of AIFRTE will go to Nairobi to join the protest with organizations across the globe.

For Reprint Rights: timescontent.com

Bennett, Coleman & Co., Ltd.

Pacific trade deal in sight, says Australia

HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"SID MAHER

13 July 2015

The Australian

Trade Minister Andrew Robb is “confident’’ a deal on the 12-­nation Trans-Pacific Partnership will be signed within weeks after a ministerial meeting to clinch the agreement late this month.

Mr Robb also said he was confident that China, which is not party to the TPP negotiations, could eventually be able to join, as a precursor to creating an Asia-Pacific free-trade zone.

The TPP negotiations take in advanced countries, including Japan, the US, Canada, Singapore and New Zealand, as well as emerging countries, including Malaysia, Vietnam, Mexico and Peru. With trade ministers due to meet in Maui, Hawaii, from July 28-31, Mr Robb told Sky News’s Australian Agenda yesterday: “I think we can conclude the deal in a matter of weeks.’’ The meeting follows last month’s granting of fast-track authority to US President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Barack Obama by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"US congress.

Mr Robb dismissed concerns about the TPP over the inclusion of investor-state dispute settlement mechanisms, which allow corporations to take governments to international tribunals.

Australia had removed health and environment issues from dispute mechanisms in deals with South Korea and China, and ­tobacco companies taking action against Australian plain-pack­aging laws under ISDS rules could not do so under the new agreements.

Australia would be expected to take the same negotiating stance in TPP negotiations.

Australia is also pushing hard for additional access to inter­national sugar markets and negotiations on the issue are expected to go down to the wire.

Mr Robb is also understood to be pushing for gains in several sugar markets, including that of the US.

Mr Robb said last week that he had yet to see any genuine offer on sugar from the US.

Sugar is set to be a major sticking point for Australia across the TPP, with Queensland Nationals MPs saying they will not support a TPP that does not include significant additional access to international sugar markets.

Mr Robb said following an agreement with trade ministers, any deal on the TPP would need to be ratified by the parliaments of each member country.

The endgame in TPP negotiations comes as business groups, including the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry, push for a greater involvement in trade negotiations.

ACCI chief executive Kate Carnell called on the government to form a panel of businesspeople, who would sign confident­iality agreements. They could then be consulted on negotiations.

She said the US had developed a similar system and this ­enabled it to run past the group various ­developments in trade negotiations and gauge how this could ­affect various constituen­cies.

“Unfortunately, Australia doesn’t do it and business doesn’t get to see any of the detail until after the Trade Minister has done the signing event,’’ Ms Carnell said.

She said that issues such as last week’s furore over the import­ation of Chinese workers under the China-Australia free-trade agreement could be avoided.

ACCI members had initial concerns about trade skills assessment processes for Chinese workers under the China-Australia deal, but further investigation had assuaged those concerns.“All Chinese 457 visa holders will still be required to hold all necessary licences and certification required by Australian federal, state and territory laws and regulations,’’ Ms Carnell said.

News Ltd. 

A Pacific Trade Pact Could Feed a Hungry Planet

By Robert B. Zoellick 

13 July 2015

The Wall Street Journal Asia

With HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"U.S. Congress granting trade-promotion authority to the Obama administration last month, negotiations for the landmark Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) trade agreement should be completed soon. The 12-country Asia-Pacific talks offer an unprecedented opportunity to transform ocean and fisheries conservation.

According to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization, 90% of marine fisheries in every region of the world are now significantly depleted or recovering. Chinese fleets, for example, are devastating West African fisheries because countries such as Senegal, Sierra Leone, Guinea Bissau and Guinea have weak enforcement capabilities.

Yet more than 4.5 billion of the world's 7.25 billion people rely on fish as an important source of animal protein. And the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"U.N. predicts that the world population will grow by nearly 30% by 2050 and require 70% more food. The global population's need for nutrition will be imperiled if overfishing continues -- and the TPP offers a big step toward a solution.

Commercial fleets now catch more fish than the seas can provide if oceans are also to rebuild fish stocks for the future. Much fishing overcapacity is due to government subsidies for the construction of vessels, engine upgrades and operating expenses (such as fuel). The University of British Columbia Fisheries Centre, for example, estimates that "overfishing" subsidies are equivalent to approximately 20% of the global catch.

Working with Australia, Canada, New Zealand and others in the TPP negotiations, the U.S. is seeking to prohibit subsidies for harvests of overfished stocks and illegal fishing. Among its proposed provisions are rules that would prohibit subsidies for fishing by an unlicensed country's fleet within another country's 200-mile exclusive economic zone, harvesting banned species, using banned gear and fishing out of season. The TPP countries represent one-third of the world's wild catch by weight. Eight of the 12 are among the world's top-20 producers.

Rough estimates by leading scientists suggest that illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing costs legitimate fishermen $10 billion to $23 billion annually, and at least $6 billion in the Asia-Pacific region. By a wide margin, the U.S. and Japan are the top importers of seafood. Yet a recent study in the Journal of Marine Policy estimates that 20% to 30% of U.S. seafood imports are caught illegally.

The U.S. has long been a leading advocate for the reform of global fishing subsidies. Republican and Democratic administrations have pressed this case in HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"World Trade Organization negotiations, backed by bipartisan congressional support. The new trade-promotion authority specifies that U.S. negotiators should reduce or eliminate subsidies that decrease market opportunities for U.S. exports or unfairly distort agriculture markets (including fisheries) to the detriment of the U.S.

A trade agreement with antisubsidy provisions could serve important ocean-conservation goals that are not limited to the 12 TPP countries. If other large economies and fishing nations, such as South Korea, join the agreement, the benefits to ocean abundance increase.

A TPP pact also would strengthen the case for conservation in the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership negotiations with the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union, where the U.S. has also introduced proposals to reform subsidies to fisheries. A global movement for reform could pull in China and other countries, whether through the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"WTO or separate negotiations.

Rebuilding an abundant ocean that can feed a hungry planet is a crucial conservation opportunity. The Trans-Pacific Partnership could turn out to be the most important ocean-conservation achievement of this, or any, presidency. Trade, with strictly enforced rules, can deliver good conservation outcomes.

Mr. Zoellick has served as president of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"the World Bank Group, U.S. trade representative and deputy secretary of state. 

Europe and Russia Must Start Building Bridges

13 July 2015

The Moscow Times

More than a year after it started, the Ukrainian crisis seems stalled and has produced only losers - especially Ukraine. Having lost Crimea and part of its eastern provinces, it is paying a high price for the repercussions of the Euromaidan protests.

Despite Western aid, its economy is collapsing amid a political climate marked by radicalization in Kiev, as evidenced by the recent "historical memory" laws and sometimes tragic fates of former politicians or experts who were not in line with the new authorities. Prospects for integration into the EU and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"NATO are more distant than ever.

Another loser is Russia. Even though its economy is not "in tatters," - as U.S. President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Barack Obama unwisely claimed last fall - and it is not isolated on the international stage, its situation is not much brighter. The Kremlin is "playing it by ear," without any strategy, and is encouraging a conservative groundswell that is clearly going against the country's modernization. Perceptions of Russia in the West are at their lowest in decades.

The third victim of the crisis in Ukraine is the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union. After having raised disproportionate expectations by launching the Eastern Partnership in 2009, the EU is pitifully beating retreat without taking full responsibility for it, as was evident at the recent summit in Riga.

The political price of this inconsistency will be heavy. In Kiev, people are already feeling like they have been let down, while the Kremlin sees the move as a harbinger of its geopolitical victory. The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"European Union is also suffering economic losses. Western sanctions and Russian counter-sanctions favor the establishment of new trading alliances, mostly for the benefit of the BRICS and countries such as Turkey and South Korea.

The causes of this great pan-European misunderstanding abound. Future historians will consider with astonishment the missed opportunities to reunify the continent in the early 1990s, after Sept. 11, 2001 or during the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"Dmitry Medvedev presidency in Russia from 2009-2010. In Western Europe, including France, the elites lost interest in Russia. It was generally perceived as a residual power, which was threatening first because of its weakness, then because of what was perceived as displaced ambitions.

A strange country - European in appearance but refusing more and more openly the practices and rules of the Western game. The often sensationalized way Russia is covered by many Western media has shaped the public opinion for a long time, and the loss of historic and strategic memory among many senior officials and political leaders did the rest.

Russia - and Putin in particular - also bears a heavy responsibility in what some observers call - rather hastily, hopefully - the Russian-Western schism. Criticism from Moscow on double standards, Western inconsistency in the Middle East or the revival of right-wing currents in Eastern Europe would be more audible if the Kremlin was faultless.

Some will say, rightly, that this is not the first major crisis between Russia and the rest of Europe. More or less sustainable reconciliation phases have always succeeded confrontation periods. However, it would be hazardous to rely on this single pendulum effect. The Ukrainian crisis comes at a very particular geopolitical moment: the shifting of the world's center of gravity toward the Asia-Pacific region.

Careful observers of the Moscow scene notice further tectonic movements, primarily in the minds of many Russians: Western Europe is not the central reference anymore, whether in terms of economic development, societal evolutions or international behavior. Faced with this reality, two attitudes arise.

The first is to make do with the existing fractures, considering that the real frontier of Europe is between Ukraine and Russia. This vision, firmly anchored in European political thinking for centuries and dominant in the U.S., aims to confine Russia as far as possible in the northeast of the continent.

The other approach is to consider that Russia, despite the crises and the vagaries of history, is also "of Europe." The geopolitical configuration of the continent for the upcoming decades depends on the outcome of this titanic battle of ideas, which goes "two ways." (Western hawkish factions and Russian Eurasists mutually reinforcing themselves).

In this context, Germany and France have a particular responsibility. The first, Germany, because of its economic weight and its special relationship with Moscow born of World War II and the reunification. The second, France, because it is the only permanent member of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"UN Security Council seen as credible by both the Ukrainians and the Russians and it knows - because of its history - the dangers of post-imperial seizures.

Paris and Berlin should act in five directions. First, by working with other EU states to preserve unity on Ukraine. Second, by pursuing a firm and realistic dialogue with Russia. Third, by putting pressure on Ukraine, which is dragging its feet on implementing the political component (in particular points on decentralization) of the Minsk II agreement.

Fourth, by keeping offside those - many within HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"NATO and the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);"U.S. Congress - who advocate arms deliveries to Ukraine. Finally - and this is perhaps most important in the long term - by encouraging Warsaw and Moscow to overcome historical wounds and recent disputes, because the continent's stability is unthinkable without a Russian-Polish reconciliation. For sure, there will be obstacles, but several factors point to a glimmer of optimism. The main one being that perhaps neither Russia nor the EU have an interest in letting Ukraine become a "black hole" at their borders.

Pascal Lorot is president of the Institut Choiseul for International Politics and Geoeconomics, and Arnaud Dubien is director of the Franco-Russian analytical center Observatoire.

