HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "Les 20 ans de l'OMC: Entretien exclusif avec le DG
·         HYPERLINK \l "Doha Work Program By July Seen As Tall Order By U.S. Commodity Groups
·         HYPERLINK \l "India to soon finalise Doha round work programme
·         HYPERLINK \l "China Suggests Talks On Phaseout Periods To Restart ITA Expansion Effort
·         HYPERLINK \l "China Seeks WTO Consultations With EU Over Tariffs on Poultry Exports to Europe
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S. Requests Panel With China Over Alleged 'Demonstration Bases' Subsidies
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO Appellate Body, Panel Delay Deadlines For Two U.S. Disputes With India
·         HYPERLINK \l "Canada's Top Court Rejects Class Action Over Eliminating Wheat Board's Monopoly
·         HYPERLINK \l "Obama to promote competitiveness, trade at Summit of the Americas
·         HYPERLINK \l "Administration Touts Export-Driven Jobs in Quest for Support on Trade
·         HYPERLINK \l "Athens Says Sanctions On Moscow Are Futile
·         HYPERLINK \l "US says China, South Korea should let currencies rise
·         HYPERLINK \l "Costa Rica says invited to join OECD
·         HYPERLINK \l "IMF Chief Lagarde: Global Economy Seeing Moderate and Uneven Recovery
·         HYPERLINK \l "Editorial | El mecanismo de solución de diferencias de la OMC bajo la lupa
 
Les 20 ans de l'OMC: Entretien exclusif avec le DG
L'economiste.com 
Date d'édition : 09/04/2015
 
Roberto Carvalho De Azevedo, DG de l’OMC, l’Afrique n’a pas encore une place de choix dans les décisions et les flux commerciaux
 
Roberto Carvalho De Azevedo, directeur général de l’OMC depuis le 1er septembre 2013, impose son rôle de négociateur et de constructeur de «consensus». Il a réussi en deux ans à faire une avancée sur le cycle des négociations en commençant par une cohésion autour du paquet de Bali qui est bien parti pour une ratification. Prochain défi, la conférence ministérielle de Nairobi pour une feuille de route et des délais raisonnables pour la conclusion de ce long cycle de Doha. Entretien exclusif
 
- L’Economiste: 20 ans après la création de l’OMC, aucun cycle abouti. Comment expliquez-vous le gel des négociations de Doha?
- Roberto Carvalho De Azevedo: Entre un monde en crise et des pays en pleine divergence, il y a toujours des réserves et il faut dire qu’il était quasiment impossible de conclure le cycle de Doha -dans sa version initiale- puisqu’il fallait d’abord l’adoption de l’accord de facilitation des échanges. Et cela a été fait à Bali en 2013. Mais de nouveau, en 2014, nous nous sommes retrouvés dans l’impasse. Les réserves de Londres ont bloqué les négociations du paquet Bali et par conséquence du cycle de Doha. Et ce n’est qu’en novembre dernier que nous avons pu faire adopter par les 160 membres le protocole relatif à l’accord sur la facilitation des échanges et qui devrait simplifier et moderniser les procédures douanières. Les pays membres ont aussi pris la décision pour la protection temporaire des programmes de sécurité alimentaire appliqués dans les pays en développement et qui autorise la constitution de stocks alimentaires. Ce qui a permis la reprise des négociations.
- Où en êtes-vous actuellement? Vous pensez conclure le cycle de Doha à Nairobi?
- Je ne peux m’avancer là-dessus. En juillet prochain, nous allons surtout finaliser une feuille de route pour la conclusion du cycle avec des délais raisonnables.
- Quelles garanties apportez-vous aux pays africains préoccupés plutôt par la sécurité alimentaire et la question des subventions agricoles?
- Nous voulons aider les pays africains à plus de participation active par le biais de conditions plus favorables au sein du commerce mondial. Nous parlons là de marges de préférence que les grands marchés peuvent donner aux exportateurs de pays en développement, mais aussi de la réduction des subventions agricoles, préoccupation majeure des agriculteurs africains. Cette problématique ne concerne pas uniquement l’OMC qui offre toutefois un forum de négociations et un espace de surveillance de la bonne utilisation et application de ces négociations, et bien sûr la résolution des litiges.
- Le paquet de Bali approuvé en 2013 prévoit un accord de facilitation des échanges. Quid aujourd’hui des ratifications? Vous êtes en campagne pour sensibiliser les pays à l’adhésion effective…
- En général, le processus de ratification parlementaire demande du temps. Un exemple, la déclaration sur la santé publique, approuvée en 2001, manque toujours de signatures. J’espère en revanche que pour la facilitation des échanges, les délais seront moins longs. L’OMC se donne pour mission d’inciter les gouvernements à ratifier plus rapidement, mais c’est une tâche qui, in fine, leur appartient.
- Revenons à l’Afrique. Que peut concrètement gagner le continent à prendre part à ces échanges?
- Tout d’abord, l’Afrique est une région où les coûts de transaction commerciale ont significativement augmentés.  On estime qu’entre 15 et 20% du coût de la transaction restent à la frontière. Ce qui est forcément pénalisant. Il faut donc absolument arriver à baisser ces coûts pour optimiser les transactions et arriver à l’insertion des pays africains dans le flux du commerce mondial.
C’est pour cela que cet agrément demeure un accord historique, car, pour la première fois, l’OMC s’engage à une assistance technique à des pays moins avancés pour qu’ils puissent implémenter les décisions prises. Sans cette aide technique, nous ne pouvons pas leur imposer l’obligation de mettre en œuvre les déclarations. Il faut d’ailleurs que les pays africains profitent de cette mesure.
- Quelle place occupe l’Afrique aujourd’hui sur l’échelle mondiale?
- Le continent n’a pas encore une place de choix, puisque encore en marge des décisions et des flux commerciaux. Mais ses potentiels à explorer sont énormes. Ce qui lui manque à mon sens, c’est une meilleure coordination entre les pays afin de développer le commerce interrégional, la complémentarité économique et ce, pour une meilleure insertion dans la ronde mondiale.
- La création de l’OMC en 1995 était un défi pour les relations multilatérales. Tous ces accords régionaux et bilatéraux ne fragilisent-ils pas le rôle de l’OMC?
- Non! Il s’agit là de pistes complémentaires. Les accords bilatéraux et même régionaux ont une constante présence dans l’environnement commercial. Ils ont toujours existé et vont continuer à exister. Car ils servent à négocier des questions beaucoup plus concentrées, comme les accès aux marchés ou les facilitations bilatérales, sans interférer dans les grands thèmes des négociations globales. Plutôt que s’opposer, ces initiatives plus ciblées permettent de mieux avancer dans les négociations multilatérales.
Propos recueillis par Badra BERRISSOULE et Stephanie JACOB
URL source: http://www.leconomiste.comarticle/969792-les-20-ans-de-lomcentretien-exclusif-avec-le-dg
 
 
Doha Work Program By July Seen As Tall Order By U.S. Commodity Groups
Inside U.S. Trade - 04/10/2015
 
Following meetings in Geneva, representatives of U.S. rice and wheat growers this week signaled they were skeptical that the World Trade Organization can meet its July 31 deadline to develop a work program to complete the Doha round because there is no indication that key players like the U.S. and China are working bilaterally to find a way forward.
 
In an April 8 press briefing, Craig Thorn, a partner at DTB Associates who advises clients in the agricultural sector on trade issues, said he doubted that members were at that stage, which would signal increased momentum on the Doha work program.
 
"You'll know that things are getting serious when you see some bilateral [engagement] between key players like the U.S. and China," Thorn said. "I don't know if that's happened yet. I doubt it."
 
After the press briefing, USA Rice Chief Operating Officer Bob Cummings said if WTO members miss the July 31 deadline, they could push it back to maybe even the Nairobi ministerial.
 
Other observers have said that any progress on the Doha work program can only come if the U.S. and China find a balance between U.S. demands that China do more as a major economy and China's refusal to make major concessions beyond its commitments to enter the WTO in 2001.
 
Beyond that, other sources have said that real progress on the work program can only be made when the five major players -- the U.S., China, the European Union, Brazil, and India -- are negotiating to find the middle ground between concessions and sensitivities.
 
Thorn said that based on conversations he had with Geneva WTO delegations during a February visit, it is clear there is no consensus on whether the agriculture negotiations should be based on the 2008 draft modalities on agriculture, known as Rev. 4, or on an alternative approach.
 
That point was also made clear at an informal special session of the agriculture committee held on Jan. 28 where China and India endorsed Rev. 4. At that meeting, the U.S. said it would only accept an agriculture text that includes concessions from developing-country members that currently maintain significant domestic subsidies and have the production capacity to influence global trade (Inside U.S. Trade, Feb. 27).
 
The United States has rejected the 2008 agriculture modalities because they would leave untouched the domestic subsidy programs of the so-called advanced developing countries such as China, Brazil and India, even though the U.S. considers them to have exponentially increased their domestic subsidies.
 
In contrast, the U.S. would be the only country that would have to cut its subsidies programs under the 2008 modalities, which Deputy U.S. Trade Representative Michael Punke has called a "mind-boggling imbalance." He noted that there has to be a distinction between developing countries and advanced developing countries that have significant subsidies programs and the productive capacity to affect global trade.
 
A Jan. 28 paper by the Cairns group concluded that the U.S. would be the only country under the 2008 modalities that would have to cuts its overall trade distorting domestic subsidies, which consists of the Aggregate Measure of Support (AMS), de minimis supports and blue box measures. It examined the affect of the 2008 modalities on the subsidies programs of the U.S., European Union, China, India, Brazil and Japan.
 
In the press briefing, the representatives of U.S. Wheat Associates and USA Rice echoed the demand of USTR that advanced-developing countries cut domestic subsidies programs to an extent similar to developed countries.
 
But Thorn acknowledged that these countries have shown no interest in doing so and instead insist that there should be no distinction among developing countries, which should all take on the same obligations under Doha. However, he said that this resistance to stratification is ill-placed given the fact that a "least developed countries" group has long been given special treatment among developing countries.
 
U.S. Wheat Associates and USA Rice backed their demands on advanced developing countries by focusing on an updated DTB study that shows China, Brazil, India, Thailand and Turkey to have domestic subsidy programs in excess of their WTO commitments to negotiators in Geneva.
 
That study, which was updated in November 2014, analyzed the corn, rice and wheat crops of those countries and determined that the AMS of those crops receive are in excess of the levels those countries have agreed to under the Uruguay Agreement.
 
During their mid-February visit to Geneva, the commodity group representatives presented this study to negotiators there to offer a new narrative because negotiators are currently working with outdated information, Cummings said.
 
This is because several countries are behind in notifying the WTO of their domestic subsidy programs. For instance, China has only submitted its domestic support or export subsidy notifications up to 2008, according to the study.
 
Thorn, Cummings and U.S. Wheat Associates Vice President of Policy Shannon Schlect also said that USTR should focus on enforcing the current WTO obligations, but stopped short of calling for a case before the WTO's Dispute Settlement Body and only offered "public shaming" as a possible alternative.
 
These alleged violations should be addressed through the negotiating process and the U.S. should seek to include stricter disciplines in a potential agriculture agreement, Thorn said. One possible way to address domestic support programs in the context of Doha is to cut the de minimis level of domestic subsidies for developing countries more.
 
 
India to soon finalise Doha round work programme 
 
New Delhi, Apr 9 (PTI) India will soon finalise its work programme which will be discussed as part of the long-pending agenda of Doha round of talks at the next WTO meet in Nairobi in December, a Commerce Ministry official said today.

"We are working to finalise the work programme for the Doha round by the end of July. My most of the attention is on market access issues. I hope we will have some reform of rules as well on the agenda for the next WTO ministerial meeting," said Additional Secretary in the Department of Commerce, J S Deepak.

He was speaking at the inauguration of 2-day International Conference on Trade Remedy Measures, organised by the Indian Institute of Foreign Trade (IIFT).

After notching up a major victory on food security last year at the World Trade Organisation (WTO), India wants to push for the long-pending Doha agenda.

The Doha round of negotiations, launched in 2001, has been virtually stalled since July 2008. It collapsed due to differences between the rich and the developing nations, including India, mainly at the level of protection for farmers in developing countries and duty cut on industrial goods.

There are a number of pending issues under the Doha round, which India would like to bring to the table in Nairobi. It includes issues related to agriculture (export subsidies, cotton and fishery subsidies), intellectual property rights, market access and services.

The rich nations are asking for a significant reduction in industrial good tariffs and further strengthening of patent laws. India also wants to resolve issues of the least developed countries (LDCs).

Talking about trade remedial measures such as anti-dumping duty, Deepak said that with the slowdown in global economy, dumping of goods will not only continue, but also grow.

"We are one of the largest users of anti-dumping instruments, but I do not see any conflict in this because if the instrument is properly used, there is no way it leads to protectionism," he said.
 
 
China Suggests Talks On Phaseout Periods To Restart ITA Expansion Effort
Inside U.S. Trade - 04/10/2015
 
Amid a lingering stalemate in the Geneva-based negotiations to update the 1996 Information Technology Agreement (ITA), China has floated the idea of holding a renewed round of talks that would include discussions both on which products should be in an expanded ITA and the length of the tariff phaseouts for those products.
 
This approach, Geneva sources said, seems to signal that Beijing may be willing to accept duty elimination on sensitive products it has previously insisted are off the table -- provided that it can secure longer phaseout periods for those goods and potentially other products as well. China put forward this idea during a March 30 meeting among the World Trade Organization ambassadors of all the roughly two dozen countries participating in the ITA talks
 
But Geneva sources said this idea received a cool reception from the United States and the European Union, which indicated they want to first secure agreement on what the expanded ITA will cover before discussing the phaseout periods. However, one source said these countries have not formally responded to China's proposal.
 
Shortly after the talks fell apart in December, ITA expansion participants asked World Trade Organization Director-General Roberto Azevedo to conduct consultations with members in order to find a way forward. As part of these consultations, the U.S., EU, China, Japan, Korea and Taiwan met for a working lunch on Jan. 29.
 
Geneva sources said Azevedo will conduct more consultations once the WTO returns from its Easter break, but his schedule has not been set yet.
 
ITA expansion participants are now eyeing two upcoming meetings where capital-level ministers could reach a deal and end the current stalemate -- the May 23-24 meeting of Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation trade ministers in the Philippines, and a June 3-4 meeting of the Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development in Paris.
 
One Geneva source said he expects ITA members like the U.S. and the EU to press China, Korea and Taiwan harder to make a deal as the ministerials get closer. But at the same time, this source said China has made clear it cannot grant major concessions to Korea and Taiwan and that the three parties have still been unable to identify products that are both significant for Seoul and Taipei and not sensitive for Beijing.
 
Even while the ITA expansion talks have remained deadlocked over the inclusion of a handful of commercially significant items, Geneva sources indicated that very little work has been done with respect to phaseout periods in the interim. In essence, the only thing participants have agreed to is that products will fall into one of three tariff elimination phaseout categories -- immediate, three years, and five years -- reflecting the framework of the original 1996 deal. In exceptional circumstances, parties were able to negotiate a seven-year phaseout period.
 
If ITA participants decide to go along with China's new idea and start making progress with regard to phaseout periods, the talks must still address a key sticking point: China's unwillingness to eliminate duties on flat-panel displays.
 
This hardline position on the part of Beijing led to a scramble in December last year between China, South Korea and Taiwan -- the latter two of which are major flat-panel exporters -- to find a deal to eliminate duties on other products that Seoul and Taipei could consider commercially meaningful enough to substitute for flat-panel displays.
 
China, however, ultimately said it had no flexibility to go beyond the understanding on product scope it reached with the U.S. on the sidelines of the APEC forum meeting in November 2014. As a result, the expansion talks collapsed for the third time since their inception in 2012.
 
A Geneva source warned that the talks could further stagnate if the stalemate is not resolved before the WTO departs for its summer break in August. The longer it takes to reach a deal, he added, the more likely the high-tech products currently under negotiation become obsolete and less commercially meaningful.
 
After the WTO returns from its summer break, members will begin focusing more on the upcoming ministerial in Nairobi, Kenya. "Are we going to be able to focus on substantial negotiations in the ITA? That's something I'm not sure about," he said.
 
 
China Seeks WTO Consultations With EU Over Tariffs on Poultry Exports to Europe
By Bryce Baschuk 
WTO Reporter, April 10, 2015
 
April 8 — China filed a new trade dispute at the World Trade Organization (WTO) over European Union tariffs on imports of Chinese poultry meat products.
 
The dispute stems from a pair of EU decisions over the past decade to modify its tariff concessions for imports of poultry. Both the EU and China are among the world's top producers of poultry meat.
 
China claimed that in both cases the EU failed to adequately negotiate or consult with China prior to making its decisions, violating the 1994 General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
 
A request for consultations is the first step in a dispute at the WTO's dispute settlement system. The EU must respond to the request within 10 days, after which the two countries shall enter into consultations within 30 days after the request is received.
 
An EU official confirmed to Bloomberg BNA that they had received China's request and would enter into consultations regarding the matter.
 
EU Consulted With Brazil, Thailand, Not China
 
In 2003, the EU adopted new regulations to reclassify certain poultry products under a higher tariff category for salted meat. The EU subsequently modified its consolidated duties in 2006 after it lost WTO disputes filed by Thailand and Brazil and opened new tariff-rate quotas for imports of poultry products.
 
In 2008, the EU responded to a surge of imported poultry meat by imposing new tariffs on processed poultry meat products. The EU consulted with Brazil and Thailand prior to modifying its tariffs because they had a “principal or substantial supplying interest” in the products under consideration.
 
The EU did not negotiate its tariff modifications with China because, unlike Brazil and Thailand, China did not issue any statement of interest at the time.
 
On April 8, Chinese Ministry of Commerce Spokesman Sun Jiwen said the EU's measures “damaged the trade interests of poultry production and export enterprises in China” and the matter had not been resolved despite repeated negotiations with the EU.
 
 
U.S. Requests Panel With China Over Alleged 'Demonstration Bases' Subsidies
Inside U.S. Trade - 04/10/2015
 
The United States has requested a World Trade Organization panel with China over what it charges are prohibited export subsidies that Beijing provided to companies operating in 178 industrial clusters known as "demonstration bases," Geneva sources said April 9.
 
The U.S. will formally request the panel at a April 22 Dispute Settlement Body (DSB) meeting, these sources said. The U.S. and China held two rounds of consultations over the demonstration bases program on March 13 and April 1-2, but they failed to resolve the dispute, Geneva sources said. That came after the U.S. first requested consultations with China over the matter on Feb. 11.
 
Under Article 4.4 of the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures, the dispute can be referred to the DSB for "immediate establishment" of a panel if the consultations do not resolve the dispute within 30 days of a request, unless the DSB decides by consensus not to establish it. This is a different practice than other disputes that are governed solely by the WTO Dispute Settlement Understanding, in which a respondent country can reject a first panel request but not a second one.
 
In the dispute, known as DS489, the U.S. is claiming that China has provided more than $1 billion in subsidies between 2010 and 2012 to producers in seven different sectors operating in the demonstration bases. In order to receive this support, according to the U.S., the producers were required to meet a certain export performance criteria.
 
At the time the U.S. requested consultations, one source supportive of the request said the timing was a "transparent effort" to help the Obama administration build support for its trade agenda -- specifically the Trans-Pacific Partnership and fast-track legislation (Inside U.S. Trade, Feb. 13).
 
 
WTO Appellate Body, Panel Delay Deadlines For Two U.S. Disputes With India
Inside U.S. Trade - 04/10/2015
 
The workloads faced by the World Trade Organization's Appellate Body and a dispute settlement panel will delay decisions in two disputes between the United States and India until later this year.
 
The WTO Appellate Body on Tuesday (April 7) announced it will circulate by June 4 its findings in a dispute between the U.S. and India over New Delhi's ban on U.S. chicken imports. In a communication to WTO members, the Appellate Body said it would not be able to meet the assigned 90-day deadline -- which fell on March 27 -- to submit its report, due to a "substantial workload" and consequent scheduling issues.
 
The communication was circulated March 25 but publicly released April 7. This large workload for both the Appellate Body and WTO dispute settlement panels has been the subject of ongoing complaints by WTO members and scrutiny in the Dispute Settlement Body (Inside U.S. Trade, Oct. 10, 2014).
 
India on Jan. 26 appealed a panel ruling which faulted New Delhi for banning U.S. poultry imports after the detection of low-pathogenic avian influenza in U.S. territory in 2008 (Inside U.S. Trade, Jan. 30). Specifically, the panel found that India had violated Article 6.2 of the Agreement on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures by failing to recognize the concept of "disease-free areas and areas of low disease prevalence."
 
Separately, a WTO panel hearing a different case brought by the U.S. against India's local content requirements for a national solar project announced its intention to complete its work by late August.
 
A March 24 communication from the panel said work on the dispute, which began with the establishment of the panel on May 23, 2014, could not be completed within the required six-month timeframe. Therefore, the panel consulted with India and the U.S. to agree on the new timeline. Both parties were at odds last year over who should serve on the panel, which delayed its composition until Sept. 24, 2014 (Inside U.S. Trade, August 22, 2014).
 
In that dispute, the U.S. is claiming that India has violated Article III:4 of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and Article 2.1 of the Agreement on Trade-Related Investment Measures by giving less favorable treatment to imported solar cells and modules for two phases of its Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission.
 
 
Canada's Top Court Rejects Class Action Over Eliminating Wheat Board's Monopoly
By Peter Menyasz
WTO Reporter, April 10, 2015
 
April 9 — The Supreme Court of Canada has refused to consider certification of a class action lawsuit attacking the federal government's elimination of the Canadian Wheat Board's monopoly on western Canadian wheat and barley exports (Edward Andrew Ellis et al. v. Her Majesty the Queen, Supreme Court of Canada, No. 36208, leave to appeal denied 4/9/15).
 
The top court's April 9 refusal to hear an appeal of rulings by the Federal Court of Appeal and the Federal Court of Canada that rejected certification of a class action lawsuit by grain producers upholds the government's support for the freedom of western Canadian farmers to choose how they market their production, federal Agriculture Minister Gerry Ritz said April 9.
 
“Marketing freedom is and will remain the law of the land,” Ritz said in a statement. “The overwhelming majority of farmers have embraced the new economic opportunities created by marketing freedom and are taking Canadian agriculture to record heights.”
 
The Supreme Court's refusal of leave to appeal, for which it traditionally does not provide reasons, upholds a November 2013 decision by the Federal Court of Canada refusing to certify most of a C$17 billion ($13.6 billion) class action brought in 2012 by grain producers against the government's overhaul of the Wheat Board. The Federal Court's ruling was upheld in October 2014 by the Federal Court of Appeal.
 
The Federal Court struck down all but one element of the proposed class action on the ground that there was no reasonable cause of action. It dismissed the producers' claims of unlawful expropriation of the Wheat Board's assets, conversion of property in which the claimants had an interest, unjust enrichment, unlawful interference with the claimants' economic interests and breach of trust.
 
The only element of the class action claim allowed by the Federal Court, representing about C$100 million ($80 million) of the damages claimed, was for mismanagement of the Wheat Board's finances in the 2011–2012 crop year by using the claimants' funds to reorganize the grain marketing agency, transferring money to a contingency fund and failing to make required payments to producers.
 
Saskatchewan's Court of Queen's Bench rejected in June 2014 another proposed class action, launched in January 2012, seeking C$15.4 billion ($12.3 billion) in damages based on allegations that the federal government failed to properly compensate producers after unilaterally dismantling the Canadian Wheat Board's assets (6 WTO, 1/11/12).
 
The Canadian Parliament passed into law on Dec. 15, 2011, the Marketing Freedom for Grain Farmers Act, which ended the Canadian Wheat Board's monopoly on the marketing of western Canadian wheat and barley products. The legislation didn't eliminate the agency, leaving it as a voluntary option for western Canadian producers.
 
Canadian courts also rejected a challenge of the federal legislation by former directors of the Canadian Wheat Board who argued that the Canadian Wheat Board Act required the government to conduct a full plebiscite of all affected producers before changing the agency's mandate (37 WTO, 2/27/12).
 
 
Obama to promote competitiveness, trade at Summit of the Americas 
 
Washington, Apr 9 (EFE).- U.S. President Barack Obama said he would seek to promote competitiveness and trade in the region during his participation in the April 10-11 Summit of the Americas in Panama City, touting them as keys to spurring development and narrowing the gap between rich and poor.

In an interview with Efe, Obama said he was convinced that the best way to close that gap is to "unleash broad-based economic growth that creates new opportunities and to expand access to the tools people need to lift themselves out of poverty, including education, skills and job training."

To that end, he said the United States "will be encouraging all the countries in the Americas to ratify the WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement," a deal that was agreed in December 2013 at a World Trade Organization meeting in Bali and which is aimed at facilitating the flow of goods across borders, reducing bureaucracy, and thus boosting global trade volumes.

At least two-thirds of the WTO's 160 members must ratify the agreement for it to take effect, but to date the United States, Singapore and Hong Kong are the only ones to do so.

"Economic growth, trade and a shared commitment to expanding opportunity has lifted countless millions of people from poverty. Since 2002, the middle class has nearly doubled, and countries like Brazil and Mexico have middle class majorities for the first time in history," Obama said.

But despite the region's wealth, "about a third of people across the region still endure grinding poverty, and it's still too hard for them to access the education, health care and basic service their families need," the president added.

"This isn't just a drag on economic growth, it's a moral challenge to us all," he said.

Obama said the United States is encouraging the countries of the Americas to establish trade relations with Europe, Africa, India, and Asia.

"It can mean more prosperity and opportunity for us all," he added.

Obama also noted that the United States is partnering with Canada, Chile, Mexico and Peru to wrap up a 21st-century trade agreement in the Trans-Pacific Partnership, and he said it is "leading the international effort to support Caribbean nations as they secure their energy future."

The president also pointed to his administration's efforts to support small-business growth, saying that "our Small Business Network of the Americas is helping grow 250,000 small businesses throughout the region, and our WEAmericas initiative is helping to empower women entrepreneurs."

"My trip this week will build on this work."

The region's opportunities and challenges "can only be solved by all of us working together, in a spirit of shared responsibility - and that includes addressing the injustice of economic inequality," Obama said.

"I think this summit can build on the incredible progress the region has made in recent decades." 
 
 
Administration Touts Export-Driven Jobs in Quest for Support on Trade 
By Nick Timiraos 
9 April 2015
Dow Jones Institutional News
 
Some 11.7 million jobs were supported by exports last year, with almost 10% of those jobs coming from Texas, according to a report released by the Obama administration on Thursday.

The state-by-state look at the benefits of exports was another blast in the administration's concerted campaign this week to build support for its trade agenda as Congress begins to debate whether to grant President Barack Obama expanded trade promotion authority in coming weeks.

Commerce Secretary Penny Pritzker told reporters Thursday she expected the Senate could unveil a draft of a bill to ease the passage of trade agreements early next week. "We're anxiously awaiting to see the language," she said.

The state analysis of trade showed California, Washington, New York and Illinois rounded out the top five states with jobs supported by exports last year, behind Texas. Those five accounted for more than 25% of all export-backed jobs, according to the report, which was compiled by the Commerce Department and the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative.

The report also provides a breakdown by state of exports to the 11 other countries who are negotiating the Trans-Pacific Partnership, or TPP, a trade deal with Japan, Australia, Canada, Mexico, and other Pacific rim nations.

The Obama administration is pursuing legislation known as trade promotion authority that allows for up-or-down votes on trade deals. Obtaining so-called "fast track" authority would give the U.S. the leverage to "speak with one voice...and make sure we can get the best deal" on the TPP, said U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman on Thursday.

The fast track legislation faces opposition from many Democrats, labor unions and environmental groups. Activists have targeted Sen. Ron Wyden of Oregon, who is the top Democrat on the Senate panel that oversees trade policy.

Conservative Republicans in the House of Representatives pose another threat to the White House. While Republicans tend to support trade broadly, several conservatives say they've lost faith in President Barack Obama's international negotiating abilities and are reluctant to hand him greater authority.

Thursday's report followed a speech the day before by Jason Furman, the chairman of the White House Council of Economic Advisers, touting the benefits of trade in boosting productivity and innovation.

On Tuesday, Defense Secretary Ash Carter warned that the U.S. risked losing influence in Asia if the White House couldn't secure the trade promotion authority needed to conclude the TPP.

"Time is running out," he said. "We already see countries in the region trying to carve up these markets." 
 
 
Athens Says Sanctions On Moscow Are Futile 
By Laura Mills 
10 April 2015
The Wall Street Journal
 
MOSCOW -- Greek Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras told senior Russian lawmakers that Athens played an active role in preventing an expansion of European Union sanctions against Russia earlier this year.

The remarks by Mr. Tsipras, whose government is in tense negotiations with European officials over a deal to supply Athens with more rescue funds, underscored the defiant tone of his two-day trip to Moscow, where he has criticized European sanctions and stressed Russia and Greece's shared cultural and religious roots.

"We used the small force we have to help avoid further sectoral sanctions," Mr. Tsipras said Thursday, in comments carried by Russian state news agencies. "You probably know that the position of the new Greek government is that sanctions don't lead anywhere, they're a dead end."

European officials said at the time that there was no strong momentum behind sanctions amid a push for a new peace deal between Ukraine's government and Russia-backed separatists, which was signed in February. Greece supported a plan agreed to by European leaders last month to maintain existing sanctions.

"The European Union's unity when it comes to restrictive measures has been confirmed regularly, including with the new Greek government," said Maja Kocijancic, the EU's spokeswoman for foreign affairs.

Mr. Tsipras's trip, a rare official visit by an EU leader to Moscow after Russia annexed Crimea last spring, highlighted the careful balance he is trying to strike in seeking to bolster relations with the Kremlin and demonstrate an independent streak, without doing significant damage to his ties in Europe. Russian officials recognize there is little hope that Greece would block any EU moves on sanctions while its finances are reliant on decisions by European leaders.

The visit comes as Greece met a deadline for repaying part of its loan from the International Monetary Fund. The repayment of about 460 million euros ($494 million) had been due Thursday. But freeing up money to repay the IMF and other creditors has forced Athens to delay other domestic spending as its cash reserves continue to dry up.

Mr. Tsipras's visit, which included a meeting with President Vladimir Putin on Wednesday, has produced no major announcements. Both sides said Greece hadn't requested financial assistance, and Moscow gave no indication it was ready to fulfill requests from Athens to reduce the price Greece pays for natural gas or to exempt Greek producers from a ban on agricultural imports from the EU.
 
 
US says China, South Korea should let currencies rise 
9 April 2015
Agence France Presse
 
The US Treasury said Thursday that the Chinese and South Korean governments should stop intervening in markets to protect their undervalued currencies and let them rise.

The Treasury said in a semi-annual report to Congress on currency manipulation that no country, including China, intervenes enough to be officially labeled a manipulator, a charge that could result in countermeasures to protect US trade competitiveness.

It said Beijing had reduced its foreign exchange market intervention on behalf of the yuan, also known as the renminbi (RMB), consistent with promises to Washington.

Even so, the Treasury said the yuan remains "significantly undervalued", which helps the country maintain its massive trade surplus with the United States.

The yuan depreciated against the dollar by 2.4 percent in 2014 and has been flat so far this year.

But on a trade-weighted basis and adjusted for inflation, the Treasury said, the currency's real effective exchange rate against the dollar was up over 10 percent over the past six months.

Beijing has made "real progress" in letting its currency move more freely, the Treasury said, but added that it remains artificially low.

"China's currency needs to appreciate to bring about the necessary internal rebalancing toward household consumption that is a key goal of the government's reform plans and necessary for sustained, balanced global growth."

The Treasury also said that while South Korea joined the rest of the G20 leading economies in 2013 in committing to refrain from competitive devaluations, it continues to intervene to protect the won and keep it low.

It said that despite the country's large current account surplus and a sharp jump last year in its trade surplus with the United States, the won depreciated by nine percent against the dollar between June 2014 and February 2015.

"The summer of 2014 saw heavy intervention, followed by a relative lull from August through November. Intervention appears to have accelerated in December and January, a time of appreciation pressure on the won," the report said.

 
Costa Rica says invited to join OECD 
9 April 2015
Agence France Presse
 
Costa Rica said Thursday it has been invited to begin the process of joining the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), a 34-member club of industrialized nations.

"It's great news that marks a milestone in our development," said President Luis Guillermo Solis, who has lobbied for membership in the elite group.

The small Central American country, which is known for its ecotourism industry and its moves to attract foreign tech companies, would become the third Latin American country in the OECD, after Chile and Mexico -- though Colombia is also trying to join.

The process of gaining membership will now take up to two years, said Costa Rican officials.

The OECD, whose members account for about 63 percent of the global economy, is a forum for countries to collaborate on best practices in policy areas such as taxation, energy, investment, transport and the environment.

Costa Rica's economy ranks 81st in the world by size -- $49.6 billion in 2013, according to the World Bank.

 
IMF Chief Lagarde: Global Economy Seeing Moderate and Uneven Recovery 
9 April 2015
Dow Jones Institutional News
By Ian Talley  
 
WASHINGTON--The global economy risks getting stuck in a long period of low growth, heavy debt and high unemployment as policy makers fail to take appropriate action to spur output, the head of the International Monetary Fund warned Thursday.

While global growth is running at roughly the average of the last three decades, IMF Managing Director Christine Lagarde said it isn't enough to surmount stubbornly high jobless rates, hefty debt burdens and stagnating growth in several of the world's largest economies.

"We must prevent that new mediocre from becoming the 'new reality,'" Ms. Lagarde said in a prepared speech to the Atlantic Council ahead of next week's semi-annual meetings of the IMF and World Bank. "All policy space and levers must be utilized," she said.

The IMF chief said fund economists expect stronger growth in the U.S. and U.K. and improving prospects for the eurozone. But they are downgrading the growth outlook for many major emerging-market economies, including China, Brazil and Russia. The IMF is scheduled to update its January forecasts in a detailed global growth outlook on Tuesday.

Ms. Lagarde said financial risks to the global economy were rising, particularly amid a prolonged era of low--and in some cases negative--interest rates.

"These foster a higher risk tolerance on the part of investors, which can lead to overpricing," she said. If low interest rates persist, she said life insurers and defined benefit pension funds could soon face solvency challenges.

Strong currency movements--particularly the surge of the U.S. dollar against the euro and yen as central banks in Europe and Japan flood their economies with cheap cash--are also a threat to emerging-market economies that have borrowed in the greenback and face falling commodity revenues.
 
 
Editorial | El mecanismo de solución de diferencias de la OMC bajo la lupa
9 April 2015
Puentes
 
El mecanismo de solución de diferencias de la Organización Mundial del Comercio (OMC) es uno de los más completos y activos del sistema internacional. A él han acudido de manera constante tanto países desarrollados como en desarrollo para dirimir sus desacuerdos comerciales y resguardar sus derechos y obligaciones en el marco del sistema multilateral del comercio. Su récord es remarcable en cuanto a participación, cumplimiento y materias abordadas.

Con fallos sonados, algunas veces controversiales y otras muy vitoreados, el sistema ha ordenado la eliminación de barreras comerciales, como medidas antidumping y compensatorias; ha aclarado la relación y el orden entre comercio y otros fines, como la salud, el medio ambiente y la moral pública; ha generado impactos en el diseño y la aplicación de políticas públicas, como ha sucedido en los casos referentes a energía y de medidas sanitarias y fitosanitarias; y ha enfrentado a chicos y grandes con resultados diversos.

La revisión del mecanismo indica un estado funcional y efectivo aunque con importantes áreas de oportunidad para el beneficio de todos los involucrados: partes, terceros, grupos especiales, Órgano de Apelación, Secretaría de la OMC y Órgano de Solución de Diferencias. Los retos en cuanto a los asuntos cubiertos, el número creciente de disputas, la sofisticación de las apelaciones, los plazos y la afectación económica vigente durante todo el procedimiento, entre otros, son tema frecuente de discusión.

La región latinoamericana es uno de los principales usuarios del sistema: entre una quinta y una cuarta parte de los casos corresponden a los nuestros. Brasil, México y Argentina lideran la lista con disputas icónicas en contra de Estados Unidos, la Unión Europea y China y otras más con socios de la misma región y otros países en desarrollo.

Se espera que el fenómeno de las cadenas globales de valor, la proliferación de normas comerciales, incluidas las de los acuerdos megarregionales, el incremento de barreras no arancelarias, el mayor conocimiento sobre el mecanismo y la participación en aumento de más actores como China y Rusia sigan propiciando un mayor uso del mecanismo multilateral.

La comprensión y el impulso de la participación de nuestros países en el mecanismo se estiman vitales, pues es ahí donde se seguirá desarrollando el derecho de la OMC, escuchando los reclamos de gobiernos y a través de ellos, del sector privado, y garantizando la previsibilidad y seguridad de un sistema multilateral de comercio basado en reglas.
El equipo de Puentes.
END