HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO Week Ahead: Chief Heads to Germany to Discuss Doha Challenges at G7 Summit
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO chief expresses concern over slow progress for next meet
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO/Doha - agriculture still a stumbling block
·         HYPERLINK \l "India, others reject recalibration approach
·         HYPERLINK \l "Panamá busca acuerdo en comercio de servicios
·         HYPERLINK \l "Cambio climático, terrorismo y epidemias centran la segunda jornada del G7; G7
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S. Appeals WTO Tuna Labeling Decision, Cites Erroneous Findings
·         HYPERLINK \l "South Africa opens doors to U.S. chicken imports
·         HYPERLINK \l "Chinese Solar Panels Are Hit With Tariffs
·         HYPERLINK \l "Antidumping duty on steel imports from China, 2 other nations
·         HYPERLINK \l "Maggi row: FSSAI prepares national food recall framework, sends proposal to WTO
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO cites need for PHL to upgrade food sanitary controls
·         HYPERLINK \l "Uruguay Sign Deal To De-dollarize Bilateral Trade
·         HYPERLINK \l "Spohr: Airlines Can Learn From WTO
·         HYPERLINK \l "India asbestos industry thrives despite health warnings
·         HYPERLINK \l "El comercio mundial sigue a un ritmo mediocre por cuarto año
·         HYPERLINK \l "Dirty Rotten Ethanol Scoundrels
 
WTO Week Ahead: Chief Heads to Germany to Discuss Doha Challenges at G7 Summit
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, June 8, 2015
 
June 5 — The Director-General of the World Trade Organization plans to discuss the dour state of the body's latest Doha negotiations at the Group of 7 (G7) summit on June 8.
 
Azevedo's trip to Bavaria comes just days after trade ministers in Paris signaled that the failure to reach an agreement on Doha in December would signal the end of the 14-year negotiations (108 WTO, 6/5/15).
 
On June 9, Azevedo plans to meet with the president of the Economic Community of West African States, Kadre Desire Ouedraogo, at the WTO. Later that day, Azevedo will attend a lunch with Costa Rican President Luis Guillermo Solis Rivera in Geneva.
 
On June 10, Azevedo will deliver a speech at the Geneva Press Club entitled “The Road to Nairobi: the WTO's Big Challenge.”
 
TRIPS Council Meetings
 
On June 9 and 10, the WTO's Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) Council will consider the latest developments in the ongoing dispute over Australia's tobacco labeling laws.
 
Opponents of Australia's 2011 Tobacco Plain Packaging Act—the Dominican Republic, Honduras, Indonesia and Cuba—are expected to denounce recent legislative developments in the United Kingdom and Ireland to restrict how tobacco manufacturers label cigarette packaging.
 
The countries argue that such laws impose unfair restrictions on the use of trademarks, geographical indications and other markings in violation of the TRIPS Agreement, the Technical Barriers to Trade Agreement and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
 
Meanwhile, Ukraine announced last week that it would withdraw from the WTO challenge of Australia's tobacco laws and instead seek a mutually agreed upon solution to the issue (107 WTO, 6/4/15).
 
WTO Meeting Schedule
 
The working party for Kazakhstan's accession to the WTO will convene for an informal meeting on June 9, followed by a formal meeting June 10.
 
On June 11, the WTO preparatory committee on trade facilitation will meet to consider new country ratifications of the Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA).
 
Australia announced on June 4 that it would submit its TFA instrument of acceptance, making it the seventh WTO member to do so(108 WTO, 6/5/15). The TFA, which instructs WTO members to improve their customs procedures, will enter into force after two-thirds of the 161 WTO members submit their instruments of acceptance.
 
On June 11, the WTO committee on balance-of-payments restrictions will convene for a meeting.
 
 
WTO chief expresses concern over slow progress for next meet
 
Geneva, Jun 5 (PTI) Expressing concern over slow progress in talks to finalise agenda for Nairobi ministerial meeting in December, WTO chief Roberto Azevedo has told trade ministers from India and other countries that "political calls" will be required to reach a consensus.
Trade ministers of key WTO member countries, including India and the US, met in Paris on the sidelines of OECD meeting to discuss the pending issues of the Doha Round and finalise the agenda for the WTO Ministerial Conference in Nairobi.
WTO Director-General Roberto Azevedo said that the members need to move quickly to find convergence on the agenda "if we are to deliver results that are both meaningful and achievable".
India too had earlier expressed concerns over slow progress in finalising the agenda.
Azevedo said: "I am becoming increasingly concerned that we are not making the progress we need to deliver a substantive work programme in July. This is particularly the case in the key areas of agriculture, industrial products and services".
"I told ministers that we were rapidly approaching the point where political calls will be required," he added.
Commerce and Industry Minister Nirmala Sitharaman was in Paris to attend the meeting.
The WTO members would have to finalise the agenda for the Ministerial Conference -- the highest decision making body of the World Trade Organisation -- scheduled from December 15-18 in Nairobi, Kenya.
The Doha Round of negotiations launched in 2001 have remained stalled since July 2008 due to differences between the rich and the developing nations mainly over the subsidies given to farmers.
As per estimates, successful conclusion of the Doha Round could boost global trade by up to USD 200 billion a year. 
 
 
WTO/Doha - agriculture still a stumbling block
 
Brussels, 05/06/2015 (Agence Europe) - In Paris on Thursday 4 June, the Director General of the WTO, Roberto Azevedo, told the trade ministers of the OECD countries and the European Commissioner for Trade, Cecilia Malmstrom, of his concern at the slow progress in the key fields of the negotiations of the Doha round. At the WTO headquarters in Geneva, blockages over the agricultural issues are still holding up the discussions on industrial products.
At Thursday's OECD ministerial, Azevedo repeated the concerns he expressed to the heads of delegation of the WTO on 1 June. “While I am encouraged by the good engagement that we have seen in recent months, I am becoming increasingly concerned that we are not making the progress we need to deliver a substantive work programme in July. This is particularly the case in the key areas of agriculture, industrial products and services. I heard views today that are clearly divergent on some of these issues. It is vital that we move quickly to find convergence if we are to deliver results that are both meaningful and achievable. I will do everything I can to support members to find a way forward”, Azevedo explained after the meeting. “I told ministers that we were rapidly approaching the point where political calls will be required. It was encouraging in this regard to hear strong support from ministers for the WTO and a recognition of the importance that they attach to a successful Nairobi meeting”, he added.
The Kenyan Foreign Minister, Amina Mohamed, who will chair the Nairobi conference, sent out a “clear message” on the need to deliver outcomes. “There was a strong focus throughout the discussion on the importance of development and LDC issues”, Azevedo added.
Following the Bali mini-agreement concluded in December 2013 and the agreement on implementing the trade facilitation agreement (TFA) reached at the end of 2014, the WTO member countries are due to set out their work programme by 31 July on the main sections of the Doha round - agriculture, industrial products, services and rules - in order to make a comprehensive political agreement possible in Nairobi.
The president of the WTO negotiation committee on industrial products (market access for non-agricultural products), the Swiss ambassador Remigi Winzap, warned on 1 June that ultimately, it will be difficult to get formal proposals to move the talks forward if no progress is made in agriculture. During the meeting, many developing members confirmed their reluctance to fully commit to the talks on industrial goods until the level of ambition on agriculture is clarified. Some of them stressed their concerns at the lack of progress on special and differentiated treatment and other flexibilities for this category of countries.
The Doha agenda will be discussed by the G7 leaders at their summit at Schloss Elmau on 7 and 8 June, where they will be joined on Monday by Azevedo.
Spectacular drop in cost of trade under TFA, OECD forecasts. The implementation of the WTO's trade facilitation agreement (TFA) could bring the cost of global trade down by between 12.5% and 17.5%, and the developing countries would be the principal beneficiaries of this, according to the 2015 edition of the trade facilitation indicators drawn up by the OECD, and presented in Paris on Thursday.
Trade costs comprise all tariff and non-tariff costs including transport, border -related and local distribution costs from foreign producer to final user in another country.
Countries which implement the TFA in full will reduce their trade costs by anywhere from 1.4 to 3.9 percentage points more than those which only implement the minimum requirements of the agreement. The greatest opportunities for reductions in the costs of trade are in the low and lower middle-income countries, according to the OECD.
The TFA comprises a raft of binding rules to simplify and streamline customs procedures, thereby facilitating trade flows. It will enter into force once two thirds of the member countries of the WTO have completed their internal ratification processes. (Emmanuel Hagry)

 
India, others reject recalibration approach
Live Mint
June 6, 2015
Trade officials from 29 nations fail to reach consensus; situation threatens conclusion of DDA talks by year end
D. Ravi Kanth

Trade minister Nirmala Sitharaman says India will not allow attempts to divert attention from the development dimension of the Doha Round. Photo: Pradeep Gaur/Mint Paris: An informal meeting of trade officials in Paris on Thursday failed to agree on the broad contours of the post-Bali work programme to conclude the World Trade Organization’s (WTO) Doha Development Agenda (DDA) negotiations by the end of the year.
India, along with China, Brazil, and South Africa, rejected calls from developed nations to adopt a so-called “recalibration approach” to conclude the Doha Round, said an official who took part in the meeting but did not want to be identified. Such an approach will help the US, the European Union, Japan, Canada, Norway and Switzerland, among others, to discuss only those issues with which they are comfortable in the Doha agenda and bury all difficult issues.
Australia, which hosted the meeting, asked the participants what outcomes ought to be included in the post-Bali work programme; what outcomes must be achieved by the 10th ministerial conference later this year; and what needs to be done between now and the Nairobi ministerial meeting in December.
Trade ministers and officials from 29 countries took part in the meeting held on the margins of the annual Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) meeting.
India’s commerce minister Nirmala Sitharaman set the tone for the meeting, delivering the country’s strongest statement yet on what needs to be done to conclude the Doha negotiations.
Sitharaman said India will not allow attempts to divert attention from the development dimension of the Doha Round. She emphasized that special and differential flexibilities must guide the post-Bali work programme. “To conclude the Doha Round on the basis of market access is unacceptable (to India),” the minister told her counterparts, according to an official aware of the meeting’s proceedings.
Ambition in agriculture, she said, hinges on the reform of the trade-distorting domestic subsidies for which the so-called landing zones are spelt out in the 2008 revised draft modalities. Without taking names, she criticized major industrialized countries for diverting attention from their trade-distorting domestic subsidy reduction commitments by pointing a finger at farm subsidies provided by developing countries for their resource-poor farmers.
The Doha Development Agenda negotiations were launched in 2001 to address global inequities in the international trading system and enable the poorest and developing countries to integrate into the global trading system.
But the negotiations remained paralysed because of intransigent positions adopted by some major industrialized countries to reduce their trade-distorting domestic farm subsidies running into billions of dollars in the last several decades.
The US has repeatedly maintained that it will undertake commitments to reduce its most trade-distorting domestic subsidies only when the emerging countries such as China and India accept commensurate obligations to reduce their subsidies.
For India, issues such as the special safeguard mechanism for curbing unforeseen surges in imports of agricultural products, the special products with zero tariff, the permanent solution for public stockholding programmes for food security, and a special package of concessions for the poorest countries are must-haves in the post-Bali work programme, the commerce minister said.
India wants a comprehensive post-Bali work programme that would address all the outstanding issues in all areas of the Doha package without fail, Sitharaman emphasized.
China, Indonesia, Brazil, South Africa and Argentina, among others, have joined India by demanding a comprehensive post-Bali work programme that would deliver the results promised in all the existing Doha mandates.
The mandates include the Doha Ministerial Declaration of 2001, the 2004 July Framework Agreement, the 2005 Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration, and the unsettled 2008 revised draft modalities that suggested the landing zones for reducing trade-distorting subsidies and tariff cuts for agriculture and industrial products.
South Africa’s trade minister Rob Davies said efforts to bring about a recalibration have led to uneven outcomes in which the level of ambition in agriculture is drastically reduced while it is increased in the market access for industrial goods. Davies argued that African countries need policy space for carrying out their industrial policies.
Brazil criticized the slow progress made in agriculture. While work in the industrial goods and services are proceeding at a brisk pace, laggards such as agriculture are further left behind, Brazil charged.
According to a trade minister present at the meeting, the US, however, issued an inflexible message saying there are only two options: Either pursue a recalibration approach for lowering the overall level of ambition in the Doha negotiations or face a failure of the Doha Development Agenda negotiations at the 10th ministerial meeting in Nairobi in Kenya beginning on 12 December.
The US deputy trade representative Ambassador Michael Punke who took part in the meeting suggested that “red lines” of India, China, and the US don’t overlap, meaning the three countries will find it difficult to reduce their farm subsidies, said a participant who asked not to be quoted.
The US official also admitted that there is little evidence of convergence on any issue at this juncture, the participant argued.
EU trade commissioner Cecilia Malmstrom defended the US stance to lower the level of ambition based on the recalibration approach.
“There is no realistic assessment on issues among ministers at this juncture,” an EU official told Mint.
In his concluding remarks at the end of the meeting, World Trade Organization director general Roberto Azevedo expressed concern about countries sticking to their old positions. Azevedo said he has not heard anything new from the participants.
As of today, there is no deal, the WTO chief told the participants.
Kenya’s foreign minister Amina Mohammed agreed with the director general that there is no common ground among participants at this juncture.
 
 
Panamá busca acuerdo en comercio de servicios 
7 June 2015
La Estrella (Panamá)
 
Panamá participó en la primera reunión Ministerial sobre las negociaciones para un Acuerdo en Comercio de Servicios (TISA por sus siglas en inglés), efectuada en París, Francia el pasado jueves 4 de junio.

Con esta negociación, Panamá, busca brindarle mayor seguridad jurídica a las operaciones transfronterizas de servicios y potenciar al país como un centro de atracción de inversiones para la región.

Esta negociación participaron veinticuatro economías miembros de la Organización Mundial del Comercio (OMC). Entre las que se puede mencionar Australia, Canadá, Chile, Taipéi Chino, Colombia, Costa Rica, Estados Unidos, Unión Europea, Hong Kong, Islandia, Israel, Japón, Corea, México, Nueva Zelanda, Noruega, Pakistán, Perú, Suiza, Liechtenstein, Paraguay, Uruguay, y Turquía.

En total están participando en las negociaciones cincuenta y un países, si se cuenta los Estados miembros de la Unión Europea.

El titular del Ministerio de Comercio e Industria, Melitón Arrocha señaló que 'Panamá con una economía orientada mayormente hacia el sector servicios, y con un aporte de este sector al PIB, oscilando alrededor del 77%, considera importante participar en este foro de negociaciones, en donde participan activamente los principales actores del comercio mundial de servicios para definir un nuevo marco de reglas legales para este importante sector'.
 
 
Cambio climático, terrorismo y epidemias centran la segunda jornada del G7; G7 
 
Elmau (Alemania), 8 jun (EFE).- La lucha contra el cambio climático, la batalla contra el terrorismo islamista y la coordinación internacional para evitar epidemias como la del ébola centrarán los debates de hoy en la cumbre del G7 en Alemania.
Los líderes de Estados Unidos, Alemania, Francia, Reino Unido, Italia, Canadá y Japón concluirán su reunión en el palacio de Elmau, en los Alpes bávaros (sur de Alemania), con dos nuevas sesiones de trabajo temáticas.
La jornada se centrará en los esfuerzos multilaterales para hacer frente al calentamiento global, un asunto en el que los Gobiernos alemán y francés se han aliado para tratar de culminar con éxito la Cumbre del Clima de París de finales de este año.
El presidente francés, François Hollande, y la canciller alemana, Angela Merkel, quieren que en París se logre un acuerdo global y vinculante para reducir de forma radical las emisiones de CO2 y otros gases que provocan el calentamiento global.
La cita de Elmau podría servir para que los países más industrializados anuncien o eleven sus compromisos nacionales de reducción de emisiones y comprometan más dinero para el Fondo Verde del Clima, que debe contar con 100.000 millones de euros (112.000 millones de dólares) anuales a partir de 2020 para apoyar a los países más afectados por el cambio climático.
En este ámbito, varias organizaciones no gubernamentales como Oxfam y Greenpeace han criticado que Alemania, anfitriona de esta cumbre, dependa tanto del carbón para su producción eléctrica, ya que este combustible fósil es altamente contaminante.
La segunda sesión de este lunes y la siguiente comida de trabajo estarán dedicadas al auge del terrorismo islamista de Irak a Nigeria, la cooperación internacional para el desarrollo y la respuesta ante crisis sanitarias.
Boko Haram y el grupo Estado Islámico serán abordados en un primer momento y los miembros del G7 contarán para ello con la participación y aportación de los presidentes de Nigeria, Muhammdu Buhari, y de Túnez, Beyi Caid Essebsi, así como del primer ministro de Irak, Haider Al Abadi.
Con ellos abordarán también la renovación de los Objetivos de Desarrollo del Milenio, punto que ha incluido en la agenda la presidencia alemana del G7 y en el que se quiere alcanzar un compromiso de futuro para que 500 millones de personas salgan del hambre en el mundo en 2030.
Otro capítulo que la canciller quiere colocar en la agenda internacional es la salud, ámbito en el que se espera un respaldo a la propuesta presentada por Alemania, Ghana y Noruega para crear una fuerza médica de respuesta rápida ante epidemias como el ébola.
Se trabaja también en un compromiso para impulsar la puesta en marcha de planes nacionales frente a las resistencias a los antibióticos, con normas claras para acabar con las prescripciones permisivas tanto en personas como en animales.
En este último tramo de las deliberaciones estarán también presentes los presidentes de Liberia, Ellen Johnson Sirleaf; y de Senegal, Macky Sall; el primer ministro de Etiopía, Hailemariam Desalegn, y el presidente de la Unión Africana, Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma.
Participarán también el secretario general de la ONU, Ban ki-moon; la directora gerente del Fondo Monetario Internacional, Christine Lagarde; el presidente del Banco Mundial, Jim Yong Kim; el secretario general de la OCDE, Ángel Gurría; el director general de la Organización Mundial de Comercio (OMC), Roberto Azevedo, y el director general de la Organización Internacional del Trabajo (OIT), Guy Ryder. EFE
 
 
U.S. Appeals WTO Tuna Labeling Decision, Cites Erroneous Findings
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, June 8, 2015
 
June 5 –The U.S. appealed a recent World Trade Organization decision that its “dolphin-safe” labeling rules discriminate against certain fishing regions in violation of international trade rules.
 
The appeal marks the latest step in the decades-long dispute over U.S. rules that prohibit countries from labeling their tuna products as “dolphin-safe” if the tuna were caught using fishing methods that could ensnare dolphins.
 
In April, a WTO dispute settlement ruling said the various certification, tracking and verification requirements in the U.S. tuna labeling rules “accord less favorable treatment” to Mexican tuna products than are accorded to products from the U.S. and “any other country,” in violation of the WTO Technical Barriers to Trade Agreement and the 1994 General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (72 WTO, 4/15/15).
 
The U.S. said the WTO panel erred in its conclusion because it was based on erroneous findings on issues of law and legal interpretation, according to the appeal notification.
 
The WTO Dispute Settlement Body will next determine whether and when it will consider the U.S. appeal.
 
 
South Africa opens doors to U.S. chicken imports 
 
* U.S. to initially export 65,000 tonnes a year
* Deal within tolerance of S.African poultry industry 
 
WASHINGTON, June 6 (Reuters) - South Africa will end punitive duties on U.S. chicken and renew imports, initially 65,000 tonnes a year, under an agreement reached by the two countries, South Africa's trade and industry minister said on Saturday.

South Africa imposes "anti-dumping" duties of above 100 percent on certain chicken products and industry groups said removing those import barriers opened a market which had been closed for the last 15 years.

The deal was "within the tolerance of the (South African poultry) industry and is something we can all live with," Rob Davies told Reuters in a telephone conversation from Paris, where the deal was concluded.

The agreement, which would see the United States emerge as one of the top poultry exporters to Africa's most advanced economy, should help smooth the passage of the African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) currently before American lawmakers.

"We believe we have placed ourselves in a much stronger position," Davies said.

AGOA is a non-reciprocal trade preference initiative providing duty-free treatment to U.S. imports of certain products from eligible sub-Saharan African (SSA) countries.

U.S. Senators Johnny Isakson, a Republican, and Chris Coons, a Democrat, who have been pushing for removal of duties and threatened to block AGOA's passage unless market access was increased, said final details should be thrashed out by the end of the month.

That should clear the way for poultry shipments to the South African market before the end of 2015, they said, cheering exporters.

"We look forward to working with our government and the South Africans on implementing this important agreement," the USA Poultry & Egg Export Council and the National Chicken Council said in a statement.

After meeting in Paris, U.S. and South African officials had also agreed on actions to resolve issues relating to poultry, pork and beef exports, U.S. Trade Representative's office said on Friday.

South Africans consume more chicken than people in any other African country. Local producers have struggled to keep up with rising demand. (Reporting by Krista Hughes and Will Dunham in Washington and Wendell Roelf in Cape Town; editing by Clelia Oziel) 
 
 
Chinese Solar Panels Are Hit With Tariffs 
By Matthew Dalton 
8 June 2015
The Wall Street Journal Asia
 
BRUSSELS -- European authorities imposed sharp tariffs on three large Chinese solar-panel manufacturers, kicking them out of a pact signed with the Chinese industry that allows them to export to Europe with minimal tariffs.

The European Commission, the European Union's executive arm, said on Friday that Canadian Solar, ET Solar and ReneSola Ltd. are violating an agreement signed in 2013 with the Chinese solar-panel industry that allows them to avoid import tariffs of up to 70%. The pact requires the Chinese producers to export their panels above a minimum price and abide by several other conditions.

The commission warned five other Chinese producers that they need to shore up their compliance with the solar-panel agreement, people familiar with the investigation said, but decided against imposing full tariffs. The commission also concluded that dozens of other Chinese producers are complying.

"The responsibility for those breaches lies alone with the three exporting producers in question; the monitoring and the verifications have not revealed any systematic breaches by a major number of exporting producers," the commission said.

The move is part of a long-running battle between the Chinese solar-panel industry and manufacturers in Europe and the U.S. Western producers say that the Chinese firms, fed by hefty Chinese government subsidies, have built up huge overcapacity and are dumping their surplus products into Western markets at unfairly low prices.

The U.S. has imposed repeated rounds of tariffs on the Chinese industry. The EU in 2013 was on the verge of slapping large tariffs on the Chinese industry. But the two sides negotiated a last-minute settlement that would allow more than a hundred Chinese firms to continue exporting to the EU without big tariffs.

European producers have for months argued that Chinese firms are committing widespread violations of the agreement and have asked the commission to investigate.

Among other violations of the settlement, the commission said Canadian Solar offered unreported "benefits" to its customers in Europe to buy their panels, effectively lowering the sales price below the minimum import-price set by the agreement.

The commission also questioned the practice by Canadian Solar and ReneSola of selling solar cells to firms in non-EU countries for assembly into panels that are then sold to the EU. Because the EU tariffs only apply to panels coming from China, the practice, though not a direct violation of the agreement, allows the two firms' solar cells to enter the 28-nation EU unrestricted by the agreement.

The commission said the practice made monitoring the two firms' compliance with the agreement "impracticable."

The EU recently opened an investigation into whether Chinese firms are "circumventing" the agreement by intentionally routing solar cells into other countries, such as Taiwan, for assembly into panels with the purpose of avoiding the tariffs.

 
Antidumping duty on steel imports from China, 2 other nations 
 
New Delhi, Jun 7 (PTI) India has slapped anti-dumping duty of up to USD 316 per tonne on imports of certain steel products from three countries, including China, to protect domestic producers from below-cost inbound shipments.

A duty of USD 309 per tonne has been imposed on imports from China, while USD 316 per tonne duty has been fixed for Malaysia and USD 180 per tonne for Korea.

The Finance Ministry imposed the duty on the recommendation of Directorate General of Anti-Dumping Duty.

The duties have been imposed for five years on imports of certain variety of hot-rolled flat products of stainless steel used in sectors such as auto.

These steel products are used for manufacture of process equipment, reactor vessels, material handling equipment, railways, pipes and tubes, automotive components, architecture, building and construction, industrial fabrication and power sector.

The Directorate General of Anti-Dumping Duty (DGAD), under the commerce ministry, had initiated and conducted investigation into dumping, injury and causal links between dumping and injury to the domestic industry.

Jindal Stainless had filed an application before the authority for initiation of an anti-dumping investigation concerning alleged dumping of certain "Hot Rolled Flat Products of Stainless Steel of ASTM Grade 304 with all its variants" originating in or exported from China, Korea and Malaysia.

In its probe, the DGAD had concluded that the goods have been exported to India from these countries below its associated normal value, thus, resulting in dumping of the product.

It has also concluded that "the domestic industry has suffered material injury and the injury has been caused to the domestic industry, both by the volume and price effect of dumped imports of the subject goods originating in or exported from the subject countries".

The Finance Ministry has said that the anti-dumping duty imposed shall be effective for a period of five years.

Welcoming the decision, Indian Stainless Steel Development Association said: "Domestic stainless steel industry has started showing signs of being a sick industry, as excessive imports have threatened the huge investments and resulted in underutilisation of capacities."

Countries initiate anti-dumping probes to check if domestic industry has been hurt because of a surge in below-cost imports. As a counter-measure, they impose duties under the multilateral WTO regime. PTI RR MR ABK

 
Maggi row: FSSAI prepares national food recall framework, sends proposal to WTO 
Soma Das 
7 June 2015
The Economic Times
 
NEW DELHI: Amid the controversy over Maggi noodles, the central food regulator has sought to expedite the process of putting in place a national framework to recall products when found unsafe or defective.

“The proposed regulatory framework has been sent to the World Trade Organisation (WTO) for comments and inputs from other member countries, a consultation process that could take up to three months,” a government official told ET.

The framework should be in place by December, he added. “If no major changes are suggested in the existing draft, then the food recall procedure will be notified even before that,” the official said.

The structure and process of the food recall system was first drafted by the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India or FSSAI in 2011 but is yet to be implemented.

The central food regulator can direct a company to recall products as it has done in the case of Maggi after finding violations. But unlike the US and Europe, India doesn't yet have a full regulatory framework in place to supervise the entire recall process while classifying food products into categories based on the risk.

The US Food and Drug Administration for instance carries out more than 7,000 domestic food safety inspections and supervises hundreds of recalls every year.

Under the system proposed by FSSAI, the recall process may be initiated by a report of the manufacturer, importing company or wholesaler or a complaint by the distributor, retailer, consumers, media, government agencies and state or central food regulators.

All participants in the distribution chain will be responsible for implementing the recall. The food company is expected to maintain records, such as names and addresses of suppliers and customers as well as the nature of food and date of purchase and delivery, batch code, pack size, brand name, date of manufacture and best-before date for one year or the expiry of shelf life.

The state food administration will inspect plant premises and supervise the recall process, keeping the central food regulator in the loop. The central food regulator will guide state food commissioners in execution of the recall. Every recall is proposed to have a unique identity number and its closure and follow-up would also be monitored by the food regulatory agencies.

Experts feel the recall system won’t in place by the year-end considering capacity constraints.

“Today the food recall system is as good as the efficiency of the state FDA agency. So while some states such as Gujarat, Tamil Nadu have well-oiled systems in place to recall food products, others such as Bihar, Jharkhand lag behind,” said Bejon Mishra, a former FSSAI member. “In fact, some states are still following the old (Prevention of Food Adulteration Act) law, where you seized and confiscated food products when found to be violating law.” The idea of having a new food safety law (Food safety and Standard Act) was to modernize the food supply chain in the country and improve coordination between the Centre and states, which hasn't happened to the expected level due to the lack of will, he said.

Government officials defended the delay in setting up the recall system. “We started from scratch in food regulation in 2010. There were too many priority areas before a food recall system on which the regulator was focusing simultaneously in the last five years,” the official said.

According to data compiled by FSSAI from various states, the number of food samples tested have gone up from 64,593 in 2011-12 to 72, 200 in 2013-14. Of this, states found 8,200 samples not conforming in 2011-12 and launched convictions and imposed penalties in 764 cases. In 2013-14, while 13, 571 samples failed tests, penalties were imposed in 3,845 cases.

For a foolproof recall system, the country will have to implement track-and-trace technology, which can monitor the movement of products from factory to retailer, Mishra said.
 
 
WTO cites need for PHL to upgrade food sanitary controls 
Daphne J. Magturo 
8 June 2015
BusinessWorld
 
THE PHILIPPINES, alongside its developing neighbors in Southeast Asia, has some catching up to do to in implementing sanitary measures on agricultural trade, according to the World Trade Organization (WTO).

In its 2014 Annual Report released last week, the WTO said its Standards and Trade Development Facility completed last year its study of Southeast Asian countries, including Cambodia, Laos, Thailand, and the Philippines, "to examine how SPS (sanitary and phytosanitary) controls are implemented for selected food and agricultural products."

"A number of procedural obstacles associated with implementation of SPS measures were identified during the research, including complex and lengthy procedures, excessive or duplicative document requirements, high formal and informal fees, lack of transparency, repeated or redundant border inspections and long waiting times," WTO said.

"The research confirmed recent findings of the World Bank's Logistics Performance Indicators Report, which suggests that, in some countries, agencies responsible for implementing SPS controls must catch up with other border agencies in modernizing their procedures," it added.

WTO also noted the importance of ensuring health protection while keeping transaction costs "as low as possible" to facilitate trade.

The agency recommended "simple reforms" that can be carried out on a priority basis. These include improved transparency as well as fewer and more uniform document requirements to reduce waiting times at borders.

"Adjusting the frequency of SPS inspections to the level of risk presented by specific products and/or traders can make SPS controls more efficient and optimize resource allocation," WTO added. "Incentive structures should be reformed, so that unnecessary regulatory activity is not rewarded with revenue."

There are also longer-term recommendations that would require more time and resources, and must be included in the targets of the government.

These are coordinated border management initiatives - which involve coordination of policies, programs and delivery among cross-border regulatory agencies; or electronic single-window systems, which allow traders to submit all import, export and transit information required by regulatory agencies via a single electronic gateway; and one-stop border posts.

WTO said several Southeast Asian countries have started to "actively" implement the recommendations.

The research was based on "relevant provisions" of the SPS Agreement, as well the guidelines of the three standard-setting bodies under the WTO SPS Agreement: the Codex Alimentarius, the World Organization for Animal Health, and the International Plant Protection Convention. 
 
 
Uruguay Sign Deal To De-dollarize Bilateral Trade
By David Haskel
WTO Reporter, June 8, 2015
 
June 5 — Argentina and Uruguay signed a deal June 5 allowing the two South American nations to conduct bilateral trade in domestic currencies instead of U.S. dollars.
 
“Adoption of this mechanism will allow the de-dollarization of regional trade and promote greater integration among Mercosur nations,” Argentina's Central Bank said in a statement.
 
Mercosur—the Southern Common Market—also comprises Brazil, Venezuela and Paraguay.
 
The new mechanism will also help cut costs in trade between the two neighboring countries and help small- and mid-sized enterprises in particular, the bank said.
 
Buenos Aires has a similar deal with Brazil—South America's largest economy and Argentina's top trading partner—in place since 2008.
 
Access to dollars is severely-restricted in Argentina, where the cash-strapped government has implemented a series of trade and foreign exchange steps in order to curb imports and help preserve the Central Bank's foreign reserves.
 
Those restrictions have elicited international criticism. In 2012, the U.S., Japan, and the European Union filed a joint complaint at the World Trade Organization saying that, in particular, Argentina's Advance Sworn Import Declaration (DJAI) and other trade-related requirements (TRRs) unfairly discriminated against their shipments.
 
The WTO ruled that those requirements violated article XI:1 of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), and a WTO appellate panel upheld that ruling in January (11 WTO, 1/16/15).
 
 
Spohr: Airlines Can Learn From WTO
Jun 7, 2015 Jens Flottau | AviationWeek.com 
 
Lufthansa CEO Carsten Spohr suggests that the airline industry should take a close look at how the World Trade Organization (WTO) has been dealing with trade disputes in other industries and try to learn from those mechanisms. 
 
In the past three months, Spohr has had much greater and more immediate worries, the crash of a Germanwings Airbus A320 in March. He has been praised for his proactive and open communication.
 
And he continued that way at the IATA AGM with some clear messages.
 
“There is a time before the accident for Lufthansa and there is a time after,” he said. “It is still beyond imagination.” Spohr stressed that the airline has an obligation to try and learn from the accident and that he was grateful for the support by other airlines which to him shows “the greatest common value is safety.”
 
The crash happened at a time in which Lufthansa already was in serious difficulties. Those problems—high costs and a declining share in key market segments—have not gone away. But Spohr sees some signs of improvement at least on the revenue side: The new business-class product has seen bookings ahead of expectations. Demand for the new premium-economy cabin is around 10% ahead of internal projections and traffic in April and May has been very strong.
 
On the cost side, however, many issues are still unresolved. Spohr nevertheless hopes that arbitration that Lufthansa has entered with pilot union Vereinigung Cockpit (VC) will lead to a cost structure that is sustainable.
 
 
India asbestos industry thrives despite health warnings 
Rajesh Joshi 
7 June 2015
Agence France Presse
 
Gripping his inhaler as he struggles to breathe, rake-thin Chinnapan Chinnakannu blames his years spent labouring in one of India's scores of asbestos cement factories for his debilitating illness.

When he first started at the factory in western Gujarat state, Chinnapan said he was given protective clothing "but later they stopped providing us with masks and shoes".

"Initially I suffered from breathlessness, but slowly the frequency increased and reached a point where I could hardly work," said Chinnapan, who was diagnosed with asbestosis, or scarring of the lungs, in 2007.

"Slowly I started losing weight, I couldn't even drink water as it made me vomit immediately," the 64-year-old said in his one-bedroom house on the outskirts of Ahmedabad.

A pariah product in most of the West, blamed for thousands of deaths, asbestos is hugely popular in the developing world -- including in India, where it's a $1.4 billion growing industry.

Nations at a UN meeting in Geneva last month tried to add chrysotile, or white asbestos to a list of dangerous substances subject to export restrictions.

But the move was blocked by leading asbestos exporter Russia and other developing nations, a stance supported by India, one of the world's biggest importers.

Activists and unions say India's government must start to recognise the dangers posed by asbestos, whose fibres doctors worldwide say lodges in the lungs causing cancer and other diseases.

More than 50 nations, including all members of the EU, have banned all forms of asbestos, which the World Health Organization says kills at least 107,000 people annually.

"The time has come to ban this product outright and India must see that. It's just too dangerous," said hazardous materials activist Gopal Krishna.

New Delhi defended its position in Geneva, saying there was "no proof" India's asbestos factories or their products -- used mainly in low-cost housing -- are unsafe.

"We took a call which looked pro-industry but this was done in the absence of credible data (on the health risks)," Shashi Shekhar, India's top official in charge of hazardous materials and chairman of the Central Pollution Control Board, told AFP.

Shekhar said he has commissioned a study into the possible health effects which would take up to two years to complete.

"The whole world is talking about it (asbestos) in a grave way, and so we have to see whether they are right or wrong."

In Ahmedabad, business is brisk at a huge warehouse where asbestos wholesaler Mansur Satani has little time to talk of health concerns, other than to say they don't exist.

"This is the peak trading period for the year," Satani said as the phone rang constantly in his office.

The industry and other asbestos supporters say curly-fibred chrysotile is safe, and only other forms with more jagged fibres are dangerous.

More than 50 factories throughout India use white asbestos as an ingredient in mainly cement roofing sheets, wall panels and pipes. More than 400,000 tonnes of asbestos is imported every year to feed the plants.

TK Joshi, director of the Centre for Occupational and Environmental Health in New Delhi's Lok Nayak hospital, warned of huge consequences for the industry's workers.

"It could run into thousands (of sick). And that (figure) could rise exponentially in future as the use of asbestos in the last decade and a half has gone up considerably," Joshi told AFP.

But he said exact figures on those already suffering were unknown because of poor record keeping. Many doctors treating patients were also unaware of the symptoms or did not think to ask about exposure to hazardous materials.

More than 300,000 workers are employed in the factories, while thousands more tradesmen install the products, bought at markets and warehouses like the one in Ahmedabad.

"Many cases go undiagnosed leading to an underestimate of the magnitude of harm."

Joshi said he was concerned about a lack of public awareness of asbestos dangers, and poor enforcement of safety laws.

The industry denied its employees were at risk, saying all precautions were being taken, including using machines to handle bags of asbestos to prevent fibres escaping into the air.

Industry association executive director John Nicodemus also rubbished WHO and ILO research on international asbestos deaths, saying they lacked detail.

"That shows that these figures are meaningless and the health concerns are simply overblown," Nicodemus told AFP in an email.

Gujarat Composite, which runs the factory where Chinnapan worked, told AFP it adhered to all government-mandated safety requirements, that none of its staff were sick and it was unaware of Chinnapan's case.

Raghunath Manvar, whose non-profit Occupational Health and Safety Association fights for worker compensation, said about 30 were known to be suffering asbestosis in Gujarat, where some 20 factories were based.

"Besides asbestosis, over 100 people are suffering from mesothelioma which is also due to exposure to asbestos," Manvar added.

After being diagnosed, Chinnapan said he fought a long battle for compensation from the state insurance scheme, and now receives 2,700 rupees a month ($42).

He also has a retirement pension from the factory, but with most of the money spent on medicines, Chinnapan must still work to feed his family, something he finds increasingly difficult as the illness takes hold.

"I did not understand what was happening to me. Now almost all my money is spent on medicines and doctors."

 
El comercio mundial sigue a un ritmo mediocre por cuarto año
España, Francia, Italia y Japón crecen por el estímulo interior, China intenta esta vía y EE UU frena por factores internos y externos; La fragilidad del crecimiento global
7 June 2015
La Nueva España
 
Mario Draghi, presidente del Banco Central Europeo (BCE), dijo el miércoles que esperaba una recuperación económica en la eurozona más vigorosa que la que se está produciendo y atribuyó principalmente a "una mayor debilidad de las esconomías de fuera de la eurozona" lo que denominó "ligera pérdida del ritmo de crecimiento".

Draghi se incorporó así, aunque con mayor cautela, a los mensajes inquietantes de otros dirigentes internacionales. Desde el pesimista diagnóstico del "estancamiento secular" que emitió el exsecretario del Tesoro de EE UU Larry Summer en 2013 hasta la "nueva mediocridad" que abandera la directora-gerente del Fondo Monetario Internacional (FMI), Christine Lagarde. A ellos se sumó el lunes el reelegido secretario general de la Organización para la Cooperación y el Desarrollo Económico (OCDE), Ángel Gurría, quien aportó trazos también sombríos: "La inversión es muy débil, el crédito es débil, el comercio es débil y hay una erosión importante de la confianza. La situación es mejor, pero mediocre. Así no se puede ir muy lejos". Gurría pidió "reformas, reformas y más reformas".

Los hechos parecen demostrar que fiarlo todo a la política monetaria ultraexpansiva (fabricando dinero en cantidades ingentes y tirando los tipos de interés por el suelo) no es suficiente para relanzar las economía, dados los enormes lastres que acumuló el mundo (gigantescos desequilibrios exteriores, inmensas burbujas inmobiliarias y crediticias, deudas privadas mayúsculas y ahora endeudamientos públicos colosales) durante la etapa expansiva de los años 90 y 2000.

Olivier Blanchard, economista jefe del FMI, sostuvo en mayo que el estímulo monetario ayuda a elevar el nivel de producción hasta aquel que corresponda al potencial de crecimiento de cada área, pero que elevar el potencial de crecimiento sólo es posible con reformas de oferta.

Draghi viene repitiendo desde agosto que también se precisan políticas fiscales de estímulo, sugiriendo recortes del déficit y reducción de impuestos en unos casos, y aumento de las políticas presupuestarias expansivas en las economías que tengan margen para ello. Luis María Linde, gobernador del Banco de España, animó el 30 de mayo a que los países poco endeudados (una referencia a Alemania y otros) incentiven sus demandas internas. Se trata de crear, en suma, demanda global suficiente para todos, que es justo lo que falta.

Las economías se comportan como veleros. Las reformas de oferta aligeran la estructura del barco y esto facilita su flotabilidad en cuanto sube la marea. Lo liviano asciende antes y con menos agua. Por eso España, tras una portentosa destrucción de empleo, recortes sociales, reducciones salariales y flexibilización laboral, emerge ahora con mayor vigor que otros grandes países del área. La subida de la marea la aporta el BCE con los flujos e inyecciones de liquidez. Pero su efecto puede ser transitorio. Y no aporta velocidad de crucero. Para esto se necesita viento que impulse la navegación. Es decir, demanda global que empuje. Durante 50 años, el comercio internacional creció a un ritmo casi doble que el PIB. Pero la Organización Mundial de Comercio (OMC) sólo prevé un aumento del 3,3% para este año. Su secretario general, Roberto Azevêdo, dijo que 2015 será el cuarto año consecutivo con un aumento inferior al promedio. El comercio internacional tiene un efecto multiplicador. Y, a la inversa, su debilidad frena el crecimiento global o al menos lo desacelera.

Ante su debilidad, los países se refugian en la demanda interna como último recurso. En la Gran Depresión se optó por el proteccionismo, lo que agravó la recesión. Ahora no es tanto una acción deliberada como la consecuencia de los lastres que pesan sobre la economía global, del desendeudamiento simultáneo de todos los agentes y del efecto combinado de políticas depreciadoras que terminan por neutralizarse.

 
REVIEW & OUTLOOK (Editorial)
Dirty Rotten Ethanol Scoundrels 
8 June 2015
The Wall Street Journal
 
Mark down May 29 as the date when the last tether connecting ethanol subsidies to reality came unhitched, and the fuel made from corn and tax dollars achieved a kind of postmodern perfection. On the same day the Obama Administration conceded that the U.S. auto fleet cannot practically consume enough ethanol to fulfill Congress's quotas, it announced a new program so motorists can consume more ethanol.

In other words, the point of the subsidy is the subsidy, and therefore the U.S. must subsidize ethanol because the U.S. already subsidizes ethanol. Once in place, such self-referential mandates appear to be eternal.

The 2007 energy bill's renewable fuel standard requires certain annual volumes of ethanol to be bootlegged into the U.S. gasoline supply, but for years the mandate has crashed into the "blend wall." Ethanol is corrosive, and gallons of conventional gas with concentrations of the stuff higher than 10% damage the engines and fuel systems of most of the cars and trucks on the road today.

The problem is that Americans aren't guzzling enough gallons to achieve Congress's mandates at E-10 -- that is, 10% ethanol, 90% gas. Either we need to drive more in less fuel-efficient cars, consuming more overall. Or the concentration of ethanol in a given gallon needs to rise, risking accidents, breakdowns and valve, pump, cylinder and injector replacements rarely covered by consumer warranties. For model years 2001 through 2011, no car makers allow blends above E-10, and a little fewer than half say it is safe to fill up with E-15 for the last two model years.

To avoid filling this ethanol junkyard but also to avoid displeasing the corn lobby, the Environmental Protection Agency simply refused to finalize the quotas for 2014 and 2015. So the EPA has finally admitted in a regulation that "due to constraints in the fuel market to accommodate increasing volumes of ethanol, along with limits on the availability of non-ethanol renewable fuels," the volume targets "cannot be achieved."

The EPA thus proposed quotas that are 3.75 billion gallons below the statutory minimums for 2014, 2015 and 2016. Renewable Fuels Association president Bob Dinneen raged that this rare EPA recognition of the real world "eviscerated the program's ability to incentivize investments in infrastructure that would break through the blend wall."

He means he wants government to force gas stations to invest in the special blender pumps that can dispense E-15 or even E-85. As with engines, ethanol also degrades ordinary pumps, piping and storage tanks.

So as a balm for Mr. Dinneen's disappointment, the Agriculture Department offered to pick up the tab and pledged $100 million in grants for states to build special equipment to service the six of every 100 U.S. vehicles designed to run on these higher ethanol blends. These dollars were pulled from a New Deal outfit called the Commodity Credit Corporation that was created in 1933 to "stabilize, support and protect farm income and prices," as the USDA proudly put it in a press release.

At least this naked income transfer to ethanol producers respects truth in advertising. Ethanol has been sold for four decades as a wonder liquid that would reduce dependence on foreign oil and then carbon emissions, but reams of academic research and the evidence of experience show it achieves the opposite of both goals.

Such is the corruption of corporate welfare, which continues for no reason other than that it already exists. The cycle won't end until Congress allows consumers to buy, well, E-zero.
END


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.