WTO celebrates 20 years of helping global economy grow
L'Organisation mondiale du commerce à l'épreuve d'un renouveau pour ses 20 ans
Delegates of 45 nations, WTO Chief to be at CII's Jaipur summit
Compliance Rulings On Aircraft, Tuna, COOL To Headline DSB Action In 2015
Sudan making new push at WTO membership: official
China Ends Rare-Earth Minerals Export Quotas
China frees prices of commodities, services in fresh reforms
India bans imports on account of avian influenza; to challenge WTO order on US poultry
Bdesh battles to get backing from peers as time runs out
Different tariff-cut goals drag 16 Asia-Pacific nations' trade talks
A new push is needed on multilateral co-operation
A Trade Opportunity for Obama and the New Congress
 
WTO celebrates 20 years of helping global economy grow  
  
GENEVA, Jan 1 (KUNA) -- The World Trade Organization (WTO) celebrated Thursday the 20th anniversary of its foundation to be the only global international organization dealing with the rules of trade between nations.
"Over the past 20 years, this organization has, on balance, made an important contribution to the global economy and to smoother trading relations between nations," WTO Director-General Roberto Azevedo said in a press release.
"20 years ago, on 1 January 1995, the WTO opened its doors for business. Since then this organization, and the system of transparent, multilaterally-agreed rules that it embodies, has made a major contribution to the strength and stability of the global economy," Azevedo said in a press release from the WTO headquarters in Geneva.
He pointed that the WTO, over the past two decades, has helped to boost trade growth, resolve numerous trade disputes and support developing countries to integrate into the trading system.
"Indeed, when the global economy is more interconnected than ever, it is difficult to imagine a world without the WTO," he said.
Azevedo added that the WTO has also provided a bulwark against protectionism, the value of which was made plain in the trade policy response to the 2008 crisis, which was very calm and restrained in contrast to the protectionist panic that followed previous crises.
"Our organization has evolved since 1995. We have welcomed 33 new members, ranging from some of world's largest economies to some of the least developed. Today our 160 members account for approximately 98 per cent of global trade," he explained.
"Moreover, at our 9th Ministerial Conference in Bali in 2013, we took our first major step forward in updating multilateral trade rules." The measures agreed in Bali were a real breakthrough for the WTO, and they will provide a significant economic boost. In December 2014 WTO Members came together to recommit to implementing all aspects of the Bali package.
According to Azevedo, 2015 is set to be an eventful year for the WTO.
"We will be working to implement all aspects of the Bali package and we already have a full negotiating agenda - including a deadline of July to conclude a detailed road map to tackle the remaining issues of the Doha Development Agenda," he said.
"The WTO will also be seeking to make progress in negotiations on trade in environmental goods and on an agreement to remove tariffs on a wide range of information technology products." (end) ta.ibi  
 
 
L'Organisation mondiale du commerce à l'épreuve d'un renouveau pour ses 20 ans 
5 January 2015
Les Echos
 
L'OMC s'est donné six mois pour relancer les négociations de Doha.
 
« Alors que l'économie mondiale est plus interconnectée que jamais, il est difficile d'imaginer un monde sans l'OMC. » Le directeur général de l'Organisation mondiale du commerce (OMC), le Brésilien Roberto Azevêdo, ne pouvait pas faire moins pour défendre une institution multilatérale qui a fêté, le 1er janvier, ses vingt ans. Pourtant, sans une concession majeure des Etats-Unis accordée à l'Inde pour sa politique agricole à la fin de l'année dernière, l'OMC aurait pu sombrer corps et biens. Roberto Azevêdo en avait convenu en indiquant que l'Organisation était dans une situation des « plus graves ». Il est vrai que, depuis le 1er janvier 1995 où l'OMC a succédé au GATT (Accord général sur les tarifs douaniers et le commerce), le monde du commerce a profondément évolué. Mais « l'OMC a beaucoup fait pour l'économie mondiale au cours de ces vingt dernières années », a assuré son directeur général.

L'Organisation a ainsi accueilli 33 nouveaux membres. Désormais au nombre de 160, ils couvrent 98 % du commerce mondial. « L'OMC a contribué à stimuler la croissance du commerce mondial, elle a permis de résoudre un grand nombre de différends commerciaux et d'intégrer les pays en développement dans l'économie mondiale », a souligné Roberto Azevêdo. Ajoutant que l'Organisation « a fourni un rempart contre le protectionnisme lors de la crise » financière de 2008-2009. « La panique des précédentes crises mondiales a pu être évitée », a-t-il dit. C'est globalement vrai, même si certains pays n'ont pu s'empêcher de prendre certaines dispositions protectionnistes régulièrement dénoncées par l'Organisation même.

Néanmoins, en vingt ans, l'OMC n'aura pu qu'accompagner et réguler le commerce mondial. Plus de 500 conflits ont été résolus par les panels de l'Organe de règlement des différends sous l'égide de l'OMC ou par des consultations bilatérales entre les pays en conflit. Mais jamais le commerce n'a été libéralisé un peu plus. Un objectif qui lui avait été assigné lors de la réunion ministérielle de Doha en 2001. Encore désigné comme le « cycle du développement », jamais un accord n'a pu être conclu sous la direction du prédécesseur de Roberto Azevêdo, le Français Pascal Lamy.

« Plus de résultats »

Le Brésilien a la lourde tâche de le ranimer. Il a six mois pour le faire. Le succès de la réunion ministérielle de Bali, en décembre 2013, un temps mis en péril par l'intransigeance indienne, a été confirmé. D'ici à fin juillet, les pays membres doivent s'entendre sur un calendrier complet de négociations. L'accord de Bali va aussi permettre de faciliter les échanges commerciaux, grâce à une simplification des procédures douanières à laquelle les pays en développement vont prendre part.

Alors que la dixième conférence ministérielle de l'OMC se tiendra du 15 au 18 décembre à Nairobi (Kenya), Roberto Azevêdo a reconnu qu'il « y avait beaucoup de travail à faire et bien des challenges à relever. Nous devons aboutir à plus de résultats et plus rapidement ». Un chantier d'autant plus délicat que les accords commerciaux bilatéraux, tel le partenariat transatlantique que l'Union européenne et les Etats-Unis négocient, et plurilatéraux, comme le Tisa (Trade in Services Agreement) discuté depuis 2013 par 23 grands pays, menacent l'esprit multilatéral que représente l'OMC. Richard Hiault
 
 
Delegates of 45 nations, WTO Chief to be at CII's Jaipur summit 
 
New Delhi, Jan 2 (PTI) Over 1,000 delegates from 45 countries including the US, China and Australia will participate in a three-day 'Partnership Summit' in Jaipur beginning January 15.

With the theme 'Partnerships for Shared New Realities', the summit would be inaugurated by Commerce and Industry Minister Nirmala Sitharaman and Rajasthan Chief Minister Vasundhara Raje.

WTO Director General Roberto Azevedo, Asian Development Bank Vice President Wencai Zhang, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) Deputy Secretary General William Danvers and World Intellectual Property Organization Director General Francis Gurry will be among the top representatives of multi-lateral organisations who will attend the summit.

Besides Ministers from countries such as Angola, Australia, Cambodia and Iraq would also participate in the event.

The summit is an annual event of CII and is organised in association with the Ministry of Commerce and Industry.

"It is a platform that would enable close examination of the partnerships and synergies that will spark the next phase of global growth and develop strong multi-country linkages and networks to assist the transformation of the global economy," CII said in a statement.

It said that Rajasthan is an important place to organise such summits as it attracts one third of the tourists coming into India and a prosperous textile industry is present here.

"The state offers opportunities of large investments in a variety of areas ranging from hotels, amusement parks, ropeways, health resorts and transportation. The easy availability of natural resources makes the State an attractive investment destination for sectors such as food processing," it added. PTI RR MKJ
 
 
Compliance Rulings On Aircraft, Tuna, COOL To Headline DSB Action In 2015 
World Trade Online
Posted: December 30, 2014 
 
A familiar cast of World Trade Organization disputes involving the United States will stay at the top of the agenda in 2015, as they remain mired in litigation over whether the offending party has complied with prior adverse WTO rulings.
 
Among the compliance proceedings that will come to the forefront in 2015 are dueling cases by the United States and the European Union over the subsidies each side provided to their respective aircraft manufacturers; Mexico's case against the U.S. "dolphin-safe" label for tuna that it charges keeps it effectively out of the U.S. market; and the challenge by Canada and Mexico of the U.S. country-of-origin labeling regime for meat.
 
A decision in the tuna case could be first one to be announced, as the compliance panel is slated to issue its report by the end of the 2014. The compliance panel in that case (DS381) has been considering since April whether a 2013 rule issued by the U.S. implements an earlier WTO ruling. In doing so, it is examining whether the new rule makes a "legitimate regulatory distinction" in setting different requirements for tuna caught in the Eastern Tropical Pacific Ocean and other fisheries to obtain the dolphin-safe label.
 
In the aircraft disputes, the two WTO compliance panels evaluating an EU challenge of tax breaks for Boeing and a U.S. challenge of EU member state support for Airbus are set to release their reports in the middle and end of 2015, respectively. The Airbus case (DS316) was delayed in October "due to the substantive and procedural complexities" of the dispute, according to a communication from the panel. In May, the compliance panel for the Boeing dispute (DS353) delayed its report due to "the scale and complexity of the dispute."
 
In a related development, the EU on Dec. 19 requested another set of WTO consultations over a new round of tax breaks provided by Washington state to Boeing, charging they amount to illegal subsidies contingent on the use of domestic products over imported ones.
 
Another crucial dispute involves Canada and Mexico's challenge (DS386 & DS384) of U.S. country-of-origin labeling (COOL) for meat. In October, a compliance panel found that a 2013 U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) rule attempting to remedy the original 2008 farm bill provision mandating the label had, in fact, worsened the program's impact on Mexican and Canadian livestock producers.
 
In an appeal filed in November, the United States is seeking to reverse the compliance panel's finding that the COOL rule violates Article 2.1 of the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT), which requires that members' technical regulations not discriminate against imported products. But the compliance panel sided with the U.S. in finding no violation of Article 2.2 of the TBT Agreement, which requires technical measures to be no more restrictive than necessary to fulfill a legitimate objective. Canada and Mexico have filed separate appeals of that finding.
 
In a related development, the omnibus spending bill funding the government in FY 2015 that President Obama signed into law on Dec. 16 contains a provision that puts the onus on the administration to propose changes to the COOL to bring it into compliance with the WTO rulings. It asks USDA to report its recommendations to the House and Senate Agriculture Committees by May 1, 2015 or 15 days after the final resolution of the case, whichever is earlier.
 
This requirement, like others in the bill, is technically not binding, but congressional aides have warned that agencies ignore the demands of appropriators "at their own peril."
 
In another dispute under compliance litigation, a panel evaluating whether China complied with an adverse WTO ruling on its trade remedy duties applied to imports of grain-oriented electrical steel (GOES) is slated to release its report by the second quarter of 2015 (DS414). In that dispute, the U.S. is alleging that China did not conduct an injury analysis in accordance with WTO rules when Beijing applied trade remedy duties on GOES imports.
 
One dispute that has not yet advanced to the compliance stage is a successful U.S. challenge of China's restrictions on electronic payment services providers. The U.S. has continued to charge that China has failed to comply with a 2012 panel ruling in this case, but has not sought a panel ruling under DSU Article 21.5.
 
Apart from compliance proceedings, the DSB has a heavy load of other disputes involving the U.S., some of which have been delayed because of the high volume of cases and the staff shortages at the legal section. One of these delayed rulings is for a Korean challenge of U.S. countervailing duties on imports of large residential washers. The panel evaluating that dispute, composed in June 2014, on Dec. 15 delayed the release its report until the end of 2015.
 
Jan. 15 marks the deadline for the Appellate Body to release its report in Argentina's appeal of a panel ruling that faulted several import restrictions imposed by Buenos Aires as violations of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (DS444).
 
A separate dispute brought by Argentina in 2012 against a U.S. ban on imports of Argentine beef should see a panel report by early 2015 (DS447). Another dispute brought by Argentina against U.S. measures restricting lemon imports (DS448) from a region of that country, which was filed at nearly the same time in mid-2012 as the meat dispute, still has not made it further than the consultations phase.
 
Additionally, parties have until Jan. 16 to appeal a panel ruling that faulted the U.S. Department of Commerce practice of initially presuming that all exporters from non-market economies (NMEs) like Vietnam and China are units of the same government-run entity in AD proceedings (DS429).
 
Meanwhile, Feb. 28 marks the deadline for a WTO panel to deliver its report in China's challenge (DS471) of U.S. AD methodology.
 
The DSB composed a panel for the U.S. challenge of Indian domestic content requirements for both phases of its Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission on Sept. 24, meaning the deadline for the panel to complete its work will be March 24 (DS456). In a separate dispute, India and the U.S. have also asked the DSB to adopt a panel report faulting Indian measures against imports of U.S. poultry by Jan. 26 (DS430).
 
Other pending disputes include two separate U.S. challenges of Indonesia's restrictions on the importation of horticultural products, animals and animal products. A panel for the first dispute (DS455) was composed in April 2013, while the parties remain in consultations for a second dispute brought by the U.S. (DS478) in May 2014.
 
The reasonable period of time for China to implement DSB recommendations after a panel and the Appellate Body faulted its restrictions on exports of rare earths, tungsten and molybdenum expires on May 2, as agreed by Beijing and Washington (DS431).
 
The European Union and Canada, meanwhile, have agreed on a reasonable period of time expiring on Oct. 18 for the EU to bring its regime into compliance with a mixed Appellate Body ruling that said an EU ban on the importation of seal products constituted an arbitrary and unjustifiable discrimination under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (DS400).
 
Apart from the EU's new assault on Boeing's tax breaks from Washington state, several other disputes involving the U.S. still remain in the consultation phase.
 
One is a U.S. challenge of Chinese support for its automobile and auto parts industry (DS450) for which consultations were requested during the heat of the 2012 presidential campaign.
 
Another is the Korea's Dec. 22 request for consultations with the U.S. over a highly scrutinized U.S. Department of Commerce decision that led to the imposition of antidumping AD duties on imports of oil country tubular goods (OCTGs) from Korea. Seoul's request centers on Commerce's methodology for determining which profit information to use to calculate the fair value of the product in question, although it also takes issue with other aspects of Commerce's July 2014 final determination, sources said.
 
 
Sudan making new push at WTO membership: official
Sudan Tribune
4 January 2015
 
January 3, 2015 (KHARTOUM) – Sudan is undertaking fresh efforts to join the 160-member World Trade Organisation (WTO), the minister of trade Osman Omer Sharif said on Saturday.
The World Trade Organization WTO logo is seen at the entrance of the WTO headquarters in Geneva April 9, 2013 (REUTERS/RUBEN SPRICH)
Sharif said his country plans to make a formal request to join WTO this month adding that they are making the final touches in preparation for a meeting with WTO Commissioner General.
 
According to sources that spoke to Sudan Tribune from Geneva last June, Sudan has been seeking WTO membership since November 1994 but negotiations have stalled since 2004.
 
The sources noted that the government has allocated a big budget for WTO negotiations while training opportunities provided by WTO to Sudan are given to specific people.
 
To join, candidate countries have to offer to cut tariffs and change their laws to guarantee the rights of importers and exporters under WTO rules.
 
The minister of trade told the German news agency (DPA) according to pro-government Ashorooq TV that Sudan established a department in his ministry to manage WTO membership process.
 
He said that laws relating to trade in Sudan have been translated all official languages at WTO and all statistics are now updated. All projects and Sudan’s vision for the business structure in the country and the trade system were also included, he added.
 
Sharif pointed out that Sudan is a WTO monitored state since 20 years ago but has yet to obtain membership.
 
He attributed this situation to political reasons.
 
"There is no reason regarding the laws or the efficiency of Sudan and its ability to obtain membership," Sharif added.
 
"We conducted bilateral and collective negotiations, and we were supposed to hold a third round in June 2004 that would have Sudan join the WTO, but this was postponed indefinitely, and this postponement continued until today," he added.
 
The official noted that the secession of South Sudan disrupted the procedures and forced them to revise to the data and figures to reflect the new situation.
 
On the trade situation in Sudan, he said that "oil made us lose sight of agricultural products, and non-petroleum products have become an important figure, and was able to compensate for [lost] oil income, as well as the entry of gold and other minerals such as iron and manganese, which was discovered in Sudan and in large quantities that contributed to national income”.
 
The expert at WTO in Geneva Fadl Mohiydeen Tahir told Sudan Tribune previously that authorities in Sudan suffer several problems and lack transparency in addition to a misconception they have that major powers are impeding Sudan’s accession to the WTO.
 
He noted that the West, including the United States affirmed their support for the accession of least developed countries to the organisation, pointing out that Sudan prevented itself from taking advantage of opportunities and support from international organizations. 
.
Fadl said that Sudan’s failure to join the WTO contributed to the lack of economic and transparent investment laws which reflected on the instability of the economy and the spread of corruption and cronyism.
 
He pointed out that Sudan joining WTO would contribute to attracting foreign and domestic investment and achieving transparency and stability in line with WTO rules and prevents the flight of the national capital and attracting national and foreign investors, which requires a large package of measures and laws.
 
 
China Ends Rare-Earth Minerals Export Quotas
China Ends Decade-Old Quota System Limiting Exports of Metals Essential For Production of High Tech Missile Systems and Smartphones
By Chuin-Wei Yap 
5 January 2015
The Wall Street Journal Online
 
BEIJING—China ended a decade-old quota system limiting exports of rare-earth minerals that was at the center of a World Trade Organization dispute which the country lost in 2013, industry officials said Monday.

Beijing will instead monitor rare-earth exports using a system of permits issued based on trade contracts, without the need for additional documents of state approval, according to a Ministry of Commerce statement.

“The most important factor for the abolition of the rare-earth quota is that the government has been moving toward greater market orientation, with the state increasingly stepping back from the picture,” said Jin Bosong, deputy director of the commerce ministry’s International Trade and Economic Cooperation Research Institute.

The U.S., European Union and Japan in 2012 complained that China was using the quota to push up global rare earth prices in violation of World Trade Organization rules. The WTO ruled against China [http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052702304527504579167132115793314]in October 2013.

As global demand weakened and sources of supply amped up for these 17 metals, essential for the production of high-technology applications like missile systems and smartphones, China’s rare-earth exports have fallen short of the quota’s limits in recent years, making the policy increasingly redundant.

The world’s second-largest economy, which also produces about 90% of the world’s rare-earth minerals, exported 24,866 metric tons of the metals in the first 11 months last year, well below the 30,611 tons it set as the quota for 2014.

 
China frees prices of commodities, services in fresh reforms 
 
SHANGHAI, Jan 5 (Reuters) - China has freed prices of 24 commodities and services, removing all price controls on agricultural products, among other reforms, its top economic planning agency said. 
 
The National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC) issued a document last month, letting the market decide prices of tobacco leaves, the last agricultural product previously under the government's price control, it said in the announcement published on its website, www.ndrc.gov.cn [http://www.ndrc.gov.cn], late on Sunday. 
 
The official Xinhua news agency in a report said that China began to liberalise the farm produce market in 1978, and the government has now only retained its regulatory role through state storage programmes, by maintaining minimum prices and giving subsidies on some products. 
 
The NDRC announcement showed that prices of railway bulk cargo, parcels and privately-funded cargo and passenger transport had also been allowed to freely float. 
 
Among others in the latest reforms, prices of domestic air cargo, passenger transport of some airlines, port service fees, such as fees on container loading, ship rubbish treatment and water supply, were also allowed to be set by the market. 
 
 
India bans imports on account of avian influenza; to challenge WTO order on US poultry
Dilasha Seth & Madhvi Sally, ET Bureau
Economic Times,  Jan 2, 2015, 04.17AM IST
 
NEW DELHI: India plans to challenge a World Trade Organisation order that told New Delhi to remove curbs on poultry imports from the US, saying it's important to protect the industry that supports livelihood of millions of people in the country.
 
India had banned poultry imports on account of avian influenza, which WTO called 'unscientific'." We are filing an appeal very soon to the appellate body. We may get improvement in the panel decision itself, which will help us in future," a commerce department official told ET."We are, no doubt, committed to protect the industry in a WTO compliant way," the official said, adding that the poultry sector is growing in many states and has huge employment potential. Fearing loss of business, local poultry players have been pressing the government to take steps to ensure that the US doesn't dump chicken legs, an item that they say Americans usually discard, in the Indian market.
 
Currently, fresh chicken in retail was selling for Rs 180 a kg and chicken legs for Rs 240 a kg. On the other hand, chicken drumsticks from US come in at around Rs 50-60 a kg.G B Sundararajan, managing director of Suguna Poultry Farms, said the industry was working to provide international quality product at affordable rates.
 
On the likely threat from the US, he said, "We are adopting wait-andwatch policy. The outcome to the issue can take six months to two years." India is the fourth largest producer of chicken in the world after the US, China and Brazil, with annual production of 3.5-4 million tonnes.Per-capita consumption of chicken in India has been on the rise, with eating habits changing predominantly in the metro cities, driving demand for fresh meat and meat products.
 
Organised players such as Godrej Tyson, Suguna Foods, Venkateshwara Hatcheries and Alchemist have been expanding their retail base and increasing capacities. Currently, foreign suppliers have no direct access to the Indian poultry market.
 
Global poultry majors like Pilgrim's of the US, Brazil's Perdigao and Charoen Pokphand Foods from Thailand are keen to enter the country, industry executives said.US-based Tyson Foods entered the Indian market in 2006 through a joint venture with Godrej.
 
In the 1980s, US poultry breeding company Cobb had a joint venture with Venkateshwara Hatcheries. Also, the Aviagen Group, the world's premier poultry breeder, had set up an integrated backend processing plant in Coimbatore
 
 
Bdesh battles to get backing from peers as time runs out 
Shamsul Huda 
4 January 2015
The Financial Express (Bangladesh)
 
Bangladesh, Jan. 4 -- Bangladesh needs to get the global trade regime governing the intellectual property rights extended to protect its pharmaceuticals industry, but support from its peers in the Third World is 'challenging', an expert has said.

The privilege under the WTO's special TRIPS (Trade-related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights) that covers pharmaceutical products expires this year.

The general transitional period for trade has already been extended till 2021 and it covers interests of most of the least-developed-country members of the World Trade Organisation.

But, experts say, it is difficult for Bangladesh to get the transitional period for pharmaceuticals extended under the special TRIPS since this is not a field of common interest of the club of world's poorer nations.

Munir Uddin Ahmed, a professor of pharmacy at the University of Dhaka, said it may be challenging for Bangladesh to motivate the least-developed country (LDC) members for collectively lobbying the WTO as Bangladesh is the only LDC seeking to get the special TRIPS for pharmaceuticals extended up to 2021.

An official at the WTO cell under the ministry of commerce said: "We understand that TRIPS extension will be more helpful for Bangladesh than other LDC members and it is not easy to unite all the members."

He said as the general TRIPS covers different businesses of most of the LDC members and it has already been extended. So, there might be little effort from them for extension of the TRIPS for pharmaceuticals.

The Ministry of Commerce (MOC) official said: "We are increasing our diplomatic efforts and by February 2015 we will submit a proposal to the LDC group committee headed by Uganda."

He said, "At first it is urgent for a unity and negotiation among the LDC members and then we will submit our demand to the TRIPS Council."

Experts in the pharmaceutical industry said time was running out, and if the WTO does not extend the TRIPS, Bangladesh may face trouble both on local and export market.

Currently, under the WTO-TRIPS period till 2015, Bangladesh is manufacturing and exporting any kind of generic drugs, be it patented or not.

The MOC official expressed the hope that the TRIPS extension would help all the LDC member-countries as it would help reduce drug prices in their countries, including Bangladesh.

He said Bangladesh with support from the experts and consultants in the WTO Geneva headquarters was already working and the effort would be intensified to that end.

Another official said: "We have prepared a position paper and with the support of the LDC members there would be regular meetings for extension of the TRIPS in the WTO."

 
Different tariff-cut goals drag 16 Asia-Pacific nations' trade talks 
Kyodo News
 
TOKYO, Jan. 2 -- Negotiations of a free trade pact involving 16 Asia-Pacific nations remain stuck, with the parties no closer to deciding on a tariff elimination target, several negotiation sources said Friday.

India, China and South Korea have said they want to scrap tariffs on 40 percent of all imported items as part of the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership framework, while Japan and the 10-member Association of Southeast Asian Nations countries have called for 80 percent as an initial goal, they said.

The difference in their level of ambition for trade liberalization casts doubt on the likelihood of a compromise being reached by the end of this year as planned, according to the sources.

Six rounds of RCEP negotiations have been held since the ASEAN members plus its six regional partners -- Australia, China, India, Japan, New Zealand and South Korea -- launched the talks in May 2013 based on a November 2012 agreement.

The ASEAN groups Brunei, Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Vietnam.

At the latest RCEP talks held in India in early December, the ASEAN bloc proposed eliminating tariffs on 80 percent of traded goods within a 10-year period. But India and China held firm on their desire to remove duties on only 40 percent, with South Korea voicing its support, the sources said.

A bilateral free trade pact between China and South Korea, which was effectively agreed on by the countries' leaders last November, calls for 66 percent of China's tariff lines and 77 percent of South Korea's to be abolished within 10 years based on trade value.

A Japanese government source has said the 80 percent goal tabled at the RCEP talks would "not be easy for South Korea."

A tariff elimination rate remains yet to be decided in a proposed trilateral free trade agreement between Japan, China, and South Korea.

India also keeps rejecting an ambitious trade liberalization target, with a negotiating source suggesting the country has an "overwhelming excess of imports over exports." The emerging South Asian economy imports large amounts of communication devices and other goods from China.

Meanwhile, Australia and New Zealand have called for trade liberalization rates higher than 80 percent.
 
 
A new push is needed on multilateral co-operation 
2 January 2015
Financial Times (FT.Com)
Over the past year a co-operative world order - built around trade and the rule of law - has begun to creak and strain. Following its annexation of Crimea, Russia, the eighth-largest economy, was hit by international sanctions. War is raging in the Middle East. Disease, in the form of the Ebola virus, is ravaging parts of Africa. The EU is still struggling to resolve the euro crisis. Efforts at international co-operation to combat these common threats have too often been weak and disappointing.

The year 2015 should be one in which multilateralism and international co-operation make a comeback. Fortunately, the year's political calendar will present a number of opportunities to do just that across important areas from trade to climate to development and arms control.

The next 12 months are likely to be make-or-break for efforts to achieve an ambitious Transpacific trade deal - the TPP (or Trans-Pacific Partnership). Progress towards a Transatlantic deal, known as TTIP, is less well advanced. But the coming year will give a good sense of whether politicians in Europe and North America are serious about doing a deal. For European politicians in particular who are searching for ways to restore economic optimism, progress on a trade deal would be immensely helpful.

Efforts to strike an international agreement on climate change will reach a climax at a summit in Paris in December. The failure of the Copenhagen summit of 2009 led to a lasting loss of confidence in the world's ability to reach an agreement on the climate.

This time the largest economies, notably China and the US, look more serious. A climate deal in Paris would do much to arrest the dangerous fatalism that too often intrudes upon discussions of climate change.

Efforts to stop nuclear proliferation look almost as fraught as the climate negotiations. Once again, 2015 will be an important year. In May, the 189 state signatories of the nuclear non-proliferation treaty will meet in New York to review the state of the treaty - an exercise that is held every five years.

Against a backdrop of rising tensions between Russia and the US, and turmoil in the Middle East, it seems unlikely that the NPT review conference will make significant progress towards disarmament. Merely holding the line against further proliferation could be counted an achievement. The real chance for progress in nuclear disarmament, however, remains the long-running negotiations between Iran and a group of world powers, informally led by the US. A deal to curtail the Iranian nuclear programme in return for a lifting of economic sanctions would be a significant achievement for President Barack Obama, allowing him to follow up a rapprochement with Cuba with a reconciliation with Iran.

Finally, 2015 will be a significant milestone in international development. In September, yet another major UN conference in New York will seek to replace the Millennium Development goals, adopted in 2000, with a new set of Sustainable Development goals.

More progress was made towards the MDGs, for example in reducing child mortality, than many sceptics believed possible in 2000. It is important that, in setting new development goals, the UN resists the temptation to go for rhetorically satisfying targets that will be hard to define and achieve, for example on income inequality. These should be eschewed in favour of more practical and achievable ones, on issues such as clean water and childhood vaccination.

Leaders have the chance over the next year to relaunch multilateral co-operation on a range of vital issues. They should seize the opportunity.

 
A Trade Opportunity for Obama and the New Congress 
By Charles Boustany and Robert B. Zoellick 
30 December 2014
The Wall Street Journal Europe
 
After the midterm U.S. elections, political commentators identified trade policy as one area for cooperation between President Obama and the Republican Congress. We agree. Under the U.S. Constitution, Congress has authority over trade. But the active direction and use of that authority depends on an energetic executive, in partnership with Congress.

According to a recent Pew Research survey, 66% of Americans believe greater U.S. involvement in the global economy is a "good thing," with only 25% thinking it is bad. The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) trade agreement is a "good thing" in the eyes of 55% of Americans, versus 25% who consider it bad; the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) scores 53% good and 20% bad. These inclinations offer opportunity.

Prof. Richard Neustadt explained to President John F. Kennedy that the presidency relied on the "power to persuade." It's time for Mr. Obama to persuade on trade. He must make use of the convening power of the executive to bolster his advocacy. His administration must work closely with Congress -- to listen, explain, address problems and cut deals.

So why does trade matter? First, Americans are feeling squeezed. On the eve of the election, Pew Research reported that 79% of Americans considered the economy to be poor or at best fair. A boost in U.S. trade can increase wages and lower living expenses for families -- offering higher earnings and cutting taxes on trade. Manufacturing workers who produce exports earn, on average, about 18% more, according to the Commerce Department. Their pay raise can be traced to the higher productivity of competitive exporting businesses.

Since World War II, U.S. trade policy has focused on lowering barriers to manufacturing and agricultural products. But U.S. trade negotiators also use free-trade agreements (FTAs) to pry open service sectors and expand e-commerce. In recent years, such business services as software, finance, architecture and engineering employed 25% of American workers, more than twice as many as worked in manufacturing. Business service employees earned over 20% more than the average manufacturing job, and the U.S. consistently runs a trade surplus in business services.

Over the past five years, the World Bank reports, about 75% of the world's growth has been in emerging markets, which generally have higher barriers to trade. As America's highly productive farmers and ranchers have seen, growing world markets are the drivers of higher sales. With the boom in U.S. energy innovation and production, fuel exports could spur more investment and jobs in that sector, too.

American families, and businesses, benefit from higher incomes and lower-priced imports. The World Trade Organization reports that the North American Free Trade Agreement and the Uruguay Round, the last big global trade agreement, have increased the purchasing power of an average American family of four by $1,300 to $2,000 every year. The Peterson Institute for International Economics estimates that the new trade deals in the works could offer that family another $3,000 or more a year.

Second, the U.S. and world economies desperately need a shift from extraordinary governmental spending and zero-interest-rate monetary policies to growth led by the private sector. Sustained growth can only be generated by private investment, innovation and purchases. American companies need greater confidence in free-enterprise policies before investing their big cash reserves. Trade policy offers an international partnership to overcome structural impediments to growth.

The negotiations for the TPP, for example, aim to create an open trade and investment network among the U.S., six current FTA partners, and five new ones. The biggest additional market is Japan, a pivotal Pacific ally. Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe wants to use the TPP to press his own economy toward more competition, without which his goal of reviving Japan will falter. Vietnam and Malaysia would also take part; they believe they can use the rules and disciplines of the TPP to boost growth, improve industries and services, expand global linkages, and avoid the so-called "middle income" trap, where countries' lack of productivity growth slows the rise to higher incomes.

The TTIP under negotiation with the 28 countries of the European Union could overcome regulatory barriers that now choke off Europe's economic recovery and weigh down U.S. growth. The industries that already operate across the Atlantic -- such as autos, chemicals, pharmaceuticals and advanced manufacturing -- could offer examples of ways to promote more competition with high standards.

The U.S. is well-positioned to benefit from new, expanded and enforceable rules for fair competition. With an advanced economy at the technological frontier, American companies have demonstrated a rare capacity to innovate -- as we have seen in software, use of Big Data, energy, robotics and bioengineering. The demands of consumers and business for better services -- in retail, communications, entertainment, education, health care, infrastructure, transport and logistics -- in both developed and developing economies, offer private-sector opportunities for growth.

Third, U.S. foreign policy has been drifting. President Obama's disengagements, have eroded confidence in America's staying power. Trade policy can help re-establish America's international economic commitment; U.S. economic interests underpin political and security ties. New economic links with key security partners on the Pacific and Atlantic rims of the Eurasian continents advance our primary geopolitical interests. And trade policy enlists America's greatest asset -- its dynamic private sector -- in support of U.S. foreign policy.

Just as American commerce in the 19th and 20th centuries sailed with missionaries, engineers and educators, so 21st-century trade, investment and business networks will promote the causes of civil society, human rights, the environment and gender equality.

