Spying on WTO justified by economic ambitions
NZ complains to WTO after Indonesia shuts out beef

Spying on WTO justified by economic ambitions
28 March 2015
The New Zealand Herald


Keeping tabs on candidates for director general job the best way to protect New Zealand, and the world’s trade interests
The revelation that New Zealand has used its external intelligence agency to tap the communications of candidates for the top job at the HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/ha/,DanaInfo=.agmqeeqFmil3t7nNr43,SSL+default.aspx" World Trade Organisation posed the question: is this a proper use of spies? The answer, I think, is hell yeah.
The director general of the WTO is not some cosy international status job for retired or defeated politicians, at least for New Zealand it is not. It is the cockpit for driving global rounds of negotiations towards a world in which people can buy and sell freely across national borders under fair trading laws and recognised property rights.
There is probably no international post more important to New Zealand’s welfare, and probably no trade minister on the world stage more committed than Tim Groser to the HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/ha/,DanaInfo=.agmqeeqFmil3t7nNr43,SSL+default.aspx" WTO ideal. He devoted his previous diplomatic career to trade liberalisation and entered Parliament on National’s list purely to pursue the project with political power.
If any of those seeking the director general’s chair two years ago were capable of kicking the latest round back to life it was Groser, and member states knew it. That is said to be why he failed to make the short list.
Sadly, a free and fair global trading environment is not a universal goal of governments, though nearly all pay lip service to it. The majority joined the newly formed HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/ha/,DanaInfo=.agmqeeqFmil3t7nNr43,SSL+default.aspx" WTO in the 1990s. It was the the one institution that had eluded the post-war creation of the United Nations and other foundations of international co-operation and a lasting peace.
The 1990s was a time of renewed hope. The Berlin wall had been torn down, the West had won the cold war, monetarism was defeating inflation and competitive markets were acknowledged to be the source of economic success.
But looking back, it was probably naive to think the countries signing up to the HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/ha/,DanaInfo=.agmqeeqFmil3t7nNr43,SSL+default.aspx" WTO in droves were all converts to free trade. Protection is always easier politics in countries that depend on declining industries or want to subsidise surplus agriculture for the sake of maintaining rural life.
The HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/ha/,DanaInfo=.agmqeeqFmil3t7nNr43,SSL+default.aspx" WTO is still in the grip of nations in no hurry to see progress. They treat trade talks as a contest of reluctant concessions in which it is better to stall and stymie agreements than to upset protected constituencies. They don’t admit this openly, nor do their candidates for the WTO director’s chair.
If tapping their internet traffic can flush out their real intentions, I’m all for it. The surveillance is certainly legal. The GCSB’s legislation gives the bureau three stated objectives: the national security of New Zealand, the international relations and wellbeing of New Zealand, and the economic wellbeing of New Zealand.
The last would certainly be served by the election of a good WTO director. Arguably New Zealand’s international relations are less well served if the espionage is made public. This week’s Snowden drop came just as John Key was about to sign a free trade agreement with South Korea, whose candidate was one of the targets, and it didn’t sabotage the deal.
It was clear in the Herald’s report that the surveillance continued after Groser had missed the cut. The intelligence on other candidates might have been widely shared and appreciated by countries that share New Zealand’s free trade credentials.
There may be precious few of them but with the HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/ha/,DanaInfo=.agmqeeqFmil3t7nNr43,SSL+default.aspx" WTO Doha Round stalled they are making progress on other fronts. Regional and bilateral free trade agreements can be steps in the right direction if they are open to all countries willing to embrace HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/ha/,DanaInfo=.agmqeeqFmil3t7nNr43,SSL+default.aspx" WTO ideals.
New Zealand did the world’s first bilateral treaty with China and, along with Singapore, Chile and Bahrain, formed the regional pact that has grown into the hemispheric Trans-Pacific Partnership proposal.
The TPP is now the big game in global trade liberalisation, offering hopes of agreement on intellectual property rights, investment rights, biosecurity and much else besides trade in all goods and services. It is being watched closely by Europe and the rest of the world and fiercely opposed by those who claim that it will restrict democratic rights.
It cannot restrict the power of governments to do anything they like, but if they inflict unreasonable damage on a private investment the investor could seek damages from an international tribunal. Sounds fair to me.
It’s a little chilling to read Jane Kelsey’s criticism of the latest draft investment treaty yesterday. “There is no agreement on restricting capital flows in a financial crisis,” she wrote. That is somebody’s right to withdraw their own money should New Zealand ever be governed like, say, Brazil, whose currency fell with a thud last week.
A candidate from Brazil got the job at the HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/ha/,DanaInfo=.agmqeeqFmil3t7nNr43,SSL+default.aspx" WTO’s magnificent palace at Geneva. Sometime later he was moved by reports of progress in the TPP to announce a new Doha initiative, but nothing happened.

NZ complains to WTO after Indonesia shuts out beef
28 March 2015
Waikato Times


New Zealand beef exporters have had the door shut on them by Indonesia in a drive for self- sufficiency, and have joined the United States in complaining to the HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/ha/,DanaInfo=.agmqeeqFmil3t7nNr43,SSL+default.aspx" World Trade Organisation.
Beef exports to Indonesia have see-sawed in recent years, reaching a high in 2010 of 48,823 tonnes, making it New Zealand's second largest beef market for that year, behind the US (156,173 tonnes), but ahead of other markets like Korea (39,110 tonnes), and Japan (37,402 tonnes). The Indonesia market was then worth $185 million.
But in 2011 the Indonesian government introduced import quota restrictions on beef as part of a programme to become self- sufficient in a range of agricultural products.
Exports tailed off until last year when the Indonesians relaxed restrictions.
By September 2014 exports to Indonesia grew to about 20,000 tonnes of beef, worth $79m, compared to just over 10,000 tonnes the year before.
However, fresh calls for self- sufficiency have coincided with the election of President Joko Widodo late last year.
In January this year the Indonesian government banned the import of the bulk of secondary cuts and offal, and New Zealand exports fell to a trickle of 28 tonnes that month.
Meat Industry Association chief executive Tim Ritchie said the import restrictions had led to shortages of beef and price rises in Indonesia.
"During the period that they were in place, there were regular Indonesian media reports that retailers and processed beef manufacturers were facing a shortage of beef, as domestic supplies could not make up for the reduction in imports, and that the resulting shortage pushed up beef prices for consumers," Ritchie said.
A Ministry of Foreign Affairs spokeswoman said Cabinet agreed in 2013 that New Zealand would initiate HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/ha/,DanaInfo=.agmqeeqFmil3t7nNr43,SSL+default.aspx" WTO dispute settlement proceedings challenging Indonesia's import restrictions on agricultural products.
New Zealand held HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/ha/,DanaInfo=.agmqeeqFmil3t7nNr43,SSL+default.aspx" WTO dispute settlement consultations (the first stage in the HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/ha/,DanaInfo=.agmqeeqFmil3t7nNr43,SSL+default.aspx" WTO dispute settlement process) with Indonesia in 2013 and 2014.
On Thursday New Zealand joined the US - also a beef exporter - in requesting a HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/ha/,DanaInfo=.agmqeeqFmil3t7nNr43,SSL+default.aspx" WTO dispute settlement panel. New Zealand and the US will be co-complainants in this dispute, the MFAT spokeswoman said.
The Government believed that Indonesia's restrictions "undermined core HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/ha/,DanaInfo=.agmqeeqFmil3t7nNr43,SSL+default.aspx" WTO principles and are inconsistent with key obligations in the HYPERLINK "https://iconnect.wto.org/ha/,DanaInfo=.agmqeeqFmil3t7nNr43,SSL+default.aspx" WTO agreements", the MFAT spokeswoman said.
She said the "isolated trade dispute" would not negatively affect New Zealand's "strong broader relationship" with Indonesia.
Ritchie said there was strong political pressure in Indonesia for self-sufficiency, and there was little chance of the policy being reversed.
He warned that Indonesia might find it difficult to secure beef from New Zealand in the future, as demand rose from China, India and other countries.
"New Zealand's ability to supply is constrained and while New Zealand may be a large sheepmeat and beef exporter, we can only produce a certain amount of meat - and therefore will focus on markets where there is certainty of access."
