India, US disagree at WTO
Destaca Economía nombramiento de De Mateo en Consejo General de OMC
Héctor Casanueva asume presidencia de Consejo de Comercio y Mercancías de Org. Mundial del Comercio
República Dominicana sostiene que la ley antitabaco australiana alienta los bajos precios y el contrabando
Services Waiver, Will it benefit Bangladesh?
Japanese support for the AEC
DÉVELOPPEMENT: prévenir les possibles impacts négatifs du TTIP sur les pays pauvres
Le commerce USA-Asie menacé par une grève des dockers américains
Shipping firms, dockers union reach tentative deal on US ports
S. Korea, China Likely to Sign Tentative FTA Next Week
East African leaders call for speedy implementation of the monetary union


India, US disagree at WTO
Press Trust of India - 21 février 2015,
From Shreerupa Mitra Jha
Geneva, Feb 20 (PTI) The United States today said it wants to introduce the concept of "differentiation" among developing nations in the trade negotiation on agriculture, a move that has been rejected by countries like India and China.
Terming it "blood for water" or "blood for air", the US said in a general council meeting at the WTO that some studies have indicated that it will have to make significant cuts in the outlays for domestic support under the present draft modalities.
Modalities, in trade jargon, imply reduction commitments in tariffs and subsidies in agriculture and tariff cuts in industrial products.
Referring to India and China, the US, however, said trade distorting payments have expanded exponentially since 2008, but these countries do not have to do much to reduce their subsidies, an outcome that the US cannot endorse.
US farm lobbies, based on a study of five developing nations -- China, India, Brazil, Turkey and Thailand -- by an agricultural trade lobbying firm DTB Associates yesterday, said these countries have breached the maximum aggregate measure of support (AMS) and have increased their minimum support prices for crops.
Under the Doha Declaration, special and differential treatment for developing countries is integral to enable the countries to meet their needs particularly food security.
Developing countries like India and China have rejected the concept of differentiation and have called for respecting the existing mandate.
India stated that trade for commercial purposes that impinges on policy space does not lead to development and contended that the present global trading system is highly inequitable and there was a need to level the playing field.
The present round was for trade for development, not for enhancing market access and outcomes should be fair and equitable, India stated.
China argued it was important not to mix different kinds of domestic support. It said there was a difference between giving domestic support to big and rich farmers and support to poor farmers.
The issue of stockpiling for food security purposes as well as the calculation of AMS has been a major area of contention between India, China and other developing countries and the developed countries, primarily the US.
India had caused much furore among developed nations last year when it blocked the Trade Facilitation Agreement -- for cutting down red tape in global trade -- so its food security programme will not be challenged under WTO rules.
The member states have a deadline of obtaining a detailed work program for post Bali agenda by the end of July.

Destaca Economía nombramiento de De Mateo en Consejo General de OMC
 Agencia Mexicana de Noticias, NOTIMEX - 20 février 2015, México, 20 Feb (Notimex).- El nombramiento de Fernando de Mateo como presidente del Consejo General de la Organización Mundial de Comercio (OMC) posiciona muy bien a México en esa organización, que este año cumple dos décadas de su establecimiento.
Así lo destaca la Secretaría de Economía (SE), quien considera que 2015 es crucial para el organismo, que en diciembre próximo celebra su décima Conferencia Ministerial, cuyos resultados dependen de los avances que los integrantes logren en su preparación.
Refiere que en su mensaje de aceptación del nuevo cargo, De Mateo definió este como año decisivo para el futuro de la OMC, pues deberán conjuntarse las voluntades de los miembros para lograr avances decisorios en la conclusión de la Ronda de Doha.
Se comprometió a trabajar para las acciones del Consejo General de la OMC contribuyan plenamente al reforzamiento de la relevancia del organismo en el esquema de gobernanza económica global.
El Consejo General es el órgano decisorio de más alto nivel de la OMC en Ginebra y está compuesto por representantes permanentes de todos los miembros, con la facultad de actuar como portavoz de la Conferencia Ministerial que se reúne una vez cada dos años.
La dependencia refiere que De Mateo es un experto en comercio internacional, con amplia trayectoria como economista y negociador comercial.
El hasta ayer presidente del Órgano de Solución de Diferencias de la OMC, el foro de solución de disputas internacionales más activo y efectivo del mundo, ocupó también durante varios años la presidencia del órgano encargado de supervisar las negociaciones en materia de servicios en la Ronda de Negociaciones de Doha.
Durante los últimos seis años también fue presidente del Comité de Comercio de la Organización para la Cooperación y Desarrollo Económicos (OCDE).
La Secretaría de Economía menciona que en 1995, como un resultado de la Ronda Uruguay, se creó la OMC, institución que reemplazó al GATT.
Recuerda que la Conferencia Ministerial, órgano máximo de decisión, está compuesta por los ministros de los 160 países miembros y debe reunirse una vez cada dos años.
A la fecha, añade, se han realizado nueve Conferencias Ministeriales, la última de ellas celebrada en Bali, Indonesia, en diciembre de 2014.
En diciembre de 2001, los ministros decidieron iniciar la Ronda de Doha, con el objetivo de continuar liberalizando el comercio mundial.
El Consejo General, compuesto por los embajadores de todos los miembros, se encarga de vigilar la operación y administrar los acuerdos de la OMC en el ínterin entre Conferencias Ministeriales. En 2014, la presidencia del Consejo General estuvo a cargo de Canadá, agrega la dependencia.

Héctor Casanueva asume presidencia de Consejo de Comercio y Mercancías de Org. Mundial del Comercio
 ValorFuturo, 20 février 2015 21:56,

    Santiago--Feb 20--En su sesión de hoy, el Consejo General de la Organización Mundial del Comercio, decidió las presidencias para el período 2015, de los principales órganos permanentes que rinden informe al Consejo General. En ese contexto, se informó que hubo consenso para que Chile asuma la presidencia del Consejo de Comercio de Mercancías, a través del Embajador de Chile ante la OMC, Héctor Casanueva.
    El Consejo de Comercio de Mercancías es uno de los tres Consejos principales de la Organización, junto con el Consejo de Servicios y el Consejo de los Aspectos de los Derechos de Propiedad Intelectual relacionados con el Comercio (ADPICs). Su función es velar por el funcionamiento del Acuerdo General sobre Aranceles Aduaneros y Comercio
(GATT) y abarca todo el comercio internacional de mercancías.
    La nominación de Chile se originó en una propuesta de Brasil, que posteriormente tuvo el consenso de los demás miembros.
    Del Consejo que presidirá Casanueva, dependen 10 comités que se ocupan de temas específicos, tales como agricultura, acceso a los mercados, subvenciones, medidas antidumping, entre otros. Asimismo, rinden informe a este Consejo el Grupo de Trabajo sobre las Empresas Comerciales del Estado y el Comité de Participantes sobre la Expansión del Comercio de Productos de Tecnología de la Información.

República Dominicana sostiene que la ley antitabaco australiana alienta los bajos precios y el contrabando
 Creado en 20 Febrero 2015, Escrito por Agencia Efe, Ramón Santos Lantigua Santo Domingo, 20 feb (EFE).- La ley australiana de empaquetado genérico del tabaco socavaría los efectos argüidos por ese país en favor de la salud de su población, al tiempo que incentivaría baja en los precios, imitación y contrabando, según afirmaron hoy fuentes oficiales de República Dominicana.
La directora de comercio exterior local, Katrina Naut, precisó que esos y otros argumentos sustentan la demanda que su país y otras naciones han elevado contra esa medida ante la Organización Mundial del Comercio (OMC).
"La homogeneización de la presentación de los productos tabacaleros (en Australia) dificultaría la diferenciación del producto, lo que, a su vez, intensificaría la competencia de precios y, consecuentemente, se transformaría en precios más bajos", dijo la funcionaria en entrevista a Efe.
El 1 de diciembre de 2012, Australia se convirtió en el primer país del mundo en el que los cigarrillos se venden en cajetillas de color verde oliva, sin especificación de la marca, una medida que defiende bajo el alegato de que "coincide con los pasos dados por la comunidad internacional para combatir la epidemia sanitaria global del tabaquismo".
Esa ley, sin embargo, fue impugnada por República Dominicana, Cuba, Honduras, Indonesia y Ucrania ante la OMC, donde a finales de año un tribunal arbitral acogió de manera preliminar las argumentaciones contra Australia.
"Las medidas de empaquetado genérico propuestas no solo generarían graves consecuencias para los países productores de tabaco, como la República Dominicana. Todos los demás países deben comprender que dichas medidas representan un riesgo para el sistema en general, que va más allá de los productos de tabaco y más allá de las medidas de empaquetado", explicó Naut.
En ese orden, agregó que si el empaquetado genérico fuera aceptado, todos los países miembros de la OMC estarían en riesgo de que en el futuro, cualquier nación implemente ese tipo de medidas en otros productos por motivaciones "perniciosas", tales como las bebidas alcohólicas o los alimentos procesados y los refrescos.
"Por lo tanto, la adopción de estas medidas extremas sin una base probatoria y científica creíble representa un riesgo de perjuicio a la seguridad y la previsibilidad del sistema de comercio multilateral", dijo la responsable de la Dirección de Comercio Exterior (Dicoex) dominicana.
Naut criticó que Australia, en el entendido de producir normas para proteger la salud y reducir el consumo de productos de tabaco, lo quiera hacer a su discrecionalidad.
"Consideramos que debe existir un nivel más alto de rigor al momento de emitir una norma; más aún, cuando se trata del comercio de productos que constituyen sectores sensibles de la economía de otros Estados, como lo es el caso del tabaco para la República Dominicana".
De acuerdo a datos suministrados por la funcionaria, del cultivo y el procesamiento del tabaco en la República Dominicana se benefician unas 78.900 familias, con unos 300.000 dependientes directos. En las plantaciones, agregó, la actividad incorpora más de 150.000 agricultores y jornaleros.
Aseguró que su país es el mayor exportador neto de puros del mundo, con un 8 % del total de las exportaciones locales.
"Nuestra industria del tabaco está en vías de desarrollo. Durante décadas, los productores tabacaleros dominicanos han invertido considerablemente para llegar a constituirse en los productores de tabaco de mejor calidad mundial, en particular, de puros, lográndolo con gran éxito", argumentó Naut.
Sostuvo, que el empaquetado genérico ha demostrado contribuir al incremento del comercio ilícito de productos de tabaco, así como a la comercialización de productos falsificados y, aseguró, al aumento del contrabando en países que han implementado esta medida.
"Para todos los miembros de la OMC, es sumamente importante garantizar un sistema multilateral de comercio justo, se puede lograr reemplazando estas medidas por otras alternativas y menos restrictivas", puntualizó.

Services Waiver, Will it benefit Bangladesh?
 The Daily Star, 20 février 2015 19:00, Mahfuz Kabir AFTER returning from negotiation in Geneva, the commerce minister and his team expressed confidence about access to services market in developed countries by Bangladesh as an LDC. It is clearly vital for the country as the value of service export is $3.7 billion, or more than 10% of total exports as of 2013, and it experienced 92% growth in the last five years.
The government's points of discussion in Geneva were broadly supported by a technical committee on waiver and Unctad's country study on services policy review. However, the solution to any problem in WTO has been quite difficult and complicated as far as LDCs are concerned. This matter is, therefore, not expected to get exempted from the tradition in such a multilateral forum that is claimed to overly serve the purpose of dominating members, mostly from global North.
The eighth WTO ministerial meeting in December 2011 was a landmark for evolving LDC services waiver as one of the key deliverables. It was indeed a significant achievement due to a last-minute compromise after years of negotiations, in which the WTO members have been allowed to grant preferences to services and service providers of all LDCs. The most crucial part of services for Bangladesh is waiver in movement of natural persons, including professional services, which is popularly known as “GATS Mode 4.”
Originally, a range of LDC modalities were established in 2003 to guide members in accessing developed country markets. These direct members to make specific commitments, attach special priority to providing “effective market access” in sectors and modes of supply of export interest to LDCs through development of “appropriate mechanisms” by them towards achieving full implementation of GATS Article IV:3. Furthermore, the set of LDC modalities requires members to make commitments providing access in Mode 4, keeping in mind all categories of natural persons identified by LDCs in their requests.
The 8th Ministerial Conference adopted waiver allowing the WTO members to deviate from most favoured nation (MFN) obligation of non-discrimination in order to grant preferential treatment to service suppliers under Mode 4. Subsequently in Bangladesh, the Ministry of Expatriates' Welfare and Overseas Employment formed a national committee comprising members from this ministry, Ministry of Commerce, BMET and scholars from research organisations to prepare ways and means for negotiating the movement of skilled and semi-skilled persons mainly to the developed countries by preparing a 'catalogue.' The US, the most influential WTO member and the most lucrative market in Mode-4 for LDCs, was quite diplomatic and kept silent during the services negotiations in early-February 2015.
Even though this scheme sounds lucrative and is a truly special treatment for LDCs, there are many practical predicaments. It expires after 15 years of notification under which Members may provide temporary preferential treatment to LDC services and service suppliers on annual basis. However, the countries granting waiver 'must' notify the Council for Trade in Services, which will conduct an annual review and assess whether the exceptional circumstances that justify the waiver still exist or not.
To understand the matter, let us suppose that Bangladesh applies to the US for an LDC waiver for its manpower exports in order to secure preferential treatment in which the other competitors are India or Sri Lanka for the same category. In that case, the US is compelled to notify the Council for Trade in Services, which will review annually to see whether Bangladesh is supposed to be provided the waiver. As the US has already shown its 'golden face' by remaining silent in the negotiation meeting, it is unlikely to notify this Council as it may cause more burden and obligation to grant a similar waiver to other LDCs, which would increase its workload. The same can happen for other developed countries like UK, Germany, Italy, France and Canada, where the LDC governments are quite eager to facilitate movement of natural persons. Therefore, fruitful implementation of the waiver is unlikely.
Nevertheless, Bangladesh needs to conceive the opportunities under Mode-4 as skill-driven, which currently includes the manpower in semi- and less-skilled categories also. It would give the country a better dividend to access the developed country market in the medium and long terms. The manpower in the latter categories would find it extremely difficult to get temporary jobs in the developed country market as the education and training are far below standard and do not meet the requirement. Therefore, it would be wise to take those workers out of the list of request in the catalogue.
In the professional category, architects and engineers and nurses and midwives would not find short-term job through only physical presence like the semi-skilled manpower. This is mainly because the curricula and training do not necessarily meet the requirement of the host countries and lack global accreditation.
Conversely, Chartered and Cost and Management Accountants would easily be able to export services or even travel worldwide for short-term physical presence due to their accreditation. Besides ICAB and ICMAB, some leading global accountants and auditing institutions, ACCA and CIMA, are now operating in Bangladesh, which has opened up opportunity for Bangladeshi professionals to export quality accounting and auditing services in Mode-4 due to global recognition as professional manpower.
Despite lack of international accreditation, the architecture and engineering services could be exported through attracting international investment in Bangladesh. If international firms are allowed to open offices in Bangladesh and recruit manpower from the country, they can export services by staying in the country and paying short visits abroad once or twice a year, based on demand of the international clients. In that case, easing the financial rules of Bangladesh is imperative so that they are not exposed to difficulties in financial transactions, both inward and outward. It will be beneficial for Bangladesh in the long run.

Japanese support for the AEC
The Japan Times , 21 février 2015,
The Association of Southeast Asian Nations is set to establish the ASEAN Economic Community (AEC) by the end of this year, with the goal of creating a single market and production base encompassing over 600 million people. Japan, which has built friendly relations with ASEAN members and enjoys close trade and economic ties with the region, should provide effective support for the plan to help the group achieve better economic progress.
ASEAN was established in August 1967 by Thailand, Indonesia, the Philippines, Malaysia and Singapore mainly for political and security reasons. As time went on, it turned itself into an organization for wider regional cooperation, including economic integration.
Its membership has now grown to 10 countries, including Brunei, Vietnam, Laos, Myanmar and Cambodia. The ASEAN members combined had gross domestic product reaching $2.4 trillion in 2013 — making it the world's seventh largest economy, even larger than Russia or India — with per-capita GDP reaching $3,837. The group's 2013 growth rate hit 5.1 percent, and it is forecast that ASEAN as a single entity could become the world's fourth-largest economy by 2050 if its growth trend continues. Its combined area is 12 times that of Japan and its total population is the world's third-largest, following China and India. Its combined population surpasses either the European Union or the United States as a market.
The group has the world's third-largest labor force, and it is relatively young. These numbers graphically underscore ASEAN's immense economic potential.
Since the 1990s, ASEAN has worked to increase the region's economic activities through tariff cuts and the elimination of nontariff barriers to trade, and its efforts for regional economic integration have culminated in the creation of the AEC. The so-called ASEAN-6 — Singapore, Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines and Brunei — has already abolished tariffs on more than 99 percent of goods traded. Cambodia and the three other members will gradually reduce their tariffs with a view toward eventually abolishing them. Such efforts turned ASEAN into an highly open economic region, with international merchandise trade reaching $2.5 trillion in 2013 — $1.3 trillion exports and $1.2 trillion imports. Trade among ASEAN members accounted for about a quarter of the total.
ASEAN adopted the AEC Blueprint when it marked the 40th anniversary of its founding in 2007, moving up the schedule for the AEC's establishment from 2020 to 2015, and implemented 80 percent of the measures included in the blueprint by 2013. But the group's full economic integration won't be realized in the beginning. Although the AEC is aiming for the free flow of labor and services, progress in this field is slow. Unlike the EU, border controls between AEC member-states will remain and they will continue to use their own national currencies. ASEAN members' political systems, religions and income levels differ greatly from each other. Promoting equitable economic development will be one of the challenges for ASEAN to tackle as it runs the AEC.
At the ASEAN foreign ministers' meeting held in Kota Kinabalu, Malaysia, in late January, the chairman's statement underlined the members' strong political will to create the AEC by the end of this year as scheduled. It called on the member states to make efforts to ensure its successful launch.
A major problem that ASEAN faces is China's attempt to increase its maritime dominance in the South China Sea. China is engaged in disputes with some ASEAN members over islets and is seeking to establish effective rule over these territories.
The chairman's statement said that ASEAN will push for an early conclusion of the Code of Conduct with China, which will have binding power, to defuse tension in the area, but the goal remains difficult due to China's intransigence.
China should refrain from any attempt to bring the ASEAN economic zone into its sphere of influence through the use of political and military power.
In contrast with China, there are no contentious issues between Japan and any of ASEAN's members. Japan has for many years continued to invest in the region and provide it with economic assistance, and the high technological levels of Japanese firms and the quality of their products enjoy considerable respect in the region. Japan should deepen its relations with ASEAN by fully utilizing these advantages. It can also utilize the knowledge it has gained from its own economic growth to offer advice to ASEAN as it tries to narrow the gaps among members in social and economic development, and to improve the protection of intellectual property.
The AEC can be a stepping stone toward deeper and wider regional integration in the form of the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership, a free trade agreement between ASEAN and the six countries with which it has existing FTAs — Japan, China, South Korea, Australia, New Zealand and India — and possibly the establishment of an East Asian community. For the time being, Japan should help ASEAN by concentrating on providing support to solidify the AEC's economic foundation in its initial stage.

DÉVELOPPEMENT: prévenir les possibles impacts négatifs du TTIP sur les pays pauvres
 Bulletin Quotidien Europe  - 20 février 2015, Bruxelles, 19/02/2015 (Agence Europe) - Les possibles répercussions négatives du futur accord de partenariat transatlantique de commerce et d'investissement (TTIP) sur les pays en développement partenaires de l'UE ne sauraient être négligées, selon les eurodéputés experts en questions de développement. Aussi seront-elles au coeur des préoccupations de la commission du développement du Parlement, lundi 23 février à Bruxelles, soucieuse que l'UE veille à la cohérence de ses politiques et garantisse que les pays en développement ne fassent pas les frais d'un accord de libre-échange susceptible de marginaliser leurs intérêts.
L'échange de vues sera alimenté par le projet de texte rédigé par Arne Lietz (S&D, allemand), rapporteur pour avis, pour préparer les recommandations à formuler à la Commission européenne sur les négociations en cours avec les États-Unis. La commission du commerce, compétente quant au fond, sera invitée à intégrer les préoccupations de ses collègues, quand ces derniers se seront prononcés.
Devoir de cohérence.Le projet d'avis rappelle que le principe de la cohérence des politiques de l'UE au service du développement, consigné dans le Traité de Lisbonne (article 208), impose à l'UE de prendre en considération les objectifs de la coopération au développement dans la mise en oeuvre des politiques qui sont susceptibles d'affecter les pays en développement.
Exigence de clarté. Estimant que la formulation du mandat de négociations est trop générale pour permettre d'appréhender correctement les répercussions du TTIP sur les pays en développement, le projet d'avis préconise une analyse approfondie des incidences éventuelles de ce futur accord sur les pays à faible revenu et sur les futurs objectifs de développement durable, dès que les dispositions du TTIP seront plus claires.
Risque d'accès réduit au marché. Pour autant, sachant que la plupart des pays en développement bénéficient actuellement de préférences tarifaires de la part de l'UE et des États-Unis pour l'accès de leurs produits et services, le rapporteur entrevoit déjà « le risque potentiel grave d'un accès réduit au marché et d'un détournement consécutif des flux commerciaux pour certains pays ».
Achever le cycle de Doha. Le rapporteur est inquiet à l'idée que le TTIP et d'autres accords commerciaux de très grande ampleur puissent transformer les règles du commerce multilatéral et établir de nouvelles normes tout en instaurant une discrimination dans la mesure où quelque 130 pays sont exclus des négociations et que certaines questions importantes pour les pays en développement, comme la sécurité alimentaire, les subventions agricoles et l'atténuation du changement climatique, risquent d'être marginalisées. Partant, le rapporteur invitera ses collègues à demander à la Commission de redoubler d'efforts pour favoriser, à l'OMC, la conclusion des négociations sur le cycle de Doha, actuellement dans l'impasse.
Des bénéfices potentiels à exploiter. Pour faire bonne mesure avec toutes ces inquiétudes, le projet d'avis reconnaît que le TTIP offre des possibilités, qu'il convient d'exploiter, pour promouvoir les normes mondiales les plus élevées en matière de travail décent, de protection de l'environnement, de sécurité des aliments et des produits. (Aminata Niang)

Le commerce USA-Asie menacé par une grève des dockers américains
 Agence France Presse ECOFI  - Paul Handley - 20 février 2015 Un vaste mouvement de grève sur les ports de la côte ouest américaine menace de s'aggraver et de plomber les échanges commerciaux entre les Etats-Unis et l'Asie, forçant la Maison Blanche à intervenir pour tenter de régler la crise.
D'imposants tankers continuent d'être refoulés de ports commerciaux tout le long de la côte ouest en raison du mouvement social observé depuis près de quatre mois par quelque 20.000 dockers qui veulent renégocier leurs contrats de travail.
Principal terminal maritime de la baie de San Francisco, le port d'Oakland a ainsi été complètement fermé jeudi pour le septième jour depuis le début du mois, au risque de freiner les échanges des Etats-Unis avec la région Asie-Pacifique.
Des producteurs de pommes de terre aux commerces en ligne, les entreprises américaines commencent à s'alarmer de l'impact économique tandis que des constructeurs automobiles japonais disent avoir été contraints d'acheminer d'importantes pièces par avion.
Le groupe nippon Nintendo assure de son côté que les livraisons de sa dernière console de jeux sont bloquées dans des ports américains.
Face à l'impasse, l'administration Obama a dépêché son ministre du Travail Thomas Perez pour jouer le rôle de médiateur entre l'Association maritime du Pacifique, qui regroupe les dirigeants de 29 ports de la côte, et le principal syndicat de dockers.
Pour leur troisième jour, ces discussions sous l'oeil de l'exécutif n'avaient débouché sur aucun progrès jeudi, faisant craindre une aggravation du conflit et le blocage complet de ces ports qui assurent la moitié des échanges commerciaux des Etats-Unis.
Des répercussions sur une économie mondiale déjà convalescente ne sont pas à exclure.
- "C'est énorme" -
"Ils doivent comprendre qu'une solution très rapide est urgente ici", a indiqué John Keeling, directeur exécutif du Conseil national des producteurs de pommes de terre.
Selon lui, le manque à gagner pour le secteur se chiffre déjà entre 50 et 75 millions de dollars par mois, principalement en raison d'une chute des ventes de frites surgelées. "C'est énorme", se lamente-t-il.
Si les discussions salariales ont commencé il y a neuf mois, le mouvement social et la grève des dockers ont eux commencé fin octobre pour s'aggraver progressivement.
Résultat: l'activité des ports de la côte ouest s'est effondrée en janvier par rapport à l'année dernière avec des chutes allant jusqu'à 32%.
"Nous avons fortement appelé les deux parties à trouver un accord sur un nouveau contrat afin de mettre un terme à l'embouteillage de navires bloqués sur les quais et au large", a déclaré le responsable du port de Long Beach, Jon Slangerup.
Le coût du blocage se fait sentir sur un large éventail de secteurs. Le géant de la distribution Wal-Mart a ainsi prévenu jeudi que le ralentissement des importations pourrait menacer l'approvisionnement de ses magasins pour le printemps.
Le constructeur automobile Honda Motor a lui procédé à des réductions d'heures dans son usine de Greensburg, dans l'Indiana, en raison d'une pénurie de pièces détachées.
"La poursuite de la grève ralentit les livraisons par cargo et l'entreprise n'a pas pu fournir assez de pièces pour l'Amérique du Nord", a déclaré à l'AFP une porte-parole de Honda, Yuka Abe.
Le coût total pour l'économie américaine n'a pas encore été évalué mais il devrait pour le moment rester limité grâce aux précautions prises par les professionnels, selon Tom Derry, patron de l'association professionnelle ISM qui sonde plusieurs secteurs d'activités.
"La plupart des entreprises avaient mis en place des solutions de rechange", indique-t-il.
Elles ont ainsi la possibilité de passer par les ports du Golfe du Mexique ou de la côte est ou de s'approvisionner par exemple au Mexique via le transport routier, même si ces solutions sont plus coûteuses.
"Notre économie est plus résistante à ce genre de perturbations qu'auparavant", affirme M. Derry, assurant toutefois que les entreprises ne pourront supporter ce ralentissement que six à huit semaines supplémentaires.

Shipping firms, dockers union reach tentative deal on US ports
 AFP, February 21, 2015 Los Angeles (AFP) - US West Coast dockworkers and port operators have reached a tentative deal on a new labor contract, officials said, averting a shutdown that would have hit about half the country's trade.
The tentative five-year agreement, details of which were not immediately available, should free up operations at the ports, with business "restored to full capacity" beginning Saturday evening, Labor Secretary Thomas Perez told a conference call.
Operations had slowed significantly since the labor contract expired in July at key ports for trade with Asia.
The International Longshore and Warehouse Union (ILWU), representing 20,000 dockworkers, still must approve the deal with the Pacific Maritime Association, representing management for all 29 West Coast ports.
The union's steering committee, however, was unanimous in its support.
"After more than nine months of negotiations, we are pleased to have reached an agreement that is good for workers and for the industry," PMA president James McKenna and ILWU president Bob McEllrath said in a joint statement.
"We are also pleased that our ports can now resume full operations."
Perez oversaw four days of negotiations in San Francisco between the two parties.
"There were far too many victims across the country, and that's why the president sent me here" Perez said Friday.
The labor secretary had warned the two sides to strike a deal for a new dockworker contract now or see talks move to Washington, which would place more federal pressure on the two parties.
- 'A huge relief' -
The agreement is "a huge relief for our economy -- particularly the countless American workers, farmers and businesses that have been affected by the dispute and those facing even greater disruption and costs with further delays," White House press secretary Josh Earnest said in a statement.
The president called on the two parties to tend to backlogs as they finalize the deal, Earnest added.
The National Retail Federation hailed the agreement as well, saying "it is now time for the parties to quickly ratify the deal and immediately focus on clearing out the crisis-level congestion and backlog at the ports."
"As we welcome today's news, we must dedicate ourselves to finding a new way to ensure that this nightmare scenario is not repeated again," added the NRF, the world's largest retail federation.
Since October, the dockworkers have steadily slowed the processing of incoming and outgoing freight at ports that handle about half of the country's trade.
In response, the port owners have canceled shifts and had multiple-day lockouts to deny the longshoremen holiday and overtime pay.
The result has been a backup of billions of dollars' worth of cargo, with heavily laden container ships lined up outside ports from southern California to the border with Canada.
Pressure grew on both sides to compromise over what has been for weeks the key remaining issue, the arbitration system for labor disputes on the docks.
The ILWU sought more say on who can serve as an arbitrator, amid reports that the union claims the system has become more biased in favor of port management.

S. Korea, China Likely to Sign Tentative FTA Next Week
 KBS World News - English Edition, 21 février 2015, South Korea and China will likely sign a tentative agreement on the bilateral free trade agreement sometime next week and release key details about the deal.
A senior South Korean trade ministry official said on Saturday that the two sides have worked out key technical issues and documentation of the agreement in a third-party country and that a tentative agreement will likely be signed next week.
The two countries plan to disclose key details about the trade deal once the tentative agreement is signed.
Once this is done, the bilateral trade deal could take effect within 2015 assuming that it is ratified in parliament in time.
As the free trade deal moves forward, trade industry participants are moving quickly to respond to the expected change in conditions.
The Korea Trade-Investment Promotion Agency next month will establish the Korea Business Plaza, while the Korea International Trade Association will launch its so-called China Desk on March 11 to help assist local companies break into the Chinese domestic market.
The China Desk, to be established at the KITA headquarters in Seoul, is an inter-agency support structure backed by KITA, KOTRA and other organizations to help South Korean firms trading in China with a variety of subjects including establishing a new export market and reducing non-tariff trade barriers.

East African leaders call for speedy implementation of the monetary union
 PNA (Philippines News Agency), 21 février 2015, NAIROBI, Feb. 21 -- The East African Community (EAC) leaders on Friday called for the speedy implementation of the East African Monetary Union (EAMU).
Incoming Chair of the EAC Summit Tanzanian President Jakaya Kikwete said all the partner states have ratified the protocol on the establishment of the EAMU.
"In order to achieve a single currency in the next 10 years, all the five member states should abide by the approved roadmap," Kikwete said in Nairobi at the end of the 16th Ordinary Summit of the EAC Heads of State.
EAC member states include Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, Rwanda and Burundi. This summit took place during the first anniversary of the signing of the protocol establishing the EAMU.
The EAC summit also approved and signed the protocol to operationalize the extended jurisdiction of the East African Court of Justice covering trade and investment.
Kikwete said the bloc will have to ensure that there is convergence of their macro-economic policies before a monetary union is fully operational.
"It will also promote cross border trade by reducing cost of inter-EAC trade," Kikwete said, adding the EAC is the most advanced regional bloc in the continent.
Kenyan President Uhuru Kenyatta said the impressive growth and promise of the intra-community trade has been accompanied and underpinned by greater regional connectivity through enabling infrastructure development.
"Over the past two years, projects and programs designed to promote intensive integration have been completed," said Kenyatta, who is also the outgoing EAC summit chair.
He said that the partner states have made significant investments in the modernization and expansion of the railway network throughout the regional bloc. "Such projects are capital- intensive but the region is committed to mobilize funds from national budgets and donors."
Kenyatta also said the high cost of roaming calls across the region is an unnecessary impediment to trade and communication. He said that in the spirit of East African integration, innovative interventions leading to substantial reduction of calling charges are overdue.
"The implementation of a One-Area Network by Rwanda, Uganda and Kenya is an excellent beginning," he said. "Already, calls within this network have reduced to about 12 U.S. cents per minute, while there are no charges for incoming calls," he said.
According to the Kenyan leader, this tremendous benefit will be shared within the entire EAC when the region adopts harmonized calling rates in July this year.
EAC Secretary General Richard Sezibera said the trading bloc is in a good position to benefit from the Tripartite Free Trade resulting from the merger of the Southern African Development Community, Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa, and the EAC.
The merger will result in the establishment of an integrated market of 26 countries, with a combined population of almost 600 million people and a total Gross Domestic Product of about 1 trillion U.S. dollars.(PNA/Xinhua)

END

Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s).  Please note that this message may contain confidential information.  If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.

