HEADLINES:
India to Adopt Balanced Approach at WTO Meet
India hosts biggest Africa summit; plays catch-up with China
Developing world should work together: India
China communist party paper says country should join U.S.-led trade pact
A vote that could shift Argentina’s role in Latin America
El conflictivo TPP, una visión desde el sur
 
Details:
India to Adopt Balanced Approach at WTO Meet
Kirtika.Suneja
26 October 2015
The Economic Times 
India plans to adopt a more balanced approach at the upcoming HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) ministerial, not taking any hard stance that can come in the way of any agreement, after being blamed of blocking a deal last year, an official said.
The country would strongly take up the issue of food security and farmers' interest, especially after the US had last month floated a proposal that sought to dismantle the price support and subsidies of developing countries, but would not want to be seen as obstructionist, a person privy to the deliberations said.
India had refused to be party to he HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's trade facilitation agreement last year till a permanent solution for its food security issues was found, leading to an stalemate that was broken only after US President Barack Obama and Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Narendra Modi took up the case. "Though we never blocked any deal and what we did in Bali was right, many people fired from our shoulders then," a government official told ET.
India's new approach, which is n line with its attempts to play a bigger role in the world affairs, was mulled over at a meeting called by prime minister last week, ahead of the US-India trade policy forum this week.
The meeting was attended by commerce minister Nirmala Sitharaman, economic affairs secretary Shaktikanta Das, commerce secretary Rita Teaotia and India's ambassador to the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO Anjali Prasad, among others. "We were trying to build a consensus in the meeting as we are six weeks away from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO ministerial. There is no reason to change our position right now," said an official who was part of the meeting that lasted just over an hour. India will still stand by its farmers, the person added. HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO issues are likely to figure in the India-US forum meeting scheduled for October 29 and India would want to seek some assurance ahead of the Nairobi ministerial in December.
Independent experts who did not want to be identified said In dia needs to nuance its position in such a manner that it is neither seen as blocking a pact nor as diluting its position.
There are other reasons why India wants this year's HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO ministerial to succeed, sources said.
The ministerial is happening in Africa for the first time. "Kenya is under pressure for the talks to be successful. So, it is more important for India, which is seen as Africa's natural partner to push the food security issue," a person in the know of the meeting said. "Moreover, the two parties also want the Doha round to continue especially with the threat of mega trade pacts like TPP (Trans-Pacific Partnership, a proposed deal between 12 Pacific Rim countries) and RCEP (Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership, a proposed FTA between Asean and six other Asia Pacific countries including India)," the person said.
Developed countries are for winding up the Doha Development Agenda post Nairobi meeting. The US-India Trade Policy Forum meeting will be held in Washington on Thursday. The US trade representative Michael Froman has said the forum will allow the two countries to advance on-going bilateral efforts to expand trade and investment through forward-looking policy initiatives.
Bennett, Coleman & Co., Ltd. 
India hosts biggest Africa summit; plays catch-up with China
By Douglas Busvine
26 October 2015
Reuters News
NEW DELHI (Reuters) - India hosts its biggest-ever Africa summit this week as Prime Minister HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Narendra Modi seeks to challenge China's dominance on a continent that is blessed with vast natural resources and has the world's fastest-growing population.
New Delhi wants to project its soft power and historical ties to Africa, in contrast to China's focus on resource extraction and capital investment that has sparked a backlash in some countries against Beijing's mercantilist expansion.
Of the 54 countries invited, the hosts expect more than 40 to be represented by their heads of state and government who, after a series of ministerial meetings, will hold a full summit on Thursday.
India's trading ties with Africa date back to antiquity and both found HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" common cause in the struggle against colonial rule. Yet India's influence faded over the course of the Cold War as it withdrew into non-aligned isolation.
Now Modi, self-styled chief salesman of a "Make in India" export drive, wants to capitalise on an economic slowdown in China to highlight India as an alternative partner for trade and investment.
"India is the fastest-growing major economy. Africa is experiencing rapid growth too," Modi told African journalists on the eve of the summit.
Although India's headline economic growth has overtaken China's, its economy is one-fifth the size and it lacks the financial heft to challenge Beijing in a head-to-head contest for the African market.
"We can't match the Chinese in terms of resources - but any engagement we do with the Africans at least gives them a choice," said C. Raja Mohan, a foreign policy commentator at the Observer Research Foundation in New Delhi.
The India-Africa Forum Summit is the third of its kind and, since the first was held in 2008, two-way annual trade has more than doubled to $72 billion.
That lags trade between China and Africa, which has exploded to $200 billion as the world's No.2 economy sucks in oil, coal and metals to feed its industrial machine.
The world's largest democracy has been criticised by human rights groups for inviting Omar al-Bashir, the president of oil-rich Sudan wanted by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" International Criminal Court on charges of war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide in Darfur.
EXPLOITATION AND EXTRACTION
For India, business comes first.
State-run oil company ONGC, which has fields in Sudan and South Sudan, is on the hunt to buy $12 billion in foreign assets over the next three years and has identified Africa as an investment target. India is also in talks with South Africa to buy coal mines producing up to 90 million tonnes of coking coal each year to feed its growing steel industry. South Africa is already a major coal supplier to India.
Still, India wants its involvement in Africa to be less transactional than China's, seeking a development partnership for two regions that account for a third of the world's people, but seven in 10 of those living in poverty.
"Our partnership is not focused on an exploitative or extraction point of view, but is one that focuses on Africa's needs and India's strengths," said Vikas Swarup, spokesman for the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Indian Ministry of External Affairs.
Trade ministers from India and Africa are looking to make HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" common cause at a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization ministerial meeting in Nairobi next month, Commerce Minister Nirmala Sitharaman said.
Although India dropped its veto against a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO deal to streamline customs procedures a year ago, it remains uneasy over Western pressure on food stockpiling it says is vital to ensure its 1.25 billion people don't go hungry.
"India and Africa are on the same page," Sitharaman told reporters.
Thomson Reuters (Markets) LLC
Developing world should work together: India
Huma Siddiqui
26 October 2015
Financial Express
Focusing on the need for India, Africa and other developing countries to work together, the government on Sunday said that all three have to work "hand-in-hand"' in the COP 21 on climate change in Paris in December and in the 10th HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO ministerial meet in Kenya "to ensure that our development agenda is not affected''.
Speaking at the inauguration ceremony of the India-Africa Editors Forum, external affairs minister Sushma Swaraj said, "We have sought to complement our needs with each other's strengths," adding that in the last 15 years, India's trade with Africa has gone up 20 times and today stands at more than $70 billion. Besides, India also has a total investment of $30-35 billion in Africa.
"We have managed to extend concessional credit to the tune of $ 7.4 billion. Most of this credit stands approved and at least half has already been disbursed. Through credit lines, India has partnered Africa in creating 137 projects in 41 countries," she added.
Expressing hope that the 3rd edition of the India-Africa Forum Summit would focus on building people to people ties, Ethiopian ambassador to India Gennet Zewide said, "There is hardly any awareness about Africa in India or about its diverse people and culture, though many in Africa know about India."
Zewide, the dean of the about 45-strong African diplomatic corps in New Delhi, also said that the October 26-29 summit will focus on the "negative media coverage" about African students in India and find ways to deal with it. "I believe there should be pro-active engagement between Africa and India. Positive perception is needed of Africa in India. Africa has 54 countries, Africa is diverse. We are economically diverse, language-wise diverse, culturally diverse. So it is time we should have a people-to-people kind of relationship, which has to be strengthened."
The external affairs minister also said that it is "inconceivable" that the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" United Nations Security Council does not have any permanent representation from Africa which is the largest continent (in terms of the number of countries)."
"It is also incomprehensible that India, which represents almost one-sixth of the world's population and has all the credentials to be a permanent member of the Security Council, is still out of it. We all need to work together to remove this anomaly," said Swaraj.
"Our media fraternity has bravely shouldered the burden of making our two societies aware of commonalities. The relationships between the African and Indian media must be placed on the bedrock of grass-roots empowerment," Swaraj said.
Earlier in the day, Swaraj inaugurated the India-Africa Friendship Rose Garden ahead of the third India-Africa summit, which begins on Monday and is to be attended by 54 leaders from the region.
Each of the 42 African envoys in New Delhi planted a rose sapling, along with Swaraj, in the rose garden, which will be maintained by the New Delhi Municipal Committee (NDMC).
The idea is to plant roses of different varieties and colours so that once the roses are in full bloom, they present a riot of colours symbolising the increasingly colourful and fragrant relationship between India and Africa, at a time when the resource-rich continent is being looked at as the land of opportunities by the international community.
India Express Mumbai Limited
China communist party paper says country should join U.S.-led trade pact
25 October 2015
Reuters News
BEIJING, Oct 25 (Reuters) - China should join at an appropriate time the U.S.-backed regional trade accord the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) as its broad aims are in line with China's own economic reform agenda, an influential Communist Party newspaper said on Sunday.
China is not among the 12 Pacific Rim countries who earlier this month agreed the trade pact, the most ambitious in a generation. The accord includes Australia and Japan among economies worth a combined $28 trillion.
China's trade minister has said the country does not feel targeted by it, but will evaluate the likely impact comprehensively.
In a commentary, the biweekly Study Times, published by the Central Party School that trains rising officials, admitted there were those in China who viewed the TPP as a "plot" to isolate and restrain the country's global ambitions.
But the broad aims of the TPP, including reducing things such as administrative approvals and protecting the environment, were what China wants to achieve too, it wrote.
China has been trying to shift to a more sustainable, ecologically-sound, consumption-led economic growth model.
"The rules of the TPP and the direction of China's reforms and opening up are in line," the newspaper said.
"China should keep paying close attention and at an appropriate time, in accordance with progress on domestic reform, join the TPP, while limiting the costs associated to the greatest degree," it added.
However, how China's state-owned industries might be affected by joining the TPP would need careful consideration, as the party has made clear their key role in the economy, the newspaper said.
Beijing has been pushing its own trade pact, the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP), a proposed 16-nation free-trade area that would be the world's biggest such bloc, encompassing 3.4 billion people.
RCEP, which comprises the 10-nation HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Association of Southeast Asian Nations club plus six others - China, India, Japan, South Korea, Australia and New Zealand - is a Beijing-backed trade framework that has gained prominence as an alternative to U.S. plans.
The TPP aims to cut trade barriers and set common standards from Vietnam to Canada. But it has also been pitched as a way to counter China's rising economic and political clout in the region. (Reporting by Ben Blanchard; Editing by HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Jacqueline Wong)
Thomson Reuters (Markets) LLC
A vote that could shift Argentina’s role in Latin America
25 October 2015
Buenos Aires Herald
Nothing is as it seems. Spin-doctors have taken control of the campaign as has rarely been seen in Argentine history. They did their best to squeeze all life out of the candidates' proposals. Thus they outlined a “normal,” archetypal presidential candidate, who appeals to the “average citizen.” The ideal hopeful espoused an elusive discourse and did not have a past, a contrasting reality for a country like Argentina that has known plenty of inspiring politicians.
Convinced that the electorate that will tip the balance in the eighth presidential race support some degree of change with continuity, the three main contenders ended by outlining a proposal that essentially vows the same thing — to keep the good and change the bad.
According to what they said, neither Daniel Scioli, nor Mauricio Macri, nor Sergio Massa will promote a sudden devaluation, even if they all allowed their own economists to suggest the contrary. None will privatize pensions, the state-run oil company YPF nor free-to-air soccer matches. Social plans will remain intact and could even be expanded, and all the candidates vowed to pursue a degree of a tough-on-crime approach. The three main contenders will fiercely negotiate with the “vulture” funds that have been helped by New York District Judge Thomas Griesa. Apparently, Scioli, Macri and Massa will observe the law, they will not tolerate corruption cases and will encourage dialogue among Argentines. Everything is nice. The fact that an ad-man, Ernesto Savaglio, has been campaigning for the three candidates (not simultaneously, that is) imust be seen as a mere coincidence.
However, everything doesn't sound so similar. One of the points in which Scioli and Macri showed significant differences is in their approach to the international arena, particularly Latin America.
Buenos Aires Governor and Victory Front candidate deployed a high-impact agenda of meetings with Uruguay's José Mujica and Tabaré Vázquez, Brazil's Luiz Inácio “Lula” da Silva and Dilma Rousseff, Bolivia's Evo Morales and Cuba's Raúl Castro, and also phoned Ecuador's Rafael Correa and Chile's Michelle Bachelet this week. The ecumenical Scioli who does not reject a photo-op with anyone showed a sharper tilt toward the region, even travelling to celebrate electoral victories of the Workers' Party (PT) in Brazil and the Broad Front in Montevideo.
The political shift experienced in Latin America over the last fifteen years led to new blocs, such as HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UNASUR, sustained in part on the affinity of its presidents, a fact that translates into a crucial challenge over the coming years. In this context, the foreign policy of Néstor Kirchner and Cristina Fernández de Kirchner ranged from the “Bolivarian” caucus — dwindling after the death of Hugo Chávez — and less confrontational countries — or even friendly — toward the United States such as Colombia, Peru and Chile. Being the second South American economy but far from the importance of being Brazil, Argentina played its role as an intermediate point between the two groups, provoking caution and even confusion among foreign analysts.
Beyond the nuances, UNASUR countries agreed to block external interference. Given the explicit intention of Washington to get involved in Venezuelan politics, which resulted in calls to Latin American governments to join its rhetoric, the response was generally negative, except for Colombia's Álvaro Uribe.
Macri promises a dramatic change that would place Argentina at the forefront of the confrontation with Caracas. The Let's Change candidate anticipated that unless President Nicolás Maduro frees opposition leader Leopoldo López — sentenced to nearly 14 years in prison for his alleged responsibility in the violent revolt of 2014 — he would call on Argentina's partners at the Mercosur and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UNASUR to enforce the so-called democratic clause, which would entail the exclusion of any country that violates constitutional freedoms.
“This week something really important happened — the Brazilian representative to the electoral observers body for the mid-term elections, which take place in December, left the mission,” Diego Guelar, International Relations Secretary at Macri's PRO party, told the Herald.
“This means that we are close to what we think should be the full real agenda with Brazil, to end this sort of sponsorship of a regime that does not meet full democratic conditions,” said Guelar, a conservative Peronist who used to serve as lawmaker and ambassador.
Indeed, Rousseff's government withdrew its delegate to the observer mission that had been challenged by the Maduro government.
Guelar does not hesitate: “Venezuela is not a democracy.”
By contrast, the democratic clause was put forward by members of the Mercosur and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Unasur (since 2014), but as a warning to the Venezuelan opposition, which was accused of preparing a “coup” by politicians from almost the entire continent. According to Guelar, protests in Venezuela did not intend to break the constitutional order. “Our attitude is in absolute solidarity with the opposition.”
Macri announced that his first trip, if elected president, would be to Brazil, where he would propose Dilma Roussef trigger sanctions against Venezuela. Beyond the changing relationship between Brasilia and Caracas, it does not seem at all likely that the weakened Rousseff would be willing to lead an attack against Maduro that would inevitably lead to a confrontation with other presidents in the continent (namely, Morales and Correa).
However, Let's Change seems determined, as is the opposition in countries like Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Peru, Bolivia, Uruguay and Ecuador.
Until now, a key factor that defused any chance of foreign intervention in Venezuela were the clean elections, which were held properly and in a timely manner, leaving little room for criticism abroad. A vote will allegedly take place in December. If it doesn't, the situation will force a fresh approach.
Those elections will coincide with the swearing-in of Argentina's new president.
Heraldo de Buenos Aires Ltd
El conflictivo TPP, una visión desde el sur
La Razón, Bolivia
24 October 2015
El 5 de octubre sin duda se dio un hito en las relaciones económicas internacionales. La firma del Acuerdo Transpacífico (TPP por sus siglas en inglés) por parte de 12 países circundantes al océano Pacífico cambiará las reglas en la gobernanza económica global. Lo interesante es que, a diferencia de lo que sucede a nivel multilateral, las negociaciones han podido avanzar, aplacando la oposición de varios grupos dentro de los propios países. Pero ¿qué es lo que propone este acuerdo que está siendo tan controversial en el ámbito mundial?
En primer lugar, debemos revisar el contexto en el que este acuerdo fue firmado. El TPP es parte de la nueva ola de negociaciones internacionales que evidencian el cumplimiento de las predicciones sobre el camino del regionalismo, ya que nos están llevando a la conformación de "regiones mundiales" que serán los principales actores en la arena internacional. Además del TPP ya firmado, se tienen varios otros en negociación como el Acuerdo Transatlántico de Comercio e Inversiones (TTIP), entre Estados Unidos y la Unión Europea; el Acuerdo Comprensivo de Economía y Comercio (CETA) entre Canadá y la Unión Europea; y el Acuerdo de Comercio de Servicios (TISA) entre 23 países, incluyendo Estados Unidos y la Unión Europea.
A pesar de que desde 1947 se tuvo un avance en el ámbito multilateral —alcanzando su punto máximo en 1995 con la entrada en vigor de la HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Organización Mundial del Comercio (OMC)—su fracaso cada vez más evidente, llevó a los países a optar por un avance a nivel regional. Si bien en la OMC cada país tiene un voto y el número de países en desarrollo es mucho mayor al de países industrializados, estos últimos tuvieron la astucia de diseñar bloques regionales en los cuales puedan incluir países más pequeños que acepten profundizar sus compromisos internacionales en determinadas áreas y que en su gran mayoría no ofrecen beneficios claros para el ciudadano promedio. Como se sabe, esto se debe a los lobbys de Empresas Transnacionales (ETN) que presionan a sus gobiernos, en busca de normas que les aseguren mayores beneficios.
En segundo lugar, analizando los motivos por los cuales este acuerdo generó tanto conflicto debemos mencionar el secretismo en el cual se llevaron a cabo las negociaciones. Un requisito para permitir que un país ingrese a las negociaciones era que acepte la total confidencialidad. Fue tan alto el nivel de secretismo que la desinformación no solo era de la sociedad civil, sino también de políticos y académicos.
Por ejemplo, en las negociaciones del TTIP, los eurodiputados solo pueden leer extractos del Acuerdo, y para hacerlo, entran a habitaciones especiales, sin poder llevar ni siquiera el teléfono celular. En respuesta, no es raro encontrar a organizaciones como HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WikiLeaks ofreciendo gigantes sumas de dinero como recompensa por documentación relacionada con el tema o manifestaciones como la del 10 de octubre en Berlín, congregando a cuarto de millón de personas que denunciaron que la firma del TTIP sería el fin de la democracia en Europa.
Aunque la creencia común es que la resistencia a estos bloques se debe a la falta de transparencia descrita, la realidad es peor aún. El mayor punto de conflicto es que este acuerdo ya no trata solo de reducción de barreras a los intercambios comerciales, sino que además incluye diferentes temas que hacen a la misma organización económica de los países. Se tiene un capítulo sobre acceso a mercados, pero la mayor parte de las normas abordan la desregulación y la protección al capital. Éste es el punto central del análisis. La inclusión de estos "nuevos" temas es el gran problema del TPP y no así la negociación de la eliminación de barreras comerciales. Si bien es conocido que los temas más conflictivos son la protección de inversiones y la propiedad intelectual, no podemos dejar de mencionar otros igual de importantes como normas laborales, política de competencia o normas ambientales. A pesar de que cada uno de estos puntos merece un análisis profundo, en general podemos afirmar que existe renuencia a asumir compromisos en estas materias debido a que tienen el efecto obvio de privilegiar los intereses de las corporaciones por sobre las personas. Como dice el profesor Jagdish Bahgawati de la Universidad de Columbia, la inclusión de estos temas se debe únicamente a la presión de grupos de interés y que al final no tienen nada que ver con el debate sobre los beneficios del libre comercio y, lo que es peor, está destruyendo la gobernanza económica multilateral, que tanto costó construir.
En vista de lo anterior, nos preguntamos, ¿solamente por recibir la apertura de mercados para nuestros productos, estamos dispuestos a aceptar un modelo diseñado por unos pocos y para unos pocos? Éste no es el clásico debate sobre cuántos beneficios y perjuicios se obtendrán a partir de la eliminación de barreras comerciales. El principal conflicto de la firma del TPP —y los demás acuerdos en negociación— es que representan una gran pérdida de soberanía. Las normas que se están negociando tienen una visión y un modelo, y claro está, no han sido consensuadas. Son unos pocos países los que dictan las reglas y los demás se limitan a negociar "una coma o un punto". Lo sustancial de los tratados no se negocia. De esta manera, no es de extrañar que la resistencia a estos acuerdos no se esté dando solo en los países en desarrollo. En los países industrializados actualmente se está librando una batalla interna cuyo resultado determinará si se acepta dar a las corporaciones más poder del que ahora tienen.
Ante este panorama sombrío, y tomando en cuenta que el TPP ya fue firmado por 12 países de Asia y América, el desafío que queda para los países no firmantes es encontrar mecanismos que les permitan poner en práctica su visión de que existe otra forma de inserción en la economía global y que esto pueda ser un contrapeso al avance de estos acuerdos. Lo que sí está claro es que el TPP y los demás "mega bloques" son el inicio de la gobernanza regional y que, tal como están avanzando, será más perjudicial para los países en desarrollo que lo que fue la gobernanza multilateral.
Para Sudamérica, el panorama se torna muy complejo. Como afirma Mariano Turzi, "si en el siglo XX el Canal de Panamá marcó la separación del continente en norte y sur, en el siglo XXI el TPP dividirá a la región en este y oeste" . La Alianza del Pacífico tiene la idea clara: mayor liberalismo y desregulación. Entendemos que el desafío es para el HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Mercado Común del Sur (Mercosur) y para los países que no compartimos esa visión. Copyright NoticiasFinancieras - La Razón - All rights reserved
Global Network Content Services LLC
END
 
Josep Bosch, Information Officer
Information and External Relations Division
+41227395681
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.