HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO and UNEP enhance dialogue on trade and environmental issues
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO Members Criticize Ukraine's Decision to Use New Import Surcharges
·         HYPERLINK \l "Is Globalization Finished?
·         HYPERLINK \l "OMC - Le pays accueille un atelier régional de trois jours pour des parlementaires
·         HYPERLINK \l "(AE) TRADE: €649,000 from Finland to WTO funds for development
·         HYPERLINK \l "Europe solar firms accuse China of dodging import duties
·         HYPERLINK \l "Federal Circuit Strikes Down Bid for Shrimp Duty Disbursements
·         HYPERLINK \l "Industries Call for Higher Import Duty on Steel
·         HYPERLINK \l "Costa Rica Bans Poultry From States, Regions in U.S. With Avian Flu Cases
·         HYPERLINK \l "Abe vows to take on Japan's farmers over trade pact
·         HYPERLINK \l "Chief negotiators to meet on Pacific free trade deal in mid-May
·         HYPERLINK \l "EAC, EU trade pact to be ratified in 2016: official
·         HYPERLINK \l "Kenya, Tanzania blame youth radicalization on rise of terrorist activities
 
WTO and UNEP enhance dialogue on trade and environmental issues 
Wednesday, 29 April 2015 
Written by  News Editor
 
The FINANCIAL -- A flagship event on trade and environment marking the 20th anniversary of the WTO was held at WTO headquarters on 28 April 2015 with the participation of Director-General Roberto Azevêdo and the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), Mr Achim Steiner.
 
The event provided an opportunity to take stock of the increasing interconnections between trade and environment since the establishment of the WTO and to look ahead to what needs to be done to ensure these two areas continue to be mutually supportive in the years to come.
 
The event brought together leaders and renowned experts in the field of trade and environment, including the Executive Secretary of the Basel, Rotterdam and Stockholm Conventions and the Secretary-General of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES), according to WTO.
 
DG Azevêdo highlighted the increasing importance of trade-related measures aimed at environmental goals and the role of WTO institutions and activities in ensuring such measures contribute efficiently to sustainable development.
 
Mr Steiner and Mr Azevêdo emphasized the need to redouble efforts at all levels to ensure that trade and environmental policies go hand in hand.
 
Director-General Azevêdo said:
 
“20 years ago the founders of the WTO saw clearly that the well-being of habitats, societies, and economies are not separate. Rather, they are inextricably linked. Their vision was of global cooperation in trade as a means to unleash growth, alleviate poverty, raise living standards and ensure full employment, while also protecting the environment.
 
“In the 20 years since then, the connections between trade and the environment have grown significantly. We must therefore do more to ensure that trade and environmental policies work better together, both at national and international levels. Today we have taken an important step forward to improve multilateral cooperation and dialogue on these issues.”
 
Executive Director Steiner said:
 
“Trade brings the world closer together — bringing with it many opportunities but also challenges. It will not drive sustainable development by itself, but only if the international community clearly commits itself to trade-related policies and other support measures that are conducive to environmental, social and economic sustainability.
 
“International trade governance is evolving quickly. We need to assure that new structures do not come at the cost of the environment, but are drivers of an inclusive Green Economy. UNEP looks forward to continuing collaboration with the WTO as it prepares for its Ministerial Conference in Nairobi and for the decades to come.”
 
 
WTO Members Criticize Ukraine's Decision to Use New Import Surcharges
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, April 30, 2015
 
April 29 — Russia and other World Trade Organization members criticized Ukraine's recent decision to impose import surcharges to help stabilize the country's deteriorating economic situation, blamed in part on Russia's annexation of Crimea.
 
Ukraine in February initiated a series of special tariffs that subject all goods valued at more than $160 to an additional import tariff ranging from 5 percent to 10 percent of the particular good's value. The measures are set to expire at the end of 2015 and exempt energy products, humanitarian aid and certain medical products.
 
During an April 28–29 Balance-of-Payments Restrictions Committee meeting, several WTO members said that they opposed the measures because of their undue burden on exporters. Members urged Ukraine to seek other, less trade-distorting methods to ameliorate its economic situation, according to a WTO statement.
 
However, Ukraine said that the measures were needed to counteract the recent “deterioration” of its economic situation caused by Russia's annexation of Crimea, among other things.
 
Negative Economic Trends
 
The deterioration of relations with Russia and the military conflict in eastern Ukraine have “intensified” Ukraine's negative economic trends, according to a recent WTO report on the situation.
 
Russia's annexation of Crimea had a significant effect on Ukraine's energy policies and cost the country $300 billion in lost oil and gas investments, Ukraine said.
 
The continuing conflict in eastern Ukraine has destroyed 14 of the country's coal mines and reduced the operating capacity of 75 percent of its remaining state-owned mines in the region.
 
In addition, Ukraine's economy has suffered from currency fluctuations, macroeconomic uncertainty, the downgrading of its investment rating and weak export demand. The combined influence of these factors led Ukraine's GDP to slip by 6.8 percent in 2014 compared to a year prior.
 
Members Challenge Ukraine
 
Russia urged Ukraine to remove the “protectionist and trade distortive” measures immediately, particularly given the absence of a plan to progressively do so, according to one official at the meeting.
 
Russia said that there was no immediate threat to Ukraine's monetary reserves, which is one precondition for imposing safeguard measures. Russia resisted Ukraine's description of the situation in Crimea as an “annexation” and said that the committee meeting was the wrong forum in which to discuss the issue.
 
WTO members sought further information on how Ukraine would limit increases in the prices of its domestic products, how it would determine the various tariff surcharge rates and under what conditions it would end the measures ahead of schedule.
 
The WTO's Committee on Balance-of-Payments Restrictions will resume its consultations on the matter at its next meeting, scheduled for June 11.
 
 
Is Globalization Finished? 
By Paul Hannon 
29 April 2015
Dow Jones Institutional News
 
World trade volumes fell in the early months of 2015, once again disappointing the expectations of economists.

Figures released by the Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis, also known as the CPB, show trade volumes fell 0.9% in February, having fallen 1.6% in January. The World Trade Organisation has already lowered its forecasts for trade growth this year, to 2.8% from the 5.3% it projected in April 2014.

It isn't the first time the WTO has cut its trade forecasts in recent years, and it shares that habit with the International Monetary Fund and the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development.

So why have forecasters been getting it wrong? The most obvious answer is that trade isn't the main thing they have been wrong about. Over recent years, forecasters have regularly overestimated world economic growth. When it disappoints, so does trade.

That is how the WTO's director general, Roberto Azevêdo, explained the most recent cut in forecasts.

"Trade growth has been disappointing in recent years, due largely to prolonged sluggish growth in GDP following the financial crisis," he said. "Looking forward we expect trade to continue its slow recovery but with economic growth still fragile and continued geopolitical tensions, this trend could easily be undermined."

It is true that weak global economic growth is associated with slow trade growth. But there may be something more fundamental afoot. Since the financial crisis, trade flows haven't just slowed in line with broader economic growth, they have slowed more.

In the years of rapid trade growth between the late 1980s and 2005, trade volumes increased at an annual average rate that was twice that of world economic growth. Since the financial crisis, they have grown at roughly the same rate.

The persistent weakness of trade flows over recent years suggests to some that a change in the structure of the global economy is underway, and that the process of globalization that characterized the two decades leading up to the financial crisis has either come to an end, or become much less dynamic.

In a note, Capital Economics said the surge in globalization that followed the collapse of communism in the late 1980s may have ended, with China in particular about as integrated into the world economy as it is going to get.

"We suspect that the outsized increase in world trade in the 1990s and 2000s was largely driven by the integration of China and former communist states into global supply chains, a process which is now mostly complete," Capital Economics said. "Accordingly, hopes for a strong recovery in global trade will probably be disappointed."

Others doubt whether globalization has run its course, and continue to forecast a pickup in trade over coming years, although few expect growth rates to return to pre-crisis levels.

Raoul Leering, head of international trade research at ING Bank, believes the near stagnation of Europe's economy over the last half-decade has hindered global trade, since the continent typically accounts for a larger share of trade flows than it does global economic output.

"The current increase in European growth rates will make world trade recover disproportionately," he writes in a new report.

Mr. Leering also sees trade flows being boosted by the WTO's 2013 Bali agreement, which will streamline customs procedures, as well as a range of proposed regional trade deals, such as the Trans-Pacific Partnership.

But more fundamentally, Mr. Leering believes globalization still has a way to go, with multinational companies likely to continue to disperse production across the planet, whether they are based in developed or developing economies.

"The biggest wave of global value change is behind us, but it's far from over," he said. 
 
 
OMC - Le pays accueille un atelier régional de trois jours pour des parlementaires
29 April 2015
All Africa
 
Apr 29, 2015 (Government of Mauritius/AllAfrica Global Media via COMTEX) -- Un atelier de travail régional, visant à sensibiliser des parlementaires africains sur l'implémentation de l'Accord de l'Organisation mondiale du commerce (OMC) sur la facilitation des échanges commerciaux, se tiendra du 4 au 6 mai 2015 à l'hôtel Hennessy, à Ebène.

Organisé par l'OMC conjointement avec le ministère des Affaires étrangères, de l'Intégration régionale et du Commerce international, l'atelier de trois jours verra la participation de plus d'une vingtaine de parlementaires africains, de même que des membres de la Commission de l'Océan Indien et de la Communauté de l'Afrique de l'Est.

Les pays participants comprennent, entre autres : le Burundi, les Comores, le Kenya, Madagascar, le Rwanda, les Seychelles et l'Ouganda.

Lors de l'atelier les participants prendront connaissance du travail de l'OMC, et du progrès accompli au niveau des négociations par rapport à l'agenda de développement de Doha. Parmi les questions qui seront abordées : l'impact de l'Accord de l'OMC sur la facilitation des échanges commerciaux sur la région africaine ;

les accords commerciaux régionaux de l'OMC ; et le système commercial multilatéral et les parlementaires. La principale personne ressource sera M. Said El Hachimi, conseiller, division de l'Information et des Relations extérieures de l'OMC.

L'Accord sur la facilitation des échanges

L'Accord sur la facilitation des échanges commerciaux porte sur un ensemble de questions et vise à, notamment, simplifier le commerce, offrir aux pays en développement davantage d'options pour assurer la sécurité alimentaire, stimuler les échanges des pays les moins avancés et, plus généralement, favoriser le développement.

Cet accord, finalisé lors de la 9e conférence ministérielle de l'OMC tenue à Bali en décembre 2013, est le premier accord multilatéral conclu depuis la création de l'OMC en 1995. Il redéfinit l'approche conventionnelle au traitement spécial et différentiel par le fait qu'il détermine sa mise en œuvre sur la disponibilité de l'assistance financière et technique des bailleurs de fonds pour aider les pays en développement nécessitant un soutien.
 
 
(AE) TRADE: €649,000 from Finland to WTO funds for development 
29 April 2015
Bulletin Quotidien Europe
 
Brussels, 28/04/2015 (Agence Europe) - On Tuesday 21 April, the WTO announced that Finland has pledged to contribute around €649,000 in 2015 to assist the participation of developing countries in the multilateral trading system. The funding comprises €550,000 to the Standards and Trade Development Facility (STDF) and €99,000 for evaluating the WTO's Doha Development Agenda Global Trust Fund (DDAGTF).

The objective of the STDF is to help developing countries and least developed countries (LDCs) establish and implement sanitary and phytosanitary measures for health protection and expand their ability to gain or maintain access to international markets.

The DDAGTF finances trade-related technical assistance activities to help developing countries and LDCs improve their participation in the Doha round.

Since 2000, Finland has donated €12.35 million to the various WTO trust funds. (Emmanuel Hagry)
 
 
Europe solar firms accuse China of dodging import duties 
29 April 2015
Agence France Presse
 
European firms on Wednesday accused Chinese solar panel makers of dodging hundreds of millions of euros in import duties and called on the European Union to launch an investigation.

The complaint threatens to spark a new flare-up in a long-running row on the issue that Brussels and Beijing only recently managed to damp down.

"Up to 30 percent of Chinese solar imports bypass EU import measures through fraudulent circumvention," industry group EU ProSun said.

"European industry has already been devastated by illegal Chinese practices and the EU and European governments have lost substantial tax revenues at a time of great need," group spokesman Milan Nitzschke said in a statement.

EU ProSun said China was exporting solar modules and cells via Taiwan and Malaysia, passing them off as locally made to avoid EU levies, and it had lodged an official request with the European Commission for an investigation.

If found at fault, the Commission could impose heavy anti-dumping duties on the Chinese products concerned, in a repeat of previous bitter disputes between the two giant trading partners.

After months of tit-for-tat reprisals involving punitive levies on solar panels and a widening range of other goods, the EU and China called it quits in 2013 and agreed a new minimum price regime for solar panel imports from China.

This does not cover all Chinese companies however and there have been repeated complaints by European firms over alleged breaches of the accord which expires at the end of this year.

The Commission, the EU's executive arm which polices competition issues, launched an investigation in December into alleged Chinese dumping of solar glass, a key component of solar panels.

Estimated at about 210 million euros, solar glass manufacturing is just a small part of the overall market and Commission officials stressed at the time that the probe had nothing to do with the 2013 agreement.

EU ProSun has been a fierce critic of Chinese manufacturers who it says have largely destroyed Europe's solar panel industry.
 
 
Federal Circuit Strikes Down Bid for Shrimp Duty Disbursements
By Brian Flood
WTO Reporter, April 30, 2015
 
April 29 — Tampa Bay Fisheries, Inc. and Singleton Fisheries, Inc., both based in Florida, will not receive proceeds from antidumping duties collected on certain frozen and canned warmwater shrimp imports because they failed to support the underlying antidumping duty petition, a federal court of appeals panel ruled April 29 (Tampa Bay Fisheries, Inc. v. United States, 2015 BL 123401, Fed. Cir., No. 2012-1419, 4/29/15).
 
In a nonprecedential opinion, a panel from the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit held that the companies were not eligible to receive funds collected via antidumping duty orders on shrimp from Brazil, Ecuador, India, China, Vietnam and Thailand because they did not qualify as “affected domestic producers” under the requirements of the since-repealed Continued Dumping and Subsidy Offset Act, also known as the CDSOA or the Byrd Amendment.
 
Under the statute, monies collected from dumping and countervailing duty orders can be doled out to “affected domestic producers”—companies that expressed support for the antidumping duty petition, either through a letter to the International Trade Commission (ITC) or by an ITC questionnaire response. While the CDSOA was repealed in 2006, U.S. firms can still receive duties collected before Oct. 1, 2007.
 
Tampa Bay Fisheries and Singleton Fisheries were not considered affected domestic producers with regards to the shrimp orders at issue because they did not check the ITC questionnaire box indicating that they supported the underlying petition.
 
The panel also held that the support requirement does not violate domestic producers' First Amendment and equal protection rights, as the Federal Circuit has repeatedly ruled (210 WTO, 11/2/10). The U.S. Supreme Court has declined to hear appeals of several such rulings.
 
As such, the panel held that the Court of International Trade was right to dismiss the plaintiffs' case (58 WTO, 3/27/12).
 
The ruling marked the second time in a week that a Federal Circuit panel declined to expand disbursement eligibility under the CDSOA.
 
James Kevin Horgan of DeKieffer & Horgan, PLLC, Washington, represented Tampa Bay Fisheries, Inc. and Singleton Fisheries, Inc. Martin M. Tomlinson of the Justice Department's Civil Division argued for the U.S. and U.S. Customs and Border Protection. Patrick Vincent Gallagher, Jr. of the ITC's Office of the General Counsel represented ITC.
 
 
Industries Call for Higher Import Duty on Steel 
30 April 2015
Tempo
 
TEMPO.CO, Jakarta – The Indonesian Iron and Steel Industry Association (IISI) has called on the government to increase the import duty on steel products at the highest possible rate or the ceiling rate set by the World Trade Organization (WTO).

"This is one of our ways to defend ourselves against the shelling of steel imports. We propose that the import duty for upstream industries be pegged at 20 percent and 35 percent for downstream industries," IISI head Irvan Kamal told Tempo yesterday.

Irvan said the figures were the same of those in neighboring countries, including Malaysia. "But I heard the government had its own calculation mechanism."

Coordinating Minister for the Economy Sofyan Djalil said he supported the proposal, adding that it would help leverage the use of domestic steel.

"Hopefully this can protect the domestic steel industry," he said on the sidelines of the National Development Planning Conference (Musrenbangnas) on Wednesday.

The Industry Ministry recorded steel imports in 2014 reached US$12.58 billion—way higher than steel exports at US$2.23 billion.
 
 
Costa Rica Bans Poultry From States, Regions in U.S. With Avian Flu Cases
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, April 30, 2015
 
April 29 — Costa Rica imposed a temporary ban on imports of U.S. poultry products from states and regions reporting cases of avian influenza, according to an April 28 notification submitted to the World Trade Organization.
 
To date, the U.S. Department of Agriculture has confirmed avian influenza cases in more than a dozen states, including Arkansas, California, Idaho, Iowa, Kansas, Minnesota, Missouri, Montana, North Dakota, South Dakota, Oregon, Washington and Wisconsin.
 
Though the Costa Rican ban applies to eight of the affected states, the resolution will apply to “zones or compartments in the U.S. that subsequently report outbreaks of avian influenza,” according to Costa Rica's National Animal Health Service.
 
Flu-Free to Date
 
“Given that Costa Rica is free from the avian influenza virus, it is vital to protect the country and its poultry industry by implementing measures to delay or prevent the introduction of the virus into national territory,” the Costa Rican notice said, in Spanish.
 
More than 30 nations have implemented temporary bans on U.S. poultry meat originating from the affected regions.
 
 
Abe vows to take on Japan's farmers over trade pact 
Shawn Donnan in Washington 
29 April 2015
Financial Times (FT.Com)
 
Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe made an impassioned pitch for a Pacific Rim trade deal before the US Congress, calling for its rapid conclusion and pledging a "quantum leap" in reforms including taking on his country's powerful farm lobby.

Mr Abe's push on Wednesday came as the US Congress prepares for divisive votes on trade in the weeks ahead that are considered crucial to concluding the Trans-Pacific Partnership, in which the US and Japan are the biggest of a dozen players. The TPP would cover some 40 per cent of the global economy and be the most significant trade agreement sealed in two decades.

The US and Japan have for more than 18 months been engaged in tortuous parallel negotiations over opening up their respective markets that have focused on automobiles and agriculture. For both Mr Abe and Barack Obama, the US president, that has meant taking on powerful industry lobbies, members of their own parties and core political constituencies such as labour unions.

The two sides did not announce any major breakthrough in those negotiations this week, though Mr Abe said on Wednesday that the "goal is near".

As a young politician who was "like a ball of fire" he had once joined farmers' protests and opposed opening up Japan's agricultural sector to greater competition, Mr Abe said. But times had changed.

"Japan's agriculture has gone into decline over these last 20 years," he said. "In order for it to survive, it has to change now."

"Japan is right in the middle of a quantum leap," Mr Abe said. "We have regained our spirit of reform and our sense of speed. Japan will not run away from any reforms."

The unspoken message of Mr Abe's speech was that it was now time for the US Congress to do its part and grant Mr Obama the "fast-track" authority he needs to close the deal. The legislation would give Congress a simple up-or-down vote on the TPP and guarantee to Japan and other TPP countries that it would not seek to amend any deal the Obama administration reaches.

Legislation to grant the president what is formally known as "Trade Promotion Authority" last week passed through key committees of both houses of Congress with strong support. Votes by the Republican-controlled full chambers of both houses are expected in the coming weeks with both Republican congressional leaders and the administration confident they can muster the support needed.

The tabular content relating to this article is not available to view. Apologies in advance for the inconvenience caused.

<>But the bill faces strong opposition from some parts of Mr Obama's Democratic party that has left the president engaged in a divisive debate within his party, something he acknowledged this week would be familiar to Mr Abe.

"The politics around trade can be hard in both our countries, but I know that Prime Minister Abe, like me, is deeply committed to getting this done and I'm confident we will," Mr Obama told a news conference on Tuesday.

Mr Abe told Congress the economic case for the TPP was strong. But he also pitched it as a way for the US and Japan to bolster their influence in the world.

"We can spread our shared values around the world and have them take root: the rule of law, democracy, and freedom. That is exactly what the TPP is all about," he said.

"It is also about our security," he added. "Long-term, its strategic value is awesome. We should never forget that."

That strategic argument, focused mainly on the TPP as a way to respond to the economic rise of China, has started to gain greater currency in Washington in recent weeks, particularly as Beijing has garnered support from traditional US allies for its planned Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank.

Japan and the US are now the two biggest economies not to have joined the AIIB.

 
Chief negotiators to meet on Pacific free trade deal in mid-May 
Kyodo News
 
TOKYO, April 30 -- Chief negotiators from the member countries of the Trans-Pacific Partnership free trade initiative are arranging to hold talks in mid-May in Guam, negotiation sources said Thursday.

The United States, which is playing a leading role in the negotiations, informally sounded out Japan and 10 other countries about the talks, the sources said.

The 12 TPP countries are aiming to narrow down important issues such as intellectual property and reform of state-owned entities before they hold a plenary ministerial meeting possible late May in an attempt to reach a broad agreement.

The trade officials from 12 countries gathered last week in a Washington suburb but without major progress.

Immediately after a trade ministers meeting of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum to be held for two days from May 23 on Boracay Island in the Philippines, Washington aims to hold a ministerial meeting for TPP talks in a neighboring country such as Singapore, one of the 12 members, the sources said.

If a deal on the TPP is reached, the framework, also involving Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru and Vietnam, would account for some 40 percent of the global economy.

 
EAC, EU trade pact to be ratified in 2016: official 
Deng Yaomin 
 
NAIROBI, April 29 (Xinhua) -- The Economic Partnership Agreement (EPA) between the East African Community (EAC) and the EU, which was initialized in October 2014, is likely to be ratified by the respective national parliaments by end of October 2016, an EU official said on Wednesday.

EU Trade and Communication Counsellor Christophe De Vroey told journalists in Nairobi that the deal is currently undergoing legal scrubbing to ensure it meets World Trade Organization (WTO) guidelines.

"By end of August, we expect the ministers in charge of trade in the EAC states to sign the agreement," said Vroey.

He said the agreement will be translated into 23 EU languages as well as into Kiswahili. The EPA is meant to replace the previous non-reciprocal trade deal between EU and the EAC that came to an end in 2007.

Under the EPA, EAC goods and services will have 100 percent duty free, quota free access to the EU market.

"However, only 65 percent of goods from the EU will enter the EAC market without incurring import duty," said Vroey, adding that an additional 15 percent of goods from the EU will only access the EAC duty free after 15 years, with another 2.6 percent will have to wait for 25 years.

"A sensitive list of goods containing various agricultural products, wines and spirits, chemicals, plastics, will, however, remain subject to EAC import duties even after the 25-year liberalization effort," he said.

The EU official stated that the trade pact allows the EAC to impose an export tax on raw material in order to foster the development of domestic industry as well as to maintain currency stability.

"The tax will remain in place until it is reviewed by the EPA Council that consists of EAC and EU after a period of 48 months," he said.

Vroey said EU's single market of 500 million consumers is one of Kenya's main export market. "The majority of Kenyan flowers, fruits and vegetables are absorbed by the EU."

The trade counselor said the decision to strengthen the EU/ACP partnership is a mutual choice. He noted that the EU is committed to ensure that the EAC market will not be flooded by cheap subsidized agricultural produce from EU.
 
 
Kenya, Tanzania blame youth radicalization on rise of terrorist activities 
Deng Yaomin 
 
NAIROBI, April 29 (Xinhua) -- Kenyan and Tanzanian government on Wednesday blamed radicalization of youth for increased cases of terrorism activities in the East Africa region.

Outgoing Tanzania High Commissioner to Kenya, Batilda Burian said her country would work closely with Kenya in combating terrorism among other criminal activities.

"There is need for our two countries to work together in combating terrorism activities which are increasingly becoming a threat to development of East Africa Community," Burian said during a meeting with Deputy President William Ruto in Nairobi.

She said Tanzania was saddened by the recent Garissa attack where 148 people were killed.

"We wish to assure you of our support as you intensify the fight against this heinous act of lawlessness. We are standing with you," she said.

Speaking during the meeting, Ruto said Kenya has intensified efforts in the fight against terrorism, noting that the global challenge needed concerted efforts to containing it.

"We have to work together as countries in our region to eliminate terrorism activities for the sake of peace and development," Ruto said.

The police have stepped up security surveillance across the country following intelligence reports that Somali militant group Al-Shabaab are planning to carry out retaliatory terror attacks in the East African nation.

Security forces have increased surveillance measures in key installations, private and public places, and urged the public to exercise caution while dealing with people with ulterior motives.

Meanwhile, the deputy president also said the integration of EAC has strengthened relations among its member countries, noting that it has created prosperity for the region. Ruto said Kenya and Tanzania have enjoyed good working relations, especially in the field of trade.

"There is mutual benefit among citizens of the two countries as far as business activities are concerned. It is our responsibility as ambassadors and governments to strengthen our relations to improve the living standards among our people," he said.

He added that the World Trade Organization (WTO) forum will be held in December in the country, noting that it would be an opportunity for communities in East Africa to exploit their trade potentiality.

"This will be an opportunity for us as a region to host other world nations to further our agenda on development and governance, " Ruto said.
END


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.