HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO Trade Deal Will Likely Enter into Force By December Meeting, Says USTR Official
·         HYPERLINK \l "Paraguay Circulates WTO Agricultural Market Access Proposal
·         HYPERLINK \l "Germany to Pay Airbus EUR623 Million in Loans for New Jet
·         HYPERLINK \l "(AE) RUSSIA: Start of easing on trade chapter of bilateral relations
·         HYPERLINK \l "EU and Kazakhstan to sign an expanded partnership agreement this year
·         HYPERLINK \l "Normalisation of trade ties: Waiting for Pak to act, says govt
·         HYPERLINK \l "Obama’s 2015 trade agenda focuses on middle class
·         HYPERLINK \l "Advocates: Not so fast on aquaculture regs
·         HYPERLINK \l "World Bank admits botched resettlement policy
 
WTO Trade Deal Will Likely Enter into Force By December Meeting, Says USTR Official
By Brian Flood
WTO Reporter, March 5, 2015
 
March 4 — The Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA) will likely enter into force by the time of the next World Trade Organization ministerial conference in Kenya in December, though it will take “a lot of legwork,” Assistant U.S. Trade Representative for WTO and Multilateral Affairs Mark Linscott said during a panel discussion.
 
Each country has its own domestic ratification process, and some countries such as Japan will require legislative approval, which tends to take longer, Linscott said during the discussion hosted by the Washington International Trade Association.
 
Nevertheless, he said, a December goal is consistent with the history of previous WTO agreements, and many member countries are eager to begin the process of implementing the agreement by the next ministerial conference.
 
The agreement will only enter into force when it has been domestically ratified by two-thirds of WTO members. In 2014, the WTO was delayed for almost six months in its plans to open up the TFA for ratification, owing to India's demands relating to the issue of food security.
 
Richard Eglin, of White & Case LLP and a former director of the WTO Secretariat, recently said that the WTO's original deadline of July 2015 to begin implementing the agreement is now “completely implausible” (39 WTO, 2/27/15).
 
The U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) stands ready to assist any other countries that might need help in drafting such ratification legislation, said Virginia Brown, director of USAID's Office of Trade and Regulatory Reforms. The agency has already been assisting developing countries to assess which TFA commitments they will be able to implement immediately, and which ones will require more time and donor countries' aid, she said.
 
U.S. Wants Swift Ratification
 
Linscott said that the U.S. is pushing for swift TFA ratification at meetings of international fora such as the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation and the G-20.
 
Ralph Carter, managing director of trade and international affairs for FedEx Express, said the TFA will be one of the most cost-effective policy reforms that any country can undertake to improve its global economic competitiveness, attract foreign investment and accelerate its development.
 
In particular, Carter said, it will help small- and medium-size enterprises to export, as complicated customs procedures are one of the biggest challenges to small businesses looking to expand their operations abroad.
 
Yet it is one thing for a country to ratify the agreement on paper, and another for it to effectively implement the deal's requirements, said Linscott, and full implementation of all provisions will take some time. Linscott said that donor countries' assistance to developing countries will grow as the latter demonstrate their political commitment to implementing the TFA's reforms.
 
Linscott called on the private sector to provide insights on how implementation actually affects the movement of goods across borders in practice, and to work with their counterparts in other countries to put pressure on their own governments to implement the deal.
 
USAID is partnering with business representatives, as well as with five other donor countries, to organize a trade facilitation alliance to ensure a continued dialogue between governments and the private sector.
 
 
Paraguay Circulates WTO Agricultural Market Access Proposal
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, March 5, 2015
 
March 4 — Paraguay proposed new tariff cuts aimed at fulfilling the Doha Round's goal of expanding market access for agricultural products.
 
The proposal, which circulated this week in Geneva, suggested that developed countries could apply, in six equal annual installments, a maximum average cut of 54 percent and minimum cut of 20 percent per tariff line.
 
Under the proposal developing countries could apply, in 11 equal annual installments, maximum average tariff cuts of 54 percent and a minimum cut of 15 percent per tariff line. Small and vulnerable economies and new WTO members could offer a maximum average cut of 24 percent.
 
Members of the WTO Agriculture Negotiating Committee will likely consider the proposal as part of their discussions at an informal meeting scheduled for March 6.
 
Special Products
 
Paraguay suggested that developed countries could apply a minimum 10 percent cut for no more than 5 percent of tariff lines considered to be sensitive products.
 
Developing countries could under the proposal offer a minimum 10 percent cut for no more than 12 percent of tariff lines considered to be special products.
 
The proposal said that members could not offer bound tariffs over a threshold of 100 percent for developed countries and 130 percent for developing countries.
 
After the initial offers are submitted, members could enter a two-month negotiation period whereby they may exchange requests on a bilateral or plurilateral basis.
 
Members should take into account the provisions for tariff escalation in line with the 2008 draft modalities (Rev. 4), the proposal said. Modalities are formulas for various outcomes, including reducing tariffs and trade-distorting remedies, last revised in 2008.
 
Helpful Proposal
 
Geneva trade officials said that Paraguay's proposal was helpful in getting members to focus on concrete ideas aimed at expanding agricultural market access terms, according to interviews with Bloomberg BNA.
 
John Adank, chairman of the Agriculture Negotiating Committee, previously chided members for repeating old talking points and offering vague views regarding market access during the committee's Jan. 28 meeting(40 WTO, 3/2/15).
 
At that meeting Argentina said that members should consider offers and requests by individual members instead of a tariff-reduction formula, and the European Union called for a simplified approach based on average and minimum cuts.
 
Other countries continue to believe that the Rev. 4 proposal meets the objectives of higher cuts on higher tariffs, transparency and predictability.
 
 
Germany to Pay Airbus EUR623 Million in Loans for New Jet 
By HARRIET TORRY 
4 March 2015
Dow Jones Top Global Market Stories
 
BERLIN--Germany has agreed to pay Airbus EUR623 million ($690 million) in loans from Germany for the new Airbus A350 widebody jet, a spokeswoman for the economics ministry said Wednesday.

The move was expected after Airbus Chief Executive Tom Enders said a deal was pending on Friday, when the company announced full-year results in Munich. An Airbus spokesman said Wednesday that the company welcomes the agreement. The loan runs until 2031 and up to 1,500 deliveries, the ministry said.

Talks between Airbus and Berlin on the second loan broke down ahead of federal elections in Germany in 2013 amid acrimony between the company and the government over guaranteed work and jobs.

According to the ministry spokeswoman, the two parties came to agreement late last year, and Germany's parliamentary budget committee approved the payment on Wednesday.

Airbus, the commercial aerospace unit of Airbus GroupNV, has received billions of euros in preferential loans from European governments to support the development of new jetliner models over the past four decades. That included an initial EUR500 million loan from Germany for the A350. The process on agreeing a second loan, for EUR623 million, proved protracted because Airbus Group, formerly European Aeronautic Defence & Space Co., balked at the terms demanded by the German government.

The issue of loans for new planes has been controversial as the U.S. and Europe battle at the World Trade Organization over subsidies given to their respective plane makers. The WTO has said both Boeing Co. and Airbus have received subsidies not compliant with international trade agreements.

 
(AE) RUSSIA: Start of easing on trade chapter of bilateral relations 
 
Brussels, 03/03/2015 (Agence Europe) - Following a meeting with Russian Economic Development Minister Alexey Ulyukayev in Brussels on Tuesday 3 March, Trade Commissioner Cecilia Malmström said she backed resumption of trilateral discussions with Russia and Ukraine on the impact on the Russian economy of the free-trade deal between the EU and Ukraine, whose coming into force has been delayed until the start of 2016.

“I support the resumption of trilateral talks between the EU, Ukraine and Russia in order to achieve practical solutions to concerns raised by Russia. We continue to stand ready to find ways to address the concerns expressed by Russia, within the flexibility provided by the EU-Ukraine DCFTA, which, however, will not be amended”, Malmström said.

Resumption of the trilateral talks on the effect on the Russian economy of the EU-Ukraine association agreement and its trade chapter is part of the peace agreement concluded between Germany, France, Russia and Ukraine in Minsk on 12 February, ahead of the cessation of hostilities in the east of Ukraine.

“I place great importance on our trade and investment relationship with Russia, and it is in our mutual interest to overcome the current difficulties. It is only via a solution to the Ukraine crisis that we can lay down the foundations for a renewed bilateral partnership”, the commissioner said.

The EU is expected very shortly to propose a date to Russia and Ukraine for the resumption of trilateral technical talks, prior to an early return to political discussions, a Community source close to this matter told us on Tuesday.

Malmström also called on Russia, against whom the EU has now filed four cases with the WTO (see EUROPE 11264) to “respect its WTO commitments in full”. “Once conditions are met, we can start envisaging something more ambitious for our bilateral trade relationship” she stated.

Following Tuesday's meeting, the EU side was somewhat upbeat about positive developments in these issues. Russia gave positive signals and showed willing to find a solution to the cases brought by the EU at the WTO, a Community source told us. (Emmanuel Hagry)

 
EU and Kazakhstan to sign an expanded partnership agreement this year 
 
BRUSSELS. March 4 (Interfax) - The Council for Cooperation between the European Union and Kazakhstan confirmed at a Tuesday meeting in Brussels the intent of the both sides to sign and ratify the new agreement on expanded partnership and cooperation as soon as possible.

The meeting was chaired by Kazakh Foreign Minister Yerlan Idrissov, the EU was represented by Latvian Foreign Minister Edgars Rinkevics and the new Secretary General of the EU External Action Service Alain Le Roy.

Rinkevics told a press conference after the meeting that the new agreement might be signed this year.

"The Cooperation Council reiterated the importance of comprehensive implementation of the EU Strategy for Central Asia both at the regional and national levels and welcomed Kazakhstan's participation in regional initiatives of the EU in Central Asia," the Council says in a joint statement.

EU reaffirms its support for Kazakhstan's accession to the WTO. Rinkevics said at the press conference that Kazakhstan was a reliable partner of the EU, mostly in the oil and gas sector.

Idrisov said that the sides exchanged views on a number of international issues, including the situation in Ukraine.
 
 
Normalisation of trade ties: Waiting for Pak to act, says govt 
 
New Delhi, Mar 4 (PTI) The government today said that a roadmap for normalisation of bilateral trade relations between India and Pakistan has remained unimplemented as the latter has not been able to remove all restrictions on trade through Wagah-Attari land route.

In a written reply to a question in Lok Sabha, Minister of State for External Affairs Gen. (retd) VK Singh said that during the last round of commerce secretary-level talks in Islamabad on Sept. 20-21, 2012, Pakistan had agreed to a roadmap for normalisation of bilateral trade relations with India.

That included transitioning to MFN status for India in accordance with Pakistan's obligations under WTO, Singh said.

"As Pakistan was not able to take the first step as per the roadmap, that is, ensure removal of all restrictions on trade through the Wagah-Attari land route, the sequential roadmap has remained unimplemented," the minister said. PTI ADS KKM

 
Obama’s 2015 trade agenda focuses on middle class
By Doug Palmer 
3/4/15 3:46 PM EST
POLITICO
 
President Barack Obama’s annual trade agenda, released on Wednesday as labor groups and other critics of his trade policies held a rally on Capitol Hill, stresses the importance of trade agreements to middle-class jobs and promises stronger worker protections for an estimated 649 million workers covered by two proposed pacts with European and Asia-Pacific countries.
“President Obama’s trade policy seeks to promote growth, support more well-paying jobs in the United States, and strengthen the middle class,” the opening line of the report reads.
Forty-six pages later, after recapping progress on the proposed Trans-Pacific Partnership and Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership agreements and an array of other trade initiatives, the report concludes by strongly reiterating that point: “The Obama Administration’s trade policy is firmly anchored in Middle Class Economics.”
The congressionally mandated report comes as the White House is striving to conclude the TPP agreement with Japan and 10 other countries in the Asia-Pacific region and stepping up efforts to win approval of trade promotion authority, which would allow Obama to submit trade agreements to Congress for straight up-or-down votes, without amendments.
Rather than lay out major new initiatives, U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman’s office has used the report to lay out its best economic and national security arguments for trade agreements, including a heavy emphasis on their importance to America’s standing the world and the negative consequences of inaction on the pacts.
It devotes a section to trade promotion authority, which some critics consider undemocratic and even unconstitutional, that traces the lineage of the legislation back to the 1934 Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act, which authorized the administration of Franklin Delano Roosevelt to negotiate tariff reductions.
“Every American president has had trade negotiating authority since then, except Richard Nixon,” the report said, a line that seems to have been included to counter consumer advocacy group Public Citizen, whose own literature describes Nixon as the mastermind behind TPA, also known as “fast-track” trade legislation.
“Since 1974, 16 of the most damaging U.S. trade pacts, including NAFTA and the WTO, were negotiated and passed using an extreme procedure called 'Fast Track,'” the group said on its website. “When Richard Nixon was president, he cooked up Fast Track to seize power from Congress.”
While work on the 1974 Trade Act did begin before Nixon resigned in August of that year, the legislation was signed into law by President Gerald Ford. Since then, it has been renewed a number of times under both Republican and Democratic administrations, most recently in 2002 under President George W. Bush.
The report credits the North American Free Trade Agreement, which went into force in 1994, and a string of agreements negotiated under President George W. Bush, with helping to boost exports and supporting well-paying jobs connected to trade.
“Over the past five years, exports of U.S. goods to our free trade agreement partners increased over 64 percent, significantly outpacing the increase of around 45 percent to our non-FTA partners,” the report said. “It’s in our interest to build on this progress, because the United States is already an open economy.”
Meanwhile, in a separate report, the Commerce Department on Wednesday estimated a record 11.7 million U.S. jobs were supported by exports in 2014, or about 5,800 jobs for every $1 billion of exports. That’s down from more than 7,100 jobs for every $1 billion of exports in 2009 because of higher export prices and productivity gains, the department said.
Lori Wallach, director of Public Citizen’s Global Trade Watch, accused the administration of “recycling the usual platitudes and distorted data” to make its case.
“The report tries to obscure that our trade deficit with Korea has risen 72 percent since passage of the administration’s one major trade deal [in 2011], the administration’s goal of doubling exports by 2014 fell short by 64 percent due to weak export growth, and we suffered a jobs-killing $912 billion goods trade deficit last year thanks in large part to the past agreements on which this administration’s proposed deals are based,” Wallach said.
One criticism of trade agreements is that they depress wages by making it easier for companies to move jobs overseas. The report does not directly address that point, but argues that trade agreements boost the number of jobs connected to exports, “which pay up to 18 percent more than jobs not related to exports.”
The Obama administration also is pushing for strong labor and environmental protections in both the Asia-Pacific and European trade agreements that would be enforceable under the same mechanisms that apply to commercial provisions of the pacts, the report said.
“In TPP, we are negotiating to put in place the largest expansion of enforceable labor rights in history, renegotiating NAFTA and bringing hundreds of millions of additional people under enforceable International Labor Organization standards,” the report said.
Between TPP and the TTIP agreement, “an estimated 649,762,600 workers in the combined free trade areas could benefit from the strongest labor protections in any trade agreement in history,” the report said.
 
 
Advocates: Not so fast on aquaculture regs
By Jenny Hopkinson | 10/29/13 5:03 AM EST
POLITICO
Farm-raised fish is one of the few types of food not currently available at the grocery store with a USDA organic label on it, but the department shouldn’t be in too much of a rush to rectify that, a handful of organic and consumer advocacy groups warn.
The National Organic Standards Board received more than 900 letters in relation to its request for comments regarding the use of certain synthetics by aquaculture operations hoping to secure future organic accreditation. In particular, the NOSB is looking for reaction to petitions submitted in relation to allowing the use of trace minerals and vitamins, chlorine to be used as a disinfectant and tocopherols to delay rancidity in fats.
The comment period closed Oct. 1, though many of the comments were only made publicly available after the reopening of the government Oct. 17.
The board was supposed to discuss the petitions at an Oct. 22 to 24 meeting, in Louisville, Ky., but the meeting was canceled because of the government shutdown and has yet to be rescheduled.
However, the Center for Food Safety says it’s too early to provide meaningful comments on the materials anyway.
“Evaluating substances within the context that they are used is key to the NOSB materials review process,” the advocacy group says in its letter. “Without final regulations to govern organic aquaculture, it is impossible to meaningfully assess the necessity or essentiality of” synthetic materials for use in the program. “If you don’t know which species of fish are being grown, where, or whether the system is open or closed, how can you possibly begin to determine their feed requirements?”
NOSB, an advisory panel made up of 15 organic company representatives, scientists, advocates and others, is tasked with providing the USDA’s Agricultural Marketing Service’s National Organic Program with advice on setting standards for the products permitted to contain the USDA organic seal. After receiving and reviewing comments, the NOSB will then make recommendations to the NOP, which will in turn draft the proposed standards.
As it is, organic standards do not exist for either wild-caught or farm-raised fish. However, the NOP has been working to create standards for aquaculture since at least 2001 when it was recommended by an industry task force to help U.S. seafood producers compete with companies in other countries that certify their farmed fish as organic and those that use a different third-party accreditation.
More than a dozen countries have standards for organic aquaculture, including Australia, Canada, Italy and Norway.
In 2005, NOP and NOSB formed the Aquaculture Working Group — which comprises representatives from industry, academia and environmental groups — to offer guidance and recommendations on the formation of an organic aquaculture program. Progress seemed stalled for several years, but in a May 16, 2012, memo, Miles McEvoy, deputy administrator of NOP, told the NOSB that his staff was working on a proposed rule for the certification of organic animal aquaculture products, with the intention of completing the rulemaking process over two years.
McEvoy asked NOSB to start reviewing several petitions for synthetic materials to be given exemptions in advance. An NOP spokesman says rulemaking efforts are ongoing, though there is no timeline for the release of a proposal.
But CFS and other groups question whether aquaculture can be genuinely organic at all.
While a farmer can control the inputs onto his land, ensuring that fertilizer and pest management and other products meet organic standards, that level of control isn’t really available in a natural body of water, Lisa Bunin, CFS’s organic policy coordinator, says. For example, pollutants move freely through water, making it almost impossible to ensure a fish raised organically is not exposed. Further, some fish, such as salmon, are migratory, and stopping that migration would be adverse to the spirit of organic, Bunin adds.
“We are skeptical because we don’t know the system in which we are talking about allowing aquaculture to take place. Does there need to be a synthetic environment for where these fish are grown” in order to be able to fully control the environment and ensure the fish are fully organic, Bunin says.
Requiring a synthetic environment for organic aquaculture production would be problematic, she adds. “You don’t try to change the system to fit the product. If the product doesn’t fit the system then it can’t be organic.”
The Cornucopia Institute, Consumers Union, Beyond Pesticides and the National Organic Coalition also have called for NOSB to reject the synthetic material petitions due to the lack of standards.
“We are especially concerned that the board is unable to adequately review these petitioned materials to OFPA criteria, since it is has not been determined which aquaculture systems will be allowed,” writes Consumers Union in an Oct. 1 letter. While a material may be appropriate for use in one type of organic aquaculture system, it may not be appropriate in all cases, the group writes. “It is also not possible for the board to determine the essentiality of a material until there are standards specifying which systems are allowed and which fish species will be raised under the organic standards. … Until the board and the public have a clear understanding which systems will be allowed in organic aquaculture, we believe it is not possible to make an informed decision.”
Noticeably absent from the comments about the synthetic materials that should be permitted in organic aquaculture operations was a letter from the Organic Trade Association. Gwendolyn Wyard, OTA’s regulatory director for organic standards and food safety, said the issue was not raised by her group’s members.
”We do not have any aquaculture members, so it simply has not been an area of focus in the past few years,” she said. “That being said, we do support emerging sectors such as organic aquaculture and the development of standards that are consistent with the principles of OFPA.”
 
World Bank admits botched resettlement policy 
 
WASHINGTON, March 4 (Reuters) - The World Bank admitted on Wednesday that it had no idea how many people may have been forced off their land and lost their jobs due to its projects in developing countries, and whether these people were compensated fairly and on time. 
 
The admission comes as the global development lender seeks to ramp up investments in risky infrastructure projects that often lead to forced resettlement, including dams and highways, in an effort to eliminate extreme poverty. 
 
World Bank President Jim Yong Kim pledged that "we must and will do better," on a call with reporters, and launched an action plan to address shortcomings. 
 
In a recent case, indigenous Anuak people in Ethiopia's Gambella region said the World Bank contributed to the Ethiopian government's "villagization" program that forced about 70,000 people off their land. 
 
The bank's Inspection Panel found that the forced evictions and the use of intimidation were not linked to the bank's project, but that the World Bank did not fully assess and mitigate the risks. 
 
Similar issues have arisen in many of the bank's projects that involve resettlement, according to internal reviews released on Wednesday, which found the lender did a "poor job" monitoring and reporting on the status of affected people. 
 
"The sizeable gaps in information point to significant potential failures in the bank's system for dealing with resettlement," according to an internal review from last June. 
 
By the bank's limited data, about half a million people have been affected by resettlement out of a sample of 218 active projects. The World Bank said it did not have a clear idea of how many of those did not receive compensation or new land. 
 
The reviews also found that many countries may not be able to resettle people according to the bank's own standards or set up proper grievance mechanisms. 
 
The findings could be problematic as the World Bank is considering putting more governments in charge of policing its aid projects, a move that watchdog groups worry could undermine social and environmental safeguards the lender currently has in place. END
 
 


  ________________________________  
Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.