Headlines:
Cyprus,United Kingdom : EBRD signs trade facility with Eurobank Cyprus

Nazarbayev launches new industrial projects in Kazakhstan

EU to propose expert assistance to Uzbekistan in joining to WTO 

Restructured EIF, Strong Focus On Trade in Services At WTO Aid for Trade Review [press release]

ITC Guide Helps LDCs Make the Most of the WTO Services Waiver [press release]

Deliberate trade policies for Africa's industrialisation

Kenya FDI Inflows Rise 95 Percent to Sh97.8 Billion in 2014

State Has Few Options to Help Cherry Growers against Low Purchase Price - Minister

Treaty in Services Agreement (TISA) - International Trade Deal

President Aquino issues EO 185 modifying tariff rates on environmental goods

Philippines modifies tariff rates on environmental goods

Rare-earth metals: Price declines reinforce addiction to Chinese supplies

Minxin Pei: China market crash could be a blessing in disguise

L'augmentation du RNB par habitant aux Seychelles positionne l'archipel sur la liste de la Banque Mondiale des pays à revenus élevés

Le Botswana et l'UE discutent des progrès des négociations des APE

Bacardí y Pernod batallan por el ron Havana Club

Japón se queja contra Brasil en la OMC



Details:
 
Cyprus,United Kingdom : EBRD signs trade facility with Eurobank Cyprus
3 juillet 2015
Al Riyadh
ARYDEN
 
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) is supporting the expansion of international trade in Cyprus with a 20 million trade facility to Eurobank Cyprus Limited under the EBRD's Trade Facilitation Programme (TFP). Eurobank will become the first issuing bank under the programme in Cyprus.
 
Through the facility the EBRD will issue guarantees in favour of international commercial banks covering the political and commercial payment risk of the transactions undertaken by Eurobank. In addition, Eurobank Cyprus will also benefit from the EBRD's award-winning technical cooperation projects in trade finance.
 
Lucyna Stańczak-Wuczyńska, EBRD Director, Financial Institutions, said: This is a very important step to widen and deepen our engagement in Cyprus. The EBRD will aim to contribute to boost intra-regional trade and will contribute to the development of trade links between Cyprus and other countries where we invest. Extending trade is an important way of strengthening the local economy by creating opportunities for growth and the EBRD would like to be more engaged in working with Cypriot banks.
 
Michalis Louis, CEO of Eurobank Cyprus Limited, added: We are particularly pleased and honoured to sign this agreement with the EBRD today. This facility will enable and assist our clients operationally and in a cost-efficient manner to promote their export/import businesses. At the same time, it is a vote of confidence for the Cyprus economy and our bank by a major and very well-respected international institution. We are looking forward to expand our cooperation with the EBRD in other areas of mutual interest.
 
The signing took place in the framework of the EBRD's first Information Session dedicated to Financing Foreign Trade with Cyprus today, which attracted up to 100 representatives from issuing and confirming banks under the programme; the International Chamber of Commerce, Vienna; the World Trade Organization, as well as key trade finance professionals to discuss industry challenges with leading specialists including regulators and economists.
 
The main topics of discussion were the latest trends and developments of trade finance in the region including factoring and supply-chain finance. With the exception of a few countries, the factoring business remains largely under-developed or non-existent in the EBRD regions. Leading specialists from factoring companies and organisations including International Factors Group and International Trade and Forfeiting Association discussed the development of this product in the EBRD​ region and ways to provide companies with wider access to this source of financing.
 
Presentations by Marios Tsiakkis, Honorary Secretary General of the Cyprus Chamber of Commerce and Industry (CCCI) and Vincent O Brien from the International Chamber of Commerce (ICC)HYPERLINK "file:///javascript/void(0)%3B"  provided an update on trade and trade finance activities as well as the latest trends and challenges in the industry, with a comprehensive outlook for the rest of year. Representatives of some of the most active confirming banks under the TFP: Commerzbank, Germany; and Deutsche Bank, Germany; discussed the opportunities available and their view of trade finance development in Cyprus.
 
Launched in 1999, the TFP aims to promote foreign trade to, from and among the countries in which the EBRD invests. Through the programme, the EBRD provides guarantees to international confirming banks and short-term loans to selected banks and factoring companies for on-lending to local exporters, importers and distributors. The TFP currently includes over 120 partner banks in 25 countries where the Bank invests, with limits exceeding 1.5 billion in total, and more than 800 confirming banks worldwide.
 
 
Nazarbayev launches new industrial projects in Kazakhstan
3 juillet 2015
The Times of Central Asia
TCASIA
 
ASTANA (TCA) - During a nationwide video teleconference in Astana on July 2, Kazakhstan President Nursultan Nazarbayev gave a start to ten new industrial facilities located in various regions of the country.
 
The president launched an aluminum production at Aluminium of Kazakhstan in the Almaty province, a polymer production in the Atyrau province, a facility to produce spongy titanium at the Ust-Kamenogorsk Titanium and Magnesium Plant in the East Kazakhstan province, Central Asia's largest solar power plant Burnoye Solar-1 in the Zhambyl province with a capacity of 50MW and annual generation of 73 million KWh of electricity, the reconstructed furnace #3 at ArcelorMittal Temirtau steel plant in the Karaganda province, a production of agricultural machinery at Kaztechmash plant in the North Kazakhstan province, a production of dairy products in the Kostanai province, the Borzhakty-Yersai railway line in the Mangistau province, a tractor production in cooperation with South Korean company Daedong in the South Kazakhstan province, and a transport and logistics center of national railway company Kazakhstan Temir Zholy in Astana.sp spDuring the nationwide video teleconference Nazarbayev also said that Kazakhstan needs to improve the instruments for export support. The president emphasized that as part of integration processes within the Eurasian Economic Union Kazakhstan should focus on the access to neighboring markets of Russia, Central Asian countries, China, and Iran. He also said that as Kazakhstan will join the World Trade Organization this December, the country will have to "compete with the rest of the world".
 
 
EU to propose expert assistance to Uzbekistan in joining to WTO  
3 juillet 2015
Central Asia News
CEASEN
 
The European Union will have expert assistance to Uzbekistan on joining the World Trade Organization (WTO) in the framework of bilateral Council on issues of trade-economic cooperation and investments, which will be launched by the end of the year, hopes Embassy of European Union to Uzbekistan Yuri Sterk, reports Podrobno.uz.
 
“The EU is ready to assist in the evaluation of the work which needs to be done to prepare the country for WTO. The proposal of expert assistance was made and received by Uzbek interest,” said Ambassador.
 
We hope that we can launch this structure and by the end of this year and hold the consultations on joining the WTO.
 
CA-News
 
 
Restructured EIF, Strong Focus On Trade in Services At WTO Aid for Trade Review [press release]
3 juillet 2015
All Africa
AFNWS
 
Jul 03, 2015 (International Trade Centre/All Africa Global Media via COMTEX) -- Trade leaders focus on the new, more results-based phase of the EIF and the role of trade in services in global trade on day two of the event.
 
Trade-led development of least developed countries (LDCs) will be led by a leaner, more efficient Enhanced Integrated Framework (EIF) and renewed focus on services, according to government and business leaders participating in the World Trade Organization's (WTO) Fifth Global Review of Aid for Trade.
 
Phase two of the EIF - a partnership supporting economic growth and poverty reduction in LDCs - was launched on 1 July at WTO headquarters in Geneva on the second day of the event, following talks on inclusive and sustainable growth on the first day. Reducing trade costs for inclusive and sustainable growth is the theme of the WTO's biennial review of trade-related development assistance.
 
A more efficient, effective EIF
 
'The EIF is a very important initiative which has delivered real and concrete support to the LDCs in recent years, helping them to use trade as a tool for growth, sustainable development and poverty reduction,' said WTO Director-General Roberto Azevedo, who opened the event and confirmed WTO's commitment to the new EIF.
 
This new phase, with the tagline 'Trade for LDC Development', is designed to be more efficient and cost-effective, focusing on results delivery and on stronger programme management to better respond to country conditions and priorities.
 
Arancha Gonzalez, Executive Director of the International Trade Centre (ITC), spoke on behalf of EIF partner agencies at the session, saying that the EIF would have an instrumental role to play in the post-2015 development agenda.
 
'The agencies are confident that we will see a more dynamic and responsive EIF which takes advantage of its unique position to leverage additional resources and support for trade development in LDCs,' she said.
 
During the event, Norway announced it would donate NOK 150 million (US$ 19 million) for EIF's work in its second phase. Donors will have the opportunity to pledge their contributions during a pledging conference at the WTO​'s 10th Ministerial Conference in Nairobi in December.
 
The second phase of the EIF will be operational on 1 January 2016.
 
Fuelling trade in services
 
Services need to play a stronger role in contributing to trade-led growth in LDCs, according to business leaders and policymakers at an afternoon session on the topic of reducing trade costs for LDCs' services trade development.
 
'Trade facilitation in Africa means boosting services,' said Alioune Sarr, Minister of Commerce, Entrepreneurship and the Informal Sector, Senegal. 'Forty percent of investments in Africa are in services.'
Businesses that provide services can increase their productivity through participation in global value chains, as services account for more than half of overall trade in LDCs. An increase in trade in services should be aligned with that of trade in goods - as even trade in goods is made up of trade in services - through the reduction and elimination of trade barriers.
 
For growth in trade in services to be sustainable, women and youth need access to business and entrepreneurial opportunities in key sectors, such as tourism in Myanmar. Women operate more than 50% of tourism companies in the country, according to Myat Su, Managing Director, Silk Road to Asia Travels and Tours Company Limited.
 
Participants at the session said that increasing trade in services and reducing related costs for LDCs require capacity building to enable LDCs to identify their priority services sectors, as well as the development of monitoring mechanisms through integrated policy frameworks. Partnerships between the private sector and government will help to ensure these steps are taken.
 
 
ITC Guide Helps LDCs Make the Most of the WTO Services Waiver [press release]
3 juillet 2015
All Africa
AFNWS
 
Jul 03, 2015 (International Trade Centre/All Africa Global Media via COMTEX) -- Least developed countries recognize that they must be proactive to take full advantage of the new business opportunities opened up for their services industries by World Trade Organization decisions authorizing governments to effectively discriminate in favour of LDC services exports.
 
The International Trade Centre's new guide, Making the Most of the LDC Services Waiver, helps LDC negotiators, government officials and service sector businesses understand how to use the waiver and create a roadmap to increase their services exports.
 
It also spells out how ITC, with its proven expertise in connecting small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in developing countries to regional and global value chains, can assist them along the way.
 
WTO rules have long let governments grant lower tariffs or even duty-free market access to LDC exports of manufactured or agricultural goods while denying such treatment to merchandise from richer countries.
 
In 2011, WTO members found a way to put services on a par with goods trade, when they approved a 'waiver' from core WTO non-discrimination principles that permits preferential market access for LDC services exports. Subsequent WTO decisions have reinforced the original waiver.
 
By early 2015, 25 WTO members had indicated that they would grant such preferential access to LDCs, and more were expected to follow. These market access offers are supposed to be formally notified to the WTO in July.
 
Connecting supply and demand
 
The LDC share of the world services export market is only some 0.5%. Better integration into the global services economy will require action not only on the demand side - where the new preferential market access can help - but also on the supply side, to make sure LDC businesses are sufficiently knowledgeable about the opportunities, competitive and connected to global value chains.
 
The guide provides a roadmap to help LDCs make the most of the new market access. It sets out 10 key steps for LDCs to use the waiver to enhance their services trade.
 
These include securing better information on services market opportunities; facilitating dialogue and coordination among governmental agencies and the private sector; and conducting trade promotion activities and events.
 
In addition, the guide outlines how ITC can assist LDCs with supply side interventions to improve SME competitiveness.
 
 
Deliberate trade policies for Africa's industrialisation
Franck Kuwonu
3 juillet 2015
The Africa Report.com
AFREP
 
African countries can use deliberate trade policies to achieve growth through industrial development and structural transformation.
 
Sanusi Lamido, a former governor of the central bank of Nigeria, once railed against his country for spending "huge resources importing consumer goods from China that should be produced locally."
 
If we have to make the rules work for Africa, that basically means smart protectionism
 
Nigeria, Africa's biggest economy and most populous country, is also the continent's largest crude oil producer, but imports most of its refined oil.
 
Exporting raw commodities and then spending vast sums of money on manufactured imports is hardly unique to the Nigeria-China trade relationship.
 
Most African countries are in similar situations with China, the European Union, the United States or other overseas trade partners.
 
Although China has set up mining operations across Africa and is heavily involved in building infrastructure, much of its activities on the continent involve imported equipment and labour and no skill transfers, Lamido observed.
 
"So China takes our primary goods and sells us manufactured ones," the former banker wrote in an op-ed for the Financial Times, a UK-based financial daily.
 
Lamido's views are shared by many African experts.
 
The case for industrialisation in Africa has long been recognised among those specialists who argue that the continent's economic transformation is unlikely to happen without greater industrialisation.
 
The United Nations even dedicated the two decades from 1980 to 2000 to promoting industrialisation in Africa.
 
In 1989 the UN General Assembly proclaimed 20 November as Africa Industrialisation Day to mobilise "the commitment of the international community to the industrialisation of Africa."
 
"The lack of competitiveness of African manufacturing and the extent to which the scope for domestic value addition is left untapped are epitomised by the region's trade in cotton," says the UN Economic Commission for Africa in its annual Economic Report on Africa publication.
 
While Africa accounted for about 16% of global cotton exports in 2012, only 1% of these exports, or about $400 million, was cotton that had been processed into fabrics.
 
During the same period, the continent imported $0.4 billion worth of cotton and $4 billion of cotton fabrics.
 
"In other words," says the report, "The region was trading raw cotton for cotton fabrics, missing a huge opportunity to add value domestically and industrialise."
 
Some of the main cotton exporters include Benin, Burkina Faso and Mali.
 
Such skewed trade patterns could result in a situation in which whatever revenue Africa generates from exporting raw materials is offset by imports of manufactured goods.
 
Nigeria offers a classic example of what has been happening to many sub-Saharan African countries that have concentrated on exporting raw commodities while paying scant attention to processing some of the commodities into finished goods as part of a deliberate policy on industrialisation.
 
In 2012 Nigeria exported $89 billion of crude oil, according to the ECA report, but imported $5.5 billion of refined oil because its refineries have all but collapsed due to neglect.
 
Deliberate trade policies and practices consistent with African countries' development goals could lead to industrialisation, which in turn could help transform and strengthen their economies.
 
Insufficient growth
 
Over the past two decades Africa's economic expansion has been remarkable, with a few countries registering double-digit rises.
 
Because much of the growth is fuelled by high demands for mineral and agricultural resources, the World Bank projects a slowdown in 2015 to about 4.4% due to weaker prices for oil and other commodities.
 
However, growth is expected to pick up again in 2016 and 2017.
 
Yet as in the past, this growth will likely not be enough to lead to significant changes needed to reduce poverty by creating jobs and providing social services.
 
Overall, "the current merchandise export structure, dominated by raw and unprocessed commodities, is not conducive to the envisaged level of development," says Carlos Lopes, the ECA head, in his foreword to the ECA's report, the focus of which is "Industrialising through Trade."
 
By favouring the export of raw materials over processing goods, sub-Saharan Africa denies itself the opportunity to add value through manufacturing, which would provide more jobs and generate additional revenue.
 
In 2013 the ECA argued that African countries could transform their economies through commodity-based industrialisation.
 
A year later, its report "Dynamic Industrial Policy in Africa" concluded that the continent needed to set up stronger institutions and adopt effective measures to enhance structural transformation.
 
This year the commission is saying that deliberate and smart trade policies and practices could lead to the much-delayed industrialisation of Africa.
 
This year's report is making the case that African countries can use trade to achieve industrial development and structural transformation, but advises against the traditional pattern of trading, which so far has meant exchanging raw commodities for manufactured goods.
 
"A successful trade-induced industrialisation should be interactive and coherent with a country's national development strategy; it should be evolving and highly selective," Hopestone Chavula, one of the authors of the report, told Africa Renewal.
 
Smart protectionism
 
The notion of "highly selective" trade policies seems to imply that African countries are being asked to implement some kind of protectionism or special treatment for certain sectors that would be justified by the overall need to advance national development goals.
 
To this end, the crafting of national development strategies has to be the starting point towards industrialisation, says the report.
 
But unlike in the past, such deliberate trade policies may be difficult to implement under the rules of the World Trade Organization.
 
The WTO is unlikely to give the nod to countries trying to shield selected industries, nascent or fragile, from competition, even when doing so would protect their national interests.
 
Still, Lopes from the ECA is convinced "smart protectionism" works, telling Africa Renewal last year that "all countries that have industrialised started with some degree of protectionism."
 
But he quickly concedes that Africa cannot practice crude protectionism anymore. "If we have to make the rules work for Africa, that basically means smart protectionism."
 
In pursuing industrialisation through trade, sub-Saharan Africa would not be treading untested paths.
 
Experience from Japan, the East Asian tigers and China all show the effect of deliberate trade policies, including the role of central governments in making the right choices to advance national development goals.
 
While the role of governments may be important, the report says, policymakers must understand global trade dynamics and use regional and international trade negotiations to pursue their industrialisation agenda.
 
Trade policies alone will not jump-start African industrialisation, the report finds, but they will provide "a robust framework for African countries to reassess their trade policy."
 
This will give those countries the opportunity to identify the best routes to structural transformation and tailor trade policy to achieve the desired goals.
 
The author, Franck Kuwonu writes for United Nations Africa Renewal Magazine
 
 
Kenya FDI Inflows Rise 95 Percent to Sh97.8 Billion in 2014
3 juillet 2015
All Africa
AFNWS
 
Kenya's 2014 Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) inflows hit 97.8 billion, a 95 percent increase from Sh49.9 billion in 2013, according to new data from the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) World Investment Report 2015.
 
The same data shows Kenya's FDI inflows continued to outpace other East African countries that have previously attracted more inflows mainly directed towards the resources extractive sector.
 
In 2014, total FDI inflows into East Africa stood at Sh672 billion up 11 percent from the previous year.
 
According to the report as at close of 2014, Kenya represented 14.6 percent of total FDI inflows into East Africa up from a three year historical average of 6.7 percent.
 
Kenya Investments Authority Managing Director Moses Ikiara says data confirms optimism of foreign investors despite insecurity challenges that rocked the country last year.
 
"We expect performance in 2015 and 2016 to be much stronger, considering that we are overcoming our insecurity challenges," he said.
 
He highlighted the upcoming high level events in the country that he says will accelerate the interest of investors that include United States President Barrack Obama's visit in the coming weeks, the World Trade Organization conference in December as well as the visit by Pope Francis in November 2015.
 
On ease of doing business, Ikiara says the long awaited one-stop shop will be fully operational in September where the government is set to put up a state-of-the-art office along Valley Road in Nairobi.
 
He says energy and real estate remains leading sectors attracting FDIs, other sectors include agriculture and manufacturing.
 
Investments into private firms and expansion by companies in Kenya has continued with Wrigley (a US-based chewing gum maker) breaking ground on a new Sh5.8 billion factory in Mavoko on a 20 acre piece of land and it aims to double its production capacity as it relocates from the Industrial Area.
 
Fanisi Capital has also injected $2.1 million (Sh111.6 million) into European Foods Africa Limited, a local firm processing and distributing pizza, berries and juices. Fanisi's equity and debt stake in the company will be used to expand the distribution channels.
 
Fanisi's stake in European Foods in addition to its existing investments in a Kenyan meat processor and a Rwandan grain handler indicates that Fanisi is bullish on the agro-business and food-processing sector.
 
Cytonn Investments also closed its Private Placement Offer that valued the company north of Sh1 billion with very good appetite from global high net worth investors.
 
FDI inflows to Africa as a whole remained stable at Sh5.3 trillion in 2014, with decreases in North Africa being offset by rises in Sub-Saharan Africa.
 
North Africa saw its FDI flows decline by 15 percent to Sh1.1 trillion. FDI fell overall in the region because of tension and conflict in some countries, despite significant inflows to others.
 
FDI into Egypt grew by 14 percent to Sh474.7 billion, and flows into Morocco by 9 percent to Sh356 billion.
 
Flows to West Africa declined by 10 percent to Sh1.266 trillion, as the Ebola outbreak, security issues and falling commodity prices negatively affected several countries.
 
 
State Has Few Options to Help Cherry Growers against Low Purchase Price - Minister
3 juillet 2015
Bulgarian News Agency
BTA
 
Kyustendil/Letnitsa, Southwestern Bulgaria, July 3 (BTA) - A day after cherry growers from Kyustendil protested in front of the City Hall there against the low purchase price of the fruit, Bulgaria's Agriculture and Food Minister Dessislava Taneva said the State cannot do much and can only support them in crisis conditions, i.e. by the so-called de minimis aid.
 
"There is no way we can either determine the minimum purchase price or find a market by administrative means. These are joint efforts of the producers who should associate to achieve an easier and more direct market access," the Minister said.
 
The Government will consider all opportunities for State support but will not compensate the reduced earnings in any way. Taneva blamed the situation on the Russian embargo. "The situation in the dairy sector is the same, part of the results of the Russian embargo," she told journalists during a visit to Letnitsa.
 
According to the Agriculture Minister, 75 per cent of the cherry exports were destined for Russia.
 
Mayors of villages in the municipality with large cherry orchards also took part in Thursday's protest in Kyustendil.
 
The purchase price is currently 0.60 leva/kg and is below the prime cost of the produce. According to protestors, after paying the costs of the tending the trees, plant protection and the wages paid to pickers, nothing is left for the growers themselves.
 
Bulgaria produces about 37,000 tonnes of cherries annually, and over 15 per cent of this quantity comes from Kyustendil Region.
 
This year growers are threatening to leave the fruit unpicked. "We will gather enough to distil some brandy and will leave the rest to rot. There's no point in picking," they argued.
 
The solution is to establish a cherry growers' association as soon as possible. The State, too, has been approached for offsetting action, Kyustendil Mayor Peter Paunov said. He insists on urgent extraordinary measures to help cherry growers cut the losses they sustain as a result of the ban on export to Russia and proposes compensation of 250 euro per tonne.
 
"I have been dealing with this for 11 years. Every year there are problems during the cherry harvest, but this year they are particularly serious because of the embargo," said Ivailo Borissov. He added that the foundations for establishing a cherry growers' association in the region were laid on Friday.
 
In an article about the cherry production crisis, www.mediapool.bg writes that while growers build up losses and leave the cherries unpicked, the three Santorelle brothers of Italy, who have monopolized the purchase of cherries for canning in the region, post growing profits. As a result of this monopoly, the prices paid to growers have fallen to 0.50-0.70 leva/kg since 2009, but Bulgaria became a world power in the export of cherries. According to World Trade Organization figures, in 2013 and 2014 Bulgaria was the world's second largest exporter of canned cherries, www.mediapool.bg writes. LN/BR
 
 
Treaty in Services Agreement (TISA) - International Trade Deal
3 juillet 2015
Sputnik News Service
RVESEN
 
WASHINGTON (Sputnik) — WikiLeaks uploaded 17 documents this week from the TISA negotiations, the next round of which is scheduled to take place July 6, 2015.
 
The disclosures show that TISA seeks to further deregulate financial industries across the globe, including altering domestic rules where internationally-traded services are at play.
 
Critics of the TISA deal say it will open the way to supranational regulation of labour laws, medical systems, finance and industrial policy, which will undermine governments' authority to protect their citizens.
 
TISA origins and objectives
 
TISA grew out of Washington's frustration at failing to persuade other countries, especially in the developing world, to lower trade barriers in services markets that the United States and other governments have been keen to penetrate for decades.
 
The TISA parties represent a subset of the 161-member World Trade Organization where international services trade has been governed by the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS) since 1995.
 
The terms of the GATS treaty have failed to satisfy US ambitions to liberalize services markets across the globe. As a result, Washington initiated TISA talks in 2012 with formal negotiations beginning in March 2013.
 
The World Trade Organization members negotiating TISA want to open up trade in services to a greater degree than allowed by GATS and hope the remaining members eventually sign the agreement once it's finalized.
 
The Office of the US Trade Representative claims that TISA's aim is to promote “fair and open trade across the full spectrum of service sectors, from telecommunications and technology to distribution and delivery services.”
 
Critics say TISA attempts to eliminate trade barriers in sectors favourable to Washington but not in areas where liberalization does not serve US interests.
 
TISA participants
 
The 24 economies currently participating in TISA represent 75 percent of the world's $44 trillion services market, according to the US Trade Representative.
 
The vast majority of participants are high or middle-income countries including the United States, EU member states, Australia, Norway, Iceland, Switzerland, Japan and Korea, along with several South American countries. TISA participants also include a few lower-income countries such as Pakistan and Paraguay.
 
The BRICS countries — Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa — are notably missing from the TISA talks.
 
TISA and Obama's free trade agenda
 
TISA is one piece in US President Barack Obama's overarching free trade strategy to supposedly open up “market access” overseas for American companies in order to create more and higher-paying jobs.
 
The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) agreement is currently being negotiated in unusual secrecy between the United States and 12 Asian and Pacific Rim countries, excluding China and Russia.
 
Opponents of the TPP deal argue that it lacks proper labour standards, could result in US jobs being shipped overseas and imposes US domestic regulations on foreign countries.
 
TISA and TPP will both be affected by the Trade Promotion Authority legislation that Obama signed on Monday.
 
TPA provides the US president with “fast-track” authority to negotiate international free trade agreements without Congress being able to amend them. Obama is expected to use the Trade Promotion Authority to finalize both TPP and TISA treaties.
 
 
President Aquino issues EO 185 modifying tariff rates on environmental goods
3 juillet 2015
PNA (Philippines News Agency)
PHILNA
 
MANILA, July 3 -- President Benigno S. Aquino III has issued Executive Order 185, modifying tariff rates on certain imported products, particularly environmental goods, as part of the country's commitment to the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC).
 
The order, signed by the President last June 26, states that articles listed in Annex A of EO 185 as classified under Section 104 of the Tariff and Customs Code of the Philippines, as amended, shall be subject to the most-favored nations (MFN) rate duty.
 
The rates of import duty on tariff headings and subheadings, which are not enumerated, shall remain in force and effect.
 
Once the EO takes effect, all articles listed in the Annex and are entered into or withdrawn from warehouses in the Philippines for consumption shall be levied the MFN rates of duty as prescribed.
 
The products listed in Annex A include super heaters, soot removers, gas converters, and industrial or laboratory furnaces and ovens, including incinerators.
 
Centrifuges, including centrifugal dryers, filtering or purifying machinery and apparatus for liquid or gases are also included.
 
Leaders of APEC member economies previously agreed to address issues on climate change, and review the progress of the World Trade Organization (WTO) Doha Development Agenda negotiations on the liberalization of trade environmental goods and services.
 
They also made a commitment to take concrete steps to achieve past ambitions to realize green growth, consistent with their WTO obligations.
 
Under the 2012 Vladivostok Declaration, the leaders endorsed the APEC List of Environmental Goods enumerating 54 environmental goods that directly contribute to green growth and sustainable development objectives.
 
They committed to reduce applied rates to 5 percent or less on those environmental goods by the end of 2015, taking into account "economies' economic circumstances, without prejudice to their position in the WTO."
 
On May 19 this year, the National Economic and Development Authority Board recommended the reduction of the MFN rates of duty on certain tariff lines under the APEC List of Environmental Goods by 2015.
 
The country's customs code empowers the President to increase, reduce or remove existing rates of duty, as well as modify the tariff nomenclature.
 
Published by HT Syndication with permission from Philippines News Agency.
 
 
Philippines modifies tariff rates on environmental goods
CEMU,WangWen
3 juillet 2015
12:54
Xinhua News Agency
XNEWS
 
MANILA, July 3 (Xinhua) -- Philippine President Benigno S. Aquino III has issued an executive order, modifying tariff rates on certain imported products, particularly environmental goods, as part of the country's commitment to the Asia-Pacfic Economic Cooperation (APEC).
 
Executive Order No. 185, signed on June 26 and released Friday, said articles listed in Annex A of the EO as classified under Section 104 of the Tariff and Customs Code of the Philippines, as amended, shall be subject to the most-favored nations (MFN) rate duty.
 
Once the EO takes effect, all articles listed in the Annex and are entered or withdrawn from warehouses in the Philippines for consumption shall be levied the MFN rates of duty as prescribed.
 
The products listed in Annex A include super heaters, soot removers, gas converters, and industrial or laboratory furnaces and ovens, including incinerators.
 
Centrifuges, including centrifugal dryers, filtering or purifying machinery and apparatus for liquid or gases are also included.
 
Leaders of APEC member economies previously agreed to address issues on climate change, and review the progress of the World Trade Organization (WTO) Doha Development Agenda negotiations on the liberalization of trade environmental goods and services.
 
They also made a commitment to take concrete steps to achieve past ambitions to realize green growth, consistent with their WTO obligations.
 
Under the 2012 Vladivostok Declaration, the leaders endorsed the APEC List of Environmental Goods enumerating 54 environmental goods that directly contribute to green growth and sustainable development objectives.
 
 
Rare-earth metals: Price declines reinforce addiction to Chinese supplies
3 juillet 2015
Nikkei Report
NKRP
RURIKA IMAHASHI and TOMOHIRO ARAO, Nikkei staff writers
 
TOKYO -- Autoparts manufacturers and other companies that use rare-earth metals are once again increasing their dependence on Chinese supplies. This has some worried.
 
The elements are used in production of high-performance magnets, among other things. International prices soared in 2010, due to tensions between Tokyo and Beijing over the sovereignty of the Senkaku Islands -- uninhabited islets in the East China Sea that China calls Diaoyu. Export controls imposed by Beijing prompted many companies to start looking elsewhere.
 
Now, prices have returned to levels seen before the surge. Materials used in powerful magnets cost 20-30% less than they did in April. This happened after China removed its restrictions; the World Trade Organization determined that the nation's export quota and tax system violated its rules.
 
Molycorp, the sole miner and producer of rare-earth elements in the U.S., has gone belly up because of the price reversal.
 
Investments backfire
 
"Becoming more reliant on China for procurement raises risks," said an executive at Japan's Nippon Denko, a major ferroalloy manufacturer.
 
Nippon Denko has been importing materials for magnets from Molycorp through an affiliate. It began to increase imports from the U.S. supplier in 2013 due to China's policies.
 
On June 25, however, Molycorp announced it was filing for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.
 
Nippon Denko says it will not be adversely affected for now, even if Molycorp stops shipments. But the Japanese company is wary of putting all its eggs in the China basket.
 
After prices jumped in 2010 and 2011, various companies drew up plans to expand production of rare earths outside China, including Molycorp and Australia's Lynas.
 
Molycorp upgraded its production facilities and boosted output using capital collected from investment funds. Its strategy, though, was based on rare-earth prices that were more than 10 times higher than the current ones, inflated by China's controls. Now, the U.S. company's aggressive investment has backfired.
 
Lynas, meanwhile, has rescheduled debt repayment until June 2016. The company improved its capacity utilization rate for processing rare earths mined in Australia, Japan's Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry observed. This helped bring free cash flow back into the black at the end of March. Nevertheless, as prices have sunk lower than expected, Lynas is reportedly cutting back on labor and other expenses.
 
Jean-Claude Steinmetz, chief commercial officer at Lynas, visited Japan last October and proposed three or six-month contracts, instead of spot deals, to Japanese customers, sources said. But few industry players expect prices to rise this year, and some foresee further declines, so Lynas is struggling to increase the number of fixed-price, long-term contracts.
 
In a related development, Japan's Sumitomo Corp. has yet to start a rare-earth recycling business in Kazakhstan, though preparations began in 2012. The project, supported by the government-backed Japan Oil, Gas and Metals National Corp. -- better known as Jogmec -- has been held up by tough price negotiations and a shortage of engineers.
 
In any case, the use of recycled rare-earth elements is waning. When the price of cerium, used to make glass abrasives, soared to $150 per kilogram, recycling of the material from glass scraps increased. But as cerium can now be had for around $2, it no longer makes sense to spend 700 yen ($5.63) to 800 yen to recycle a kilogram of it, according to an official at Samwood, a Tokyo-based trading house that specializes in rare earths.
 
So much for diversification?
 
Chinese rare earths are inexpensive and meet customers' quality standards, said an official at Material Trading, another Tokyo trader focused on the metals. Chinese producers are also seen as capable of withstanding further price falls.
 
Hitachi Metals has been producing rare-earth-based magnets for motors, such as those used in electric vehicles, in the U.S. since 2013. Recently, though, the company partially suspended this production and agreed to set up a manufacturing and sales company with a Chinese magnet maker.
 
Japan imported some 22,000 tons of rare earths in 2014, up 60% from 2012, when the volume was the smallest on record. Even though Japan gets some of the materials from France and other countries, Chinese rare earths are estimated to account for 80-90%.
 
On the whole, global industry seems confident that rare-earth demand is taken care of, at least for the moment. At an annual international mining conference in Toronto in March, the 24,000 attendees found "no booth devoted to rare earths," said Shigeo Nakamura, president of Advanced Material Japan, a trading company specializing in the metals.
 
But as the momentum toward supply diversification subsides, it is conceivable that customers could be bitten yet again. China is stepping up a crackdown on illegal rare-earth mining by consolidating domestic producers. Even if China complies with international trade rules, prices could jump down the road.
 
 
Minxin Pei: China market crash could be a blessing in disguise
3 juillet 2015
Nikkei Report
NKRP
 
The gyrations of the Chinese stock market, which has lost more than 20% of its value since late May, have refocused attention on the state of the Chinese economy. Since recording its last double-digit growth in 2010, the Chinese economy has been losing steam over the last five years. In 2010, China grew an annual 10.4% but this year, the country would be lucky to hit its target of 7%.
 
Of course, the Chinese government has maintained a brave face and insisted that there is nothing to worry about in the slowdown -- that Chinese growth is merely entering a "new normal" phase. Such soothing rhetoric, unfortunately, cannot conceal the harsh reality. What is happening with the Chinese economy is anything but normal. To put it plainly, this is an economy that has been kept buoyant only by multiple and simultaneous bubbles. Without the temporary growth-boosting effects of these bubbles, the Chinese economy would have been in a "new horrible" state by now.
 
It is worth recalling that in the last two decades, the Chinese economy has been sustained by a series of one-time positive shocks and bubbles. For example, the most powerful positive shock was China's accession to the World Trade Organization in 2001, which helped spur its exports. In 2001, the value of total Chinese exports was $266 billion. By 2010, exports had risen to $1,577 trillion, increasing at an astounding annual growth rate of 50% on average. Since 2010, Chinese export growth has slowed to an average of 10% a year.
 
In addition, the Chinese economy has experienced a prolonged boom period of investment, fueled by a massive credit bubble that has raised the total debt-to-gross domestic product ratio from 121% to 282% between 2000 and 2014, according to consultancy McKinsey & Co. Among other things, apparently limitless access to bank loans has enabled China to fund its investments in infrastructure, real estate and manufacturing with little regard to profitability. The investment rate in China rose from an average of 35.8% of GDP in the 1980s to 42.8% in the 2000s and 47.2% since 2010. While the credit boom powered the Chinese economy to new heights, it also created the country's real estate and manufacturing bubbles.
 
Based on Chinese official data, from 1999 to 2004, the value of completed real estate projects, both commercial and residential, averaged 1.17 trillion yuan ($188.51 billion) per annum. Between 2005 to 2009, this figure shot to 2.51 trillion yuan, more than double the previous six-year average. During 2010-2013, the number was 4.6 trillion yuan. These figures, if anything, suggest massive overbuilding in the Chinese real estate sector in recent years.
 
A similar story unfolded in the manufacturing sector, particularly in the steel industry. In 2000, crude steel output in China was 128 million tons; in 2014, it reached 822 million tons (nearly 10 times that of the U.S., which produced 88 million tons).
 
REAP WHAT YOU SOW
 
Unfortunately, the overinvestment binge in real estate and factories has resulted in a glut of unsold apartments and goods that have now begun to generate deflationary pressures and weigh down economic growth.
 
Amidst all the froth, China's latest stock market bubble has also steadily inflated. Since last summer, Chinese stock prices have risen more than 150%. The Shanghai Stock Exchange Composite Index rocketed from under 2,100 to over 5,000 before falling back to reach 3,900 on July 2 after the recent sell-off. Amidst a gloomy economic landscape, China's stock market bubble has been, indeed, a bright spot.
 
But the recent sell-off warns us that China's stock market bubble is on the verge of a spectacular pop.
 
The question, then, is how the bursting of this bubble will affect the Chinese economy. Opinions are clearly divided. Optimists argue that no real damage will be done. They point to the collapse of an even bigger stock market bubble in 2007-2008. In October 2007, the Shanghai benchmark index reached its all-time high of 5,954, but by November 2008, it had fallen to 1,900, having lost two-thirds of its value in 13 months. Yet, the Chinese economy did not seem to have suffered any direct adverse consequences from the collapse of the bubble.
 
Pessimists believe, however, that the circumstances today are vastly different from those eight years ago. Immediately after the bursting of the stock market bubble in 2007-2008, the Chinese government implemented a massive stimulus program in response to the global financial crisis, thus probably offsetting the impact of the stock market collapse.
 
As we now know, the credit-funded stimulus program merely created another bubble -- the real estate and investment bubble that has sharply increased China's overall indebtedness. Another crucial difference is the use of margin loans in equity investments. In the previous bubble, such loans were banned. But this time, speculative margin loans, funded by brokerage firms and the shadow banking system, are estimated to total 3.8 trillion yuan. In the event of a market crash, a significant portion of these loans will go sour and generate secondary financial shocks.
 
A third crucial difference between the two years 2007-2008 and today is that the current stock market bubble is inflating while the other three interconnected bubbles -- credit, real estate and manufacturing overcapacity -- have yet to pop. The presence of multiple bubbles has certainly made the job of Chinese policymakers much tougher. For one thing, they no longer have the luxury of generating a new bubble to cushion the impact of the collapse of an old one. For another, contagion -- the popping of the stock market bubble -- may undermine confidence so much that it could trigger financial defaults -- and push the overall Chinese economy over the edge into a recession, just like the popping of the Japanese bubble in 1991 triggered the decline that followed.
 
China's external environment, pessimists would remind us, is not as benign as it used to be, either. Exports are no longer contributing to GDP growth. With rising labor costs and tightening environmental standards, China is losing its cost competitiveness as a manufacturing powerhouse. The ongoing turmoil triggered by the Greece's debt default and continuing economic woes could indirectly hurt China by denting economic recovery in the eurozone, China's largest trading partner.
 
The compelling case made by pessimists may be right, but the consequences of a severe economic downturn in China may not be all that bad. Most veteran observers of China would agree that crisis is a pre-requisite for genuine reform. Indeed, the most successful reforms in the post-Mao era were all precipitated by crises and shocks. In the last two and half years since Xi Jinping became Communist Party chief, the new leadership has vowed to undertake painful economic reform to reinvigorate growth, but the sad truth is that there has been only modest progress. So an economic downturn triggered by a stock market crash may force Chinese leaders to embrace painful reforms because there is no other alternative.
 
The second hidden benefit of a potential hard landing is the return to moderation in Chinese foreign policy. Bubble-fueled economic prosperity has made Chinese leaders less restrained in recent years in the use of power, as we can see from examples such as China's behavior in the South China Sea and the territorial disputes with Japan. The bursting of China's stock market bubble may help deflate Beijing's geopolitical ego and force its leaders to flex their muscles less often.
 
So let us cheer the bears even though the carnage on China's stock exchanges might be unimaginably ugly.
 
Minxin Pei is a professor of government at Claremont McKenna College in California and a non-resident senior fellow of the German Marshall Fund of the United States.
 
 
L'augmentation du RNB par habitant aux Seychelles positionne l'archipel sur la liste de la Banque Mondiale des pays à revenus élevés
4 juillet 2015
All Africa
AFNWSF
 
Victoria, Seychelles, Jul 03, 2015 (Seychelles News Agency/AllAfrica Global Media via COMTEX) -- - L'archipel des Seychelles de 90 000 personnes a été accepté au sein du groupe exclusif de 83 nations sur la « liste des pays à revenus élevés » établie par la Banque Mondiale.
 
Les Seychelles, avec l'Argentine, le Venezuela, et la Hongrie, ont tous progressé sur la liste des revenus les plus élevés cette année.
 
Dans un communiqué de presse publié jeudi après-midi, le Président des Seychelles, James Michel, a salué l'institution internationale pour avoir reconnu les progrès économiques des Seychelles.
 
« Une combinaison de facteurs nous ont permis d'atteindre ce niveau, entre autres, le succès du programme de réforme économique entrepris depuis 2008, la diversification de notre économie et la croissance de l'investissement dans le tourisme», a déclaré le président Michel, qui s'était exprimé publiquement en juin 2014 à propos de la perspective des Seychelles à rejoindre le groupe de pays à revenus élevés et qui a été renforcée par le rapport d'un analyste basé aux Etats-Unis affirmant que cela était « très probable ».
 
« Le travail acharné, la résilience et l'innovation du peuple seychellois a porté ses fruits et nous sommes déterminés à continuer sur cette voie. Nous avons atteint cela ensemble et si nous continuons à travailler ensemble, nous pouvons réaliser beaucoup plus pour notre pays et pour ses citoyens. »
 
Toutefois, le président a également pris soin de souligner que l'évaluation de la richesse d'un pays sur le critère du PIB par habitant n'a pas toujours été pertinente, en particulier quand il s'agit de Petits États Insulaires en Développement (PEID), qui restent particulièrement vulnérables aux chocs externes et qui doivent faire face à leur propre et unique défis de développement.
 
Le président a réitéré un appel qu'il avait lancé en 2014 demandant un soutien plus ciblé de la communauté internationale en faveur des PEID par le biais de la mise en place de mesures telle que l'indice de vulnérabilité, pour permettre aux petits États insulaires de s'adapter et de renforcer la résilience à la fois contre le changement climatique et les chocs économiques.
 
Les Seychelles peinent déjà à accéder au développement et à s'adapter au changement climatique. Le financement par la communauté internationale de ces mesures d'atténuation pourrait maintenant être refusé.
 
« Nous avons atteint un niveau de revenu équivalent à de nombreux Pays de l'OCDE, mais nous n'avons pas accès aux mêmes instruments de développement, notamment aux moyens de financement abordables que ces pays ont. Nous reconnaissons cette étape mais je demande à tous nos partenaires en matière de développement de ne pas nous pénaliser pour notre succès, » a conclu le président Michel.
 
Les Seychelles sont en tête en matière de RNB mensuel moyen par habitant en Afrique
 
En 2012, la Banque mondiale a évalué que le revenu national brut (RNB) par habitant aux Seychelles s'élevait à 12 180 US$ par an. Ce qui était déjà très proche de la limite pour la catégorie des pays à revenu intermédiaire supérieur dont le seuil était fixé à 12,736 US$ ». Le RNB des Seychelles par habitant a augmenté à 13 990 US$ en 2014.
 
La Banque mondiale utilise la méthode du RNB par habitant comme outil d'évaluation. Le calcul s'effectue en prenant le revenu annuel final d'un pays et en divisant ce montant par son nombre d'habitants pour arriver au revenu moyen par citoyen. Le RNB par habitant est également lié à d'autres indicateurs qui mesurent le bien-être social, économique et environnemental du pays et de ses habitants.
 
Suite à sa récente adhésion à l'Organisation Mondiale du Commerce, à la reprise du tourisme et aux progrès constants en matière d'exploration pétrolière et gazière des fonds sous-marins, les Seychelles pourraient bientôt être sur le point de faire évoluer encore plus ses revenus domestiques.
 
Selon le profil national des Seychelles établi par la Banque Mondiale, l'Etat insulaire a gagné 1,4 milliards de dollars de PIB l'année dernière, dont la majorité de ses revenus proviennent du tourisme, de la pêche et de l'industrie financière offshore.
 
Les Seychelles sont le deuxième pays africain à rejoindre le « groupe de pays à revenus élevés ». La Guinée équatoriale avait était la première à être classée dans cette catégorie en 2007.
 
Les Seychelles sont désormais en tête des pays à revenus élevés d'Afrique subsaharienne, en termes de RNB par habitant.
 
En 2013, la Guinée équatoriale avait un RNB par habitant de 14.320 US$, mais les revenus du pays d'Afrique de l'Ouest, riche en pétrole, ont chuté en 2014, laissant le pays avec un RNB par habitant de seulement 13,340 US$.
 
 
Le Botswana et l'UE discutent des progrès des négociations des APE
3 juillet 2015
APANEWS
APASENE
 
APA-Gaborone (Botswana) Le ministre botswanais du commerce et de l'industrie, Vincent Seretse, s’est entretenu avec le commissaire européen au Commerce, Cecilia Mamstrom, à Gaborone pour discuter de la finalisation des Accords de partenariat économique (APE) entre l'UE et la Communauté de développement de l'Afrique australe (SADC).
 
Vincent Seretse a rencontré son homologue de l'Union européenne, le commissaire chargé du commerce, Cecilia, a appris APA vendredi.
 
Selon un communiqué de presse du ministère, Seretse qui est également le coordinateur du groupe des APE de la SADC et Malmstrom ont discuté de la conclusion du processus vers la signature et la ratification des APE entre la SADC et l'UE ainsi que la 10eme Conférence ministérielle de l'Organisation mondiale du commerce qui se tiendra prochainement à Nairobi, au Kenya, et d'autres questions commerciales d'intérêt mutuel pour les deux parties.
 
Concernant les APE, le ministre et le commissaire ont réitéré leur plein engagement pour la conclusion du processus menant à la signature, la ratification, puis l'entrée en vigueur des APE.
 
Ils ont reconnu le travail important accompli jusque là, à savoir, la négociation des accords et les élucidations judiciaires en cours sur ces accords.
 
Pour sa part, le commissaire a affirmé que l'UE a mis de côté des fonds pour aider les pays de la SADC dans la mise en œuvre des APE lorsqu'ils entreront en vigueur et que le Botswana en bénéficiera à hauteur de 2,6 millions d'euros soit 28.8 milliards de Pula du Botswana.
 
Elle a donc exhorté le Botswana à venir avec des propositions d'orientation pour débloquer le financement.
 
 
Bacardí y Pernod batallan por el ron Havana Club
3 juillet 2015
Diario Financiero
ELDRIO
 
Los pájaros cantan en el terreno de la destilería de Havana Club de Pernod Ricard en Cuba. En la bodega, el ron se añeja en barricas de roble y en las modernas instalaciones 12.000 botellas salen de las líneas de producción cada hora para ser empacadas y embarcadas alrededor del mundo.
 
“Una ofrenda para los santos”, dice un ronero, mientras abre una botella y salpica unas gotas al piso antes de ofrecérsela a un visitante.
 
Aquí, en medio del refugio de eficiencia y folclore que ofrece la destilería, existe poca preocupación por los problemas más grandes que afectan a la economía socialista cubana, y mucho menos por el drama que rodea al propio ron Havana Club.
 
Sin embargo, esta bebida se encuentra en el centro de una intensa batalla corporativa que ya ha involucrado al régimen de Raúl Castro, al Congreso estadounidense, a la Unión Europea y a la Organización Mundial del Comercio (OMC).
 
Durante las últimas dos décadas, Pernod ha producido Havana Club junto con su socio en la empresa mixta, la paraestatal Cuba Ron, y lo ha vendido alrededor del mundo excepto en Estados Unidos.
 
Mientras tanto, Havana Club también es producido en Puerto Rico por Bacardí, el más famoso –aunque ahora exiliado– productor cubano de ron, que sólo se vende en EEUU. Sin embargo, la decisión del año pasado de restablecer las relaciones entre Washington y La Habana y poner fin a 50 años de enemistad podría reiniciar este barroco forcejeo corporativo.
 
Hay mucho dinero involucrado. En 1993, cuando Pernod comenzó a comercializar Havana Club, vendía 5 millones de botellas anualmente. Las ventas se han incrementado en diez veces, principalmente en Europa. Una apertura al mercado de EEUU, el mayor mercado del mundo para el ron, sería una gran oportunidad para la compañía francesa.
 
“Con el cambio de situación, esperamos vender ron Havana Club en EEUU”, dice Jérôme Cottin-Bizonne, presidente ejecutivo de Havana Club de Pernod.
 
Bacardí, una empresa orgullosa de su herencia cubana que a la vez es la compañía de bebidas no abierta a bolsa más grande del mundo, tiene un punto de vista diferente.
 
“Hemos adquirido lo que creemos que son los derechos globales del fabricante original y también somos dueños de los derechos de la marca en EEUU”, dice Rick Wilson, vicepresidente senior de Bacardí para asuntos externos.
 
Las semillas de la pelea fueron plantadas hace unos 55 años, cuando el gobierno revolucionario de Cuba nacionalizó Havana Club–al igual que hizo con las operaciones de su rival más grande, Bacardí– y su dueño, José Arechabala, huyó a España.
 
En la década de 1990, después de la caída del bloque soviético, Cuba, necesitada de dinero, hizo una sociedad mixta con Pernod para comercializar Havana Club globalmente, y Pernod comenzó a comprar marcas registradas a través del mundo.
 
Sin embargo, en 1997 la familia Arechabala vendió su receta y patente de la marca a Bacardí. Después, en 1998, el congreso de EEUU aprobó una cláusula llamada sección 211 en una propuesta de ley de apropiaciones. A veces llamada la “propuesta Bacardí”, ésta impide el reconocimiento de derechos sobre marcas registradas que hayan sido confiscadas sin compensación por algún gobierno. La propuesta, por tanto, hizo ilegal la renovación de la marca registrada de Havana Club de Pernod en EEUU cuando expiró en 2006.
 
Desde entonces se han sucedido costosas demandas y contrademandas, como detalla el escritor Tom Gjeltenen su libro “Bacardí and the Long Fight for Cuba”.
 
Diplomáticos cubanos se quejaron en la ONU y Pernod se quejó en la Unión Europea, que a su vez lo hizo con la OMC (que eventualmente decretó que EEUU podía hacer sus propias reglas para marcas registradas).
 
Esto resultó en una débil tregua, pues Cuba y EEUU generalmente respetan asuntos de marcas registradas; Coca-Cola está registrada en Cuba, por ejemplo. Entonces Bacardí ahora produce un sólo ron Havana Club blanco en Puerto Rico y lo vende en EEUU. Pernod, por su lado, ha invertido US$ 100 millones en el negocio y ha desarrollado una línea completa de rones para Havana Club(Máximo, su producto premium, se vende por más de 1.000 libras en Reino Unido) que vende en el resto del mundo.
 
Pero la situación está cambiando. Los visitantes estadounidenses pueden regresar con hasta US$ 100deHavana Club. ¿Qué pasaría si se levantara el embargo completamente?
 
En teoría, un trato que beneficie a ambas partes es posible. Si los dos mercados se abrieran completamente, Bacardí podría regresar a Cuba y vender sus rones allí de nuevo. “Permanentemente estamos buscando mercados donde podamos vender, siempre y cuando ofrezcan protección básica de los derechos fundamentales y terreno de juego parejo… en un entorno comercial equitativo”, dice Wilson.
 
Pernod, mientras tanto, vendería Havana Club en EEUU. “Si se elimina el embargo completamente… significaría que dejaría de haber impedimentos”, señala Cottin-Bizonne.
 
La historia sugiere que levantar “todos los impedimentos” llevaría tiempo. Mientras tanto, Pernod ha lanzado una nueva marca en el mercado de EEUU, llamada Havanista, que es Havana Club en todo menos en el nombre. Esto le da la vuelta al problema de la marca registrada y podría bien ser la primera andanada de la siguiente ronda de esta larga batalla.
 
 
Japón se queja contra Brasil en la OMC
3 juillet 2015
Gestión
GESTID
 
Japón argumenta que Brasil impone una carga tributaria más alta a los importadores y provee subsidios supeditados a exportaciones, indicó la OMC.
 
(Reuters).- Japón presentó una queja contra Brasil en la Organización Mundial del Comercio para remover cargos e impuestos que, según sostiene, favorecen ilegalmente a los productos brasileños frente a la competencia extranjera, dijo el organismo internacional.
 
Japón argumenta que Brasil impone una carga tributaria más alta a los importadores y provee subsidios supeditados a exportaciones, afectando las ventas de autos, semiconductores, teléfonos avanzados, software, autopartes y otros productos japoneses de alta tecnología, indicó la OMC.
 
Un alto funcionario brasileño dijo en diciembre que las políticas del país estaban justificadas porque el Gobierno necesitaba defender los derechos de todas las naciones emergentes de implementar sus propias medidas sobre la industria.





Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.