Poorer Nations' Demand for Climate-Change Aid Weighs on Paris Talks
ASEAN - Renewable energy a growth catalyst
Shipping industry braces for pollution tax after Paris talks
Foreign governments outspending U.S. on cotton subsidies four-to-one
OECD predicts Brazil to see 3.1 percent contraction in economic growth in 2015
OECD warns Brazil on environment, economy risks
Anti-dumping lawsuits weigh down Vietnam
Obama administration to release full text of Pacific Rim free-trade accord
No likely Trans-Pacific bonanza for government procurement, trade lawyer says
Investors shifting focus to TPP members: survey 
CIGARETTE DISPUTE - Govt sizes up Philip Morris WTO claim

Details:
Poorer Nations' Demand for Climate-Change Aid Weighs on Paris Talks
By William Mauldin
4 November 2015
Dow Jones Top Energy Stories
Poorer nations' demand that wealthier countries help bankroll their transition to cleaner energy has emerged as the biggest obstacle for world leaders seeking to reach an agreement on emissions at a summit that begins this month.
World leaders arrive in Paris in late November with the aim of negotiating an agreement to slash carbon dioxide emissions beyond 2020. But many developing countries say highly industrialized nations haven't yet pledged enough to help them transition to lower-carbon energy or to prepare for the effects of for a more adverse climate.
"Finance is a very big issue in this negotiation," said Todd Stern, the U.S. special envoy for climate change, in an interview.
The latest round of climate negotiations organized through the United Nations was meant to blur the line between highly industrialized, richer countries that have burned large amounts of fossil fuels for more than a century and the poorer, developing countries that still rely on burning more coal and oil to achieve rapid growth and lift hundreds of millions out of poverty.
Rather than assigning across-the-board reductions in emissions of greenhouse gases, the Paris talks allow countries to set their own emissions targets based on their particular level of development. That approach will prevent the Paris accord from limiting global warming as much as officials had sought, but it may allow for a politically palatable agreement that brings China and other big emerging markets to the table to limit emissions down the road.
Still, the split between richer and poorer countries persists in the area of finance: The participation of many developing countries—including their decision on whether to sign on to the agreement next month—is based on richer countries following through with plans to mobilize money for solar and other forms of green energy, and to compensate poorer countries for their adjustments to a harsher climate.
"One of the pieces that is very, very critical for this process is to provide that transparent support to developing countries," said Christiana Figueres, head of the United Nations Framework on Climate Change, in an interview in Washington. "But it can only be transparent and quantifiable if everyone agrees on the methodology."
The stated goal is for richer countries to kick in $100 billion a year of their own money and related private financing for developing nations by 2020. A report last month from the leading group of developed countries—the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development—estimated that more affluent countries delivered $61.8 billion in financing last year to help developing economies limit carbon emissions and fend off extreme weather and rising sea levels.
Ms. Figueres and other leading officials say the figures from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD show progress, but not all developing countries are satisfied.
"Those numbers haven't been consulted with or accepted by developing countries," said Ms. Figueres, a Costa Rican diplomat based in Bonn, Germany. In its report, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD acknowledges compiling the financing figures was "technically difficult and politically sensitive issue."
Under the consensus-based approach of the climate talks, nearly 200 countries have to agree on the text to launch the accord.
"The big threat is that there's a bloc of countries that basically says, 'No, no, wait a second, we believe the whole climate-finance system is inadequate,' " said Paul Bledsoe, a former climate official in the Clinton White House and consultant in Washington. "And they make a big demonstration, and they walk out of the meetings."
The finance problem is politically sensitive for poorer countries in part because they will actually need trillions of dollars overall to finance energy transitions and prepare for new climate realities, Ms. Figueres said. One of the top goals of the Paris agreement is to produce a convincing blueprint for world energy use decades into the future to help mobilize private funding for greener alternatives, essentially redirecting money currently invested in fossil fuels, she said.
The Obama administration, for its part, has pledged to put $3 billion in the Green Climate Fund, the leading fund for aiding developing countries. "We think it's the right thing to do to provide climate finance, and we'll continue to do that with other donor countries—developed countries—but also some developing, " Mr. Stern said. Chinese officials announced in Washington in September that they would contribute $3.1 billion to other developing countries to combat climate change.
But critics of the Paris talks, including Republicans in Washington, warn that reducing the use of coal and other high-carbon fuels is expensive enough domestically, and some say they will work to block the Obama administration's $3 billion aid pledge.
"Developed countries do have a commitment to continue to provide finance, and we have every intention of doing that," Mr. Stern said. The issue will be at the forefront in preliminary talks in coming days that are meant to prepare for the Paris summit later this month.
Besides grants and loans, developing countries are looking for help with everything from advice on infrastructure to compulsory licensing of energy-related patents held in highly industrialized countries, according to people following the talks.
"They're looking for capacity building, they're looking for technology transfer, they're looking for finance," said Jennifer Morgan, director of climate and energy at the World Resources Institute, an environmental think tank.
Dow Jones & Company, Inc. 
ASEAN - Renewable energy a growth catalyst
Csilla Kohalmi-Monfils
5 November 2015
Bangkok Post
In the next 20 years, energy demand in Southeast Asia will rise by more than 80%. Ongoing economic growth, the strong urbanisation trend, a growing middle class and a young population will drive this spectacular increase.
Effective utilisation of the region's renewable energy potential holds the key to securing the energy supply that is critical to Asean's economic expansion.
While much of the discussion on future energy sources has concentrated on extending the use of fossil fuels, there is huge potential in solar, geothermal and ocean energy. The amount of renewable energy available in the region is equal to 18 times Asean's current energy demand, but so far only 5.5% of renewable energy potential is currently exploited.
From both an economic and environmental point of view, it makes sense to diversify the energy mix. With its strong economic growth outlook, a key opportunity for the region lies in adopting energy strategies which provide affordable energy for all without resulting in exponential growth of greenhouse gases, and technologies that are resilient to the adverse effects of climate change. Energy planners and policymakers must find a way to support industries --because of their importance in employment and economic growth, while minimising environmental deterioration and negative impacts on local air and water quality.
Another area of opportunity is increasing the overall efficiency of energy consumption in the region. Southeast Asia currently consumes more than twice the amount of energy per unit of GDP than the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD average. Closing the gap would deliver between US$15 to $40 billion (532 billion to 1.4 trillion baht) in annual cost savings.
To close the gap, what can be done? Government fossil fuel subsidies --amounting to $36 billion in 2014 according to the IAE, should be reviewed for their relevance and genuine economic benefit. Fossil fuel subsidies mask the real cost of electricity, distort the market and divert money from investment in modern infrastructure, which is much needed. With global oil prices at their current low levels, why not look again to see if these costly and inefficient subsidies need to continue? Energy poverty is an issue in many countries. However, generalised fossil fuel subsidies do not only benefit the needy; in fact quite the opposite is true.
Higher prices are usually the best incentive for energy efficiency; government-led incentive schemes and regulatory regimes can bolster this. Requirement for energy certificates for buildings, consumer electronics, tax or incentive credits for proven decrease in energy consumption and training and education about energy efficiency are all tools with which many countries have achieved significant savings in energy consumption.
New, disruptive technologies will positively affect the uptake of large-scale renewable energy solutions, as prices drop below those of traditional channels of supply. With decentralised generation and storage systems available at increasingly affordable cost, micro-grids will become a more frequent feature in rural areas, bypassing the need for large connective infrastructure. In addition, innovation in battery storage has helped overcome intermittency problems that were the main barrier for wide deployment of solar and wind power.
While micro-grids can substitute the need for costly transmission infrastructure in rural areas, smart grids will replace traditional one-way transmission and distribution grids in urban centres. Distributed generation will complement centralised generation as consumers also become generators. Smart grids will have the potential to optimise the supply and demand every minute at every location, while shaving peak-capacity demand in this participative energy system.
The energy sector, like many other areas of business, is adapting to a rapidly changing society and business environment. Traditional policies and forward planning must now be complemented with a framework that enables simple, agile and responsive solutions, while still meeting macro-supply requirements.
With its projected economic development, Asean offers a genuine opportunity for energy planners and policymakers to look at tried and tested practices and solutions from around the world, in order to develop sustainable regulatory frameworks.
The pressure for more energy to support growing populations and economies in the region challenges us to find ways to encourage private investment, remove subsidies and policy inefficiencies, and remain flexible and responsive to renewable energy sources and rapidly changing technologies.
If we can achieve this, we can help transform the futures of hundreds of millions of people.
Csilla Kohalmi-Monfils is Head of Strategy, New Business and Communications at ENGIE Asia-Pacific.
The Post Publishing Public Company Limited
Shipping industry braces for pollution tax after Paris talks
5 November 2015
Manila Bulletin
London - The shipping industry expects to be stung by a carbon levy as momentum building from climate talks in Paris starting this month makes a cut to its greenhouse gas emissions likely.
Any tax - either a levy based on fuel use by diesel-driven ships or a market- based mechanism - would add to rising costs for the industry, which transports 90 percent of world trade.
A draft Paris text makes scant mention of reducing CO2 from marine bunker fuels. Yet ship industry sources say some form of taxation is expected to come in the wake of any deal at the Nov. 30-Dec. 11 summit.
"We do expect that sooner or later shipping will be regulated on CO2," said John Kornerup Bang, lead advisor on climate change with Maersk Group, which owns the world's biggest container shipping line.
"Some carriers would be better at managing it than others."
The latest IMO study showed shipping had reduced greenhouse gas emissions (CO2) to 2.2 percent of the world total from 2.8 percent in the five-year period to 2012. The study projected CO2 shipping emissions would rise and could grow by 50 percent by 2050 depending on the pace of world trade and what action was taken.
Ship emissions were omitted from national commitments under the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN's 1997 Kyoto Protocol, which ceded control to its shipping agency, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" International Maritime Organization (IMO).
The IMO has said it had already reduced airborne emissions via mandatory regulations, but it is seen by environmentalists as slow moving.
Last month, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Commission set an end-2016 deadline for the IMO to present CO2-cutting measures, which Europe's shipping industry lobby said was "unrealistic."
Campaigners have urged tough targets for both shipping and aviation plus some kind of levy to be included in the text of a climate deal.
"The 2 degree global warming limit becomes next to impossible if Paris gives these sectors a free pass," said Bill Hemmings with campaigner HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Transport & Environment, referring to a goal of limiting average temperature rises to 2 degrees Celsius (3.6 Fahrenheit) above pre-industrial times.
In a paper published in October, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" International Transport Forum, an inter-governmental organization within the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD, recommended a carbon tax for shipping, which could feed into the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" UN-backed Green Climate Fund if needed, plus clear CO2 targets.
Maersk's Kornerup Bang said shipping had to take its fair share of CO2 reductions despite tougher market conditions.
"We do prefer a levy - that is fairly easy to administer. But we are keen to emphasize that it has to be global, flag neutral and reward early movers," he said.
"It is obvious to everybody that rates are low and there are structural challenges in the industry... we all suffer from that."
Worse-than expected container overcapacity led Maersk to issue a profit warning last month, adding to woes in other shipping markets, reeling from a slump in commodities.
"If the shipping industry has to pay for this, they will pass it on to the consumer," said HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Clay Maitland, a managing partner with top ship registry the Marshall Islands.
Manila Bulletin Publishing Corp
Foreign governments outspending U.S. on cotton subsidies four-to-one
Forrest Laws
4 November 2015
Southwest Farm Press
The U.S. cotton industry, for all intents and purposes, was relegated to the side-lines in the 2014 farm bill debate because of the adverse rulings in the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO case Brazil brought against the U.S. cotton program in 2002.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" National Cotton Council doesn’t want that to happen again, Gary Adams, the president and CEO of the organization representing the seven segments of the U.S. cotton industry, testified at a House Agriculture Committee hearing on Oct. 21. (See HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brazil%E2%80%93United_States_cotton_dispute.)
Dr. Adams appeared with three other witnesses including a member of academia (Dermot Hayes of Iowa State University) and representatives of the sugar and dairy sectors (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Jack Roney, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" American Sugar Alliance, and Jaime Castaneda, American Milk Producers Federation) to discuss foreign subsidies.
The latter are changing the world cotton production order, which had been dominated by China and the U.S., and putting U.S. cotton producers, ginners, merchants and manufacturers at a disadvantage, Dr. Adams noted.
“For the 2015 crop year, India will be the largest cotton producer, surpassing China for the first time,” he said. “Prior to 2004, India generally produced between 10 million and 14 million bales. Starting in 2004, India significantly increased production to 19 million bales and has continued to increase each year since (to 29 million bales for 2015-16).”
It’s not a coincidence that the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Cotton Corporation of India, the government-run procurement and distribution company, has increased the minimum support price for it cotton producers by 52 percent for medium staple cotton and 42 percent for long staple cotton since 2010.
Minimum Support Price growing in India
The MSP operated by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Cotton Corporation of India is based on seed cotton production. If you assume a gin turnout of 35 to 40 percent that is common for U.S. varieties, the MSP equates to a cash price of between 70 and 80 cents per pound or 20 to 30 cents per pound above the U.S. cotton loan rate.
India’s government also provides subsidies estimated at more than $9 billion a year for fertilizer for cotton and other crops. India’s MSP and urea subsidies pale in comparison, however, with the $1.40 per pound China was paying its producers for cotton two years ago. Those supports have declined in some areas, but growers in western China continue to receive subsidized prices.
China’s support system has resulted in the government’s state-owned agencies amassing more than 50 million bales of cotton in government reserves. Those bales are likely to have an impact on world cotton prices for years to come.
For the latest on southwest agriculture, please check out HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" Southwest Farm Press Daily and receive the latest news right to your inbox.
In late 2014, the Chinese government set a target price of the equivalent of $1.40 per pound for the western province of Xinjiang while no direct support was announced for the eastern cotton-producing provinces. As a result, cotton area in the latter has sharply declined.
Despite such developments in China, India, Pakistan and other cotton-producing nations, some of those same entities are expected to launch another attack on the U.S. cotton program when the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organization holds its 10th Ministerial Conference in Nairobi, Kenya, next month.
Although there have been repeated comments from numerous countries for there to be “something more” done on cotton policy at this upcoming Ministerial, Adams said, “We believe that the action already taken by the United States with respect to cotton policy should be more than sufficient to allow U.S. negotiators to resist any further calls for action.”  
World support average four times U.S.
As evidence, Adams cited a recent HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" International Cotton Advisory Committee report that estimated average direct assistance to cotton production across all countries at $0.26 per pound -- but only $0.07 per pound average support for U.S. cotton production.
“Direct assistance to U.S. cotton producers was well below levels provided in other countries,” he said. “It should be noted, the ICAC study was based on the 2013 crop year, which was the last year before the significant changes implemented by the new farm legislation.”
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO establishes a “rules-based trading system” that relies on timely and accurate notifications by each member and a transparent reporting process that includes being responsive to questions and information requests from other members and from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO leadership.
Southwest Cotton Updates
Don’t miss our HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" cotton crop news and information, with cotton production, harvesting, marketing updates plus cotton futures and commodities daily.
“Unfortunately, there continues to be a lack of timely notifications from several major cotton-producing and exporting countries,” Dr. Adams said. “Specifically, neither China nor India has notified the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO of their domestic support for cotton or other commodities since 2010.”
Adams also reiterated U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman’s comments before the Senate Finance Committee earlier this year that a defensive posture regarding U.S. cotton support is outdated and justifies a shift in focus to other countries’ status regarding their HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO obligations.
More transparency in HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO sought
The NCC will continue to urge U.S. negotiators to push other countries to be as current and as transparent as the United States is with their domestic support notifications, he said, while emphasizing that U.S. programs are not having a detrimental impact on world markets or producers in other countries.
“Under the current farm law, U.S. cotton farmers are even more attuned to market conditions,” Adams said. “For the U.S. cotton industry to sustain production and infrastructure, it is imperative that production and trade policies in other countries not put U.S. farmers at a disadvantage.
“I encourage the House Agriculture Committee and our negotiators to hold firmly to the position that agricultural markets have changed over the past decade, and that U.S. cotton policy has evolved in ways that far exceed the previous demands within the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO. A cotton specific ‘solution’ focused on developed countries does not address the realities of today’s global fiber markets.”
Penton Business Media
OECD predicts Brazil to see 3.1 percent contraction in economic growth in 2015
Pau Ramirez
5 November 2015
Xinhua News Agency
RIO DE JANEIRO, Nov. 4 (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Xinhua) -- The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD) on Wednesday predicted that the Brazilian economy would contract by 3.1 percent this year and 1.2 percent next year.
In a report released in Brazil, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD admitted that the Latin America's largest economy is undergoing a "critical moment" due to high inflation, rising unemployment and growing interest rates, all of which are following a recession seen in the first half of the year.
"Brazil is living a critical moment, since its fiscal situation is challenging, inflation is raising, and the favourable factors of high raw material prices and a young population are ending," concluded the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD.
"Brazil must control the expansion of public spending, make them more effective, and reform its retirement system," suggested the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD in the report, adding that it must also tackle the challenge of maintaining social policies that have reduced poverty in the country in recent years.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD recommended that Brazil "moves forward with the fiscal adjustment plan" promoted by the government to adjust battered public funds and restore market confidence.
"Progress must continue on the fiscal and monetary fronts," said
the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD, while stressing that "ambitious structural reforms are urgently needed to diminish numerous productivity gaps" in the country. 
Xinhua News Agency
OECD warns Brazil on environment, economy risks
4 November 2015
Agence France Presse
Brazil is destroying an area of rainforest the size of Israel every four years despite major conservation progress, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD economic grouping said Wednesday.
Biologically diverse Brazil will be a key player among the 195 countries at the UN climate conference in Paris in December, which will look to reach a global agreement on limiting climate change.
In its first environmental survey of the country, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development warned that Brazil must take further action to clean up the environment even as its worsening economy is complicating those efforts.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD report hailed "strong progress made in reducing deforestation and emissions of greenhouse gases over the past 15 years" in the Latin American powerhouse.
But it warned that the giant emerging economy, which is set to host the Olympic Games next year, was still the biggest destroyer of forests in the world -- some 480,000 hectares (1.2 million acres) in 2014 alone. That was down from around 2.7 million hectares in 2004 however.
"Brazil has made tremendous progress in terms of its environmental performance, but rigorous policy implementation remains critically important," OECD Secretary-General Angel Gurria said in the organization's Environmental Performance Review of Brazil.
"Greening the economy can also bring huge social and economic opportunities, with green markets offering potential to boost GDP by up to seven percent."
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD warned in a separate report on Wednesday that Brazil's economy was in "a critical moment."
It forecast the country's economic output would shrink by 3.1 percent next year. That is a greater contraction than the latest forecast from the government, of 2.8 percent, or from the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" International Monetary Fund, of 3.0 percent.
Agence France-Presse
Anti-dumping lawsuits weigh down Vietnam
5 November 2015
The Nation
Viet Nam News
Hanoi. Many products in Vietnam are facing the risk of their market shares and revenues narrowing down due to anti-dumping investigations and lawsuits.
The number of anti-dumping cases concerning Vietnamese export products were caught in a tidal wave recently, according to announcements of the Vietnam Competition Authority.
Initial statistics showed that from the beginning of this year, nearly 20 anti-dumping lawsuits were filed against Vietnamese export products, bringing the total trade defence cases to nearly 100 so far.
Products faced with anti-dumping lawsuits this year were mainly steel, fibre, bicycle tyres and tube, apart from medium density fibre boards and iron. The most recent case was India initiating anti-dumping investigations concerning imports of AA dry cell battery (coded HS 8506.10) exported from Vietnam, the competition authority announced last week. According to the Vietnam Competition Authority, many import markets were paying increasing attention to Vietnam for trade frauds, which would threaten exports. Nguyen Phuong Nam, deputy director of the Vietnam Competition Authority, warned that the steel industry faced the highest risk of anti-dumping lawsuits. In September alone, three anti-dumping lawsuits concerning steel products were initiated.
Nguyen Nam, director of An Nam Fibre Company in southern Binh Duong Province said that regardless of the conclusion, anti-dumping investigations, once announced, would badly impact exports as other importers would take a stricter view.
According to the World Trade Organisation Centre under the Vietnam Chamber of Commerce and Industry, with Vietnam signing and negotiating a number of free trade agreements, anti-dumping cases were anticipated to soar and make it even more complicated.
"It is important that businesses enhance their awareness of trade defence," Nguyen Thi Thu Trang, from the WTO Centre said.
Nation News Network Co., Ltd.
Obama administration to release full text of Pacific Rim free-trade accord
David Nakamura Mike DeBonis
5 November 2015
The Washington Post
The Obama administration is planning to release on Thursday the full text of a 12-nation Pacific Rim free-trade accord, launching what is expected to be a long and bruising fight to win final ratification in Congress for one of the president's top priorities.
A month after trade ministers reached an agreement on the deal in Atlanta, the public will get its first look at the details of the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), an expansive pact that spans 30 chapters and hundreds of pages.
After the text is released, administration officials said, President Obama will notify lawmakers of his intent to sign the trade accord. Obama must then wait 90 days before he can apply his signature and send the agreement to Capitol Hill, under the terms of "fast-track" trade legislation approved by Congress in the spring.
The president and his top aides are preparing a public relations blitz in the coming weeks to sell the specifics of the deal to the public, with Obama highlighting the economic and foreign policy implications during a trip to Asia later this month.
But the fierce political fight waged in the spring over Obama's trade agenda is ramping up again on both sides of the aisle. The TPP accord has been thrust into the 2016 campaign for the White House. Leading candidates, including Democrats Hillary Rodham Clinton and Sen. Bernie Sanders (I-Vt.) and Republican HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Donald Trump, have publicly opposed the pact.
"We look forward to showing people what we've done," Labor Secretary Thomas Perez said in an interview. "Trade agreements have always enjoyed bipartisan support and bipartisan opposition, and the TPP is no different."
Administration officials said that if all goes smoothly, the deal could be in the hands of Congress by March, but when lawmakers would schedule a vote remains highly uncertain. Although the fast-track authority lays out a specific timetable - and prevents lawmakers from filibustering or amending the agreement - congressional leaders could choose to delay the process indefinitely, even until after Obama leaves office in January 2017, officials said.
In general, Republican leaders have been supportive of Obama's trade push. But several, including Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (Ky.) and Senate Finance Committee Chairman Orrin G. Hatch (Utah), raised concerns over provisions related to the tobacco and pharmaceutical industries after trade ministers announced a final agreement last month. New House Speaker Paul D. Ryan (Wis.) must balance his support of free trade with a conservative faction that is determined not to grant Obama any political victories.
Ryan, who collaborated with Hatch and Sen. Ron Wyden (D-Ore.) on the fast-track legislation, refused to predict when the House would hold a vote during an interview on "Fox News Sunday."
"We haven't even seen this trade agreement yet," he said. "So I don't know when that would occur."
The politics surrounding the presidential campaign could present additional uncertainty, with both parties cautious about pursuing a divisive vote ahead of the 2016 general election.
Facing fierce opposition from large swaths of the Democratic Party, Obama has sought to overcome the deep-seated scepticism from labor unions and progressives over past trade deals by pledging that the TPP will bring strong, enforceable protections for workers and the environment.
The labor chapter of the agreement requires member nations to live up to internationally recognized standards, including the ability to join unions and collectively bargain, the abolition of child labor and forced labor, and freedom from employment discrimination. But administration officials said the deal goes even further with three nations that are the most harsh on workers' rights, Vietnam, Malaysia and Brunei, each of which agreed to separate compliance plans with the United States.
Labor union leaders remain sceptical. Celeste Drake, trade policy specialist at the AFL-CIO, said the labor federation would reserve final judgment on the TPP until after officials have time to review the full text.
"Our real fear is that there probably are a lot of nice words, with good intentions" that are never enforced, Drake said.
Rep. Rosa L. DeLauro (D-Conn.), a leading opponent of Obama's trade push, said Wednesday that her coalition had gained momentum since the spring because the policy concerns remain strong among many members of Congress and the politics have shifted.
"The presidential candidates have a real role to play in this effort," she said, "because they have a bully pulpit, they're speaking nationally on the issue and they probably get heard, in many instances, with the media more than individual members of Congress."
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Lydia DePillis and Paul Kane contributed to this report.
Washington Post
No likely Trans-Pacific bonanza for government procurement, trade lawyer says
Drew Hasselback
4 November 2015
Postmedia Breaking News
Gary Horlick, a Washington-based international trade lawyer, says that while the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal is generally good news for infrastructure builders, they may be disappointed that the deal doesn't throw open the cross-border market for infrastructure procurement.
"With things like procurement, no government is willing to let go of that," Horlick said. "All international procurement agreements are piecemeal. One party says, 'I'll open up this piece if you open up that piece.' But no one says, 'I'll open up all my procurement if you open up all yours.'"
This seems to be the case with the TPP, which liberalizes the market for international government procurement, but not all the way. The text of the TPP has yet to be publicly released, but the deal apparently allows governments to keep some limits on procurement in place. For example, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" government of Canada says it has preserved its ability to promote environmental sustainability and to provide preferences to Aboriginal businesses.
But limitations on trade in procurement might be the rare disappointment for infrastructure builders in the proposed TPP, which would create a massive trading block of 12 Pacific Rim nations, including Canada, the U.S., Mexico, Japan and Vietnam.
Related
Horlick spoke Tuesday at the Conference on Public-Private Partnerships in Toronto. The conference is an annual event organized by the Canadian Council of Public-Private Partnership, which promotes the use of PPP in infrastructure development.
Horlick's primary message is that member countries will likely ratify the agreement, despite what you might hear from lobbyists in Washington or politicians currently running for U.S. president.
The 12 nations included in the deal make up at least 40 per cent of global gross domestic product. Simple game theory tells you that countries can't risk not joining the deal, Horlick said.
"God help you if you're left out," Horlick said. "There's a small industry in Washington that goes around saying, 'Oh it's in trouble, hire me to pass it.' But it will pass. There will be a huge amount of smoke and mirrors and noise because there always is. But it will happen."
Each of the 12 nations that signed the deal must ratify it before they can join the trading block. But Horlick explained there is a provision in the agreement that makes the deal operative once six countries representing 85 per cent of the trading block's GDP sign on. If the U.S. and Japan ratify, that basically satisfies the GDP requirement, and all that would be needed would be to get four smaller nations on board.
One of the more interesting aspects of the TPP is that it will apparently tighten rules on investor-state trade disputes. This could result in fewer of the investor-trade disputes that have emerged under the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" North American Free Trade Agreement.
"The TPP makes it harder to sue governments than NAFTA. There are more protections against frivolous cases," he said.
Horlick's experience has shown him that international trade deals always result in expansion of business between countries. This often takes place in business sectors that were not foreseen by the people who negotiated the deals.
He expects one of those sleeper areas to be the infrastructure associated with border crossings and cross-border transportation links - obviously a pleasing message to an audience made up of people who build infrastructure projects.
"There are going to be needs for infrastructure that no one is projecting today," Horlick said. "Businesses and entrepreneurs - people like you - will see opportunities that the negotiators didn't see."
Public-private partnerships are ways to develop public needs with private sector investment. Proponents claim PPPs can deliver infrastructure more quickly and efficiently. Yet others, such as Ontario's auditor general Bonnie Lysyk, have questioned whether they provide good returns for taxpayers.
In another presentation Tuesday morning, pollster Nik Nanos went over some research that explained some of the reasons Canadians might oppose PPP projects.
Canadians say they want more transparency about PPP projects and their true cost, Nanos found. He also learned that Canadians are concerned about the presence of foreign companies in the PPP space.
It's not that Canadians don't want any foreign involvement in projects, he explained. It's just that Canadians want to see a local company in the mix to make sure the project is a "shining beacon" that delivers on promises to the community. The key takeaway, Nanos said, is that having a mix of foreign, local and domestic companies is a critical factor in gaining public acceptance for PPPs.
Canwest News Service
Investors shifting focus to TPP members: survey 
By Ted Chen
5 November 2015
Taipei Times
The preferred investment destination of the nation's largest enterprise groups might be shifting from China to potential members of the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) trade pact, according to a survey published yesterday by China Credit Information Service Ltd (CCIS, ).
The Taipei-based agency said that the shift reflects the dwindling profitability of Taiwanese conglomerates in China and urged the government to step up efforts to seek TPP participation.
Last year, the number of Taiwanese companies investing in China rose by just 43, the smallest annual increase since 2006, amid soaring manufacturing costs in the nation, China Credit said.
On its index that accounts for labor, utilities and other factors, the agency said that it gauged manufacturing costs in the US at 100, which is not far from its rating of 96 for China.
The agency found that although revenues from companies China-based operations last year grew only 5.6 percent year-on-year to NT$11.61 trillion (US$359.06 billion), aggregate net income expanded by 48.28 percent annually to NT$232.5 billion.
China Credit said that to gain a more accurate picture of Taiwanese companies performance in China, it found that by excluding two prominent HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Apple Inc suppliers, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Hon Hai Precision Industry Co and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Pegatron Corp, overall sales growth would fall to 3.31 percent, with net income dipping 3.7 percent annually, declining for the second consecutive year.
At the same time, revenues made at potential TPP member states had seen marked growth, rising 116.41 percent in Japan, 11 percent in the US and 3.86 percent across ASEAN nations.
The US, Japan and 10 other Pacific Rim nations concluded TPP negotiations on Oct. 5 after more than five years of preparatory talks. The trade bloc covers about 40 percent of the global economy.
As Taiwan has been left out of the TPP, the nation's vanguard enterprises must find a path in the cracks between major regional trade blocs that are taking shape around the world, China Credit said.
North Korea was the only other nation in the region not included in the pact, the agency added.
Meanwhile, growth in total assets among Taiwans top 100 conglomerates last year was concentrated among the nations five leading financial holding groups.
By contrast, the nations most renowned names in the technology sector, including HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Acer Inc, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Asustek Computer Inc, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" HTC Corp and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Yageo Corp, have grown more susceptible to acquisition attempts amid diminished net worth and low shareholding by their respective management.
Unlike other experts, CCIS department of business credit editor-in-chief Jen Liu said that it is possible for Taiwan to participate in both the TPP and the Beijing-backed Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership.
Taiwanese enterprises must strive to break the mould of competing on price, and transition away from the business model of taking orders in Taiwan, then fulfilling those orders at manufacturing bases abroad, which as of last month contributed to an 18-month run of tumbling exports, Liu said.
Liberty Times Ltd. 
CIGARETTE DISPUTE - Govt sizes up Philip Morris WTO claim
Patsara JikkhamÂ and Phusadee Arunmas
5 November 2015
Bangkok Post
Commerce staff deny opposing lawsuit
The government is not sure whether a HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" World Trade Organisation (HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO) ruling cited by tobacco giant HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Philip Morris will have any impact on a lawsuit it is set to file against the firm.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Philip Morris (Thailand) Limited (PMTL) is accused of making false declarations about the value of cigarettes it imported from the Philippines and depriving the government of an estimated 68 billion baht in tax revenue.
According to a probe by the Department of Special Investigation (DSI) launched in 2005, PMTL under-reported the value of its products when declaring them to the Customs Department between 2003 and 2007.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Philip Morris claims the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO ruling stems from a trade dispute between Thailand and the Philippines.
The company says the world trade body issued a ruling against Thailand in 2010 which clearly stated Thailand had no grounds to reject the import price of cigarettes from the Philippines.
Deputy Prime Minister Wissanu Krea-ngamsaid Wednesday three issues arise over the ruling claims made by the tobacco giant.
First, he questioned whether the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO really ruled against Thailand.
If Thailand really lost this dispute, it needs to consider whether it has something to do with Thailand's legal action against the company, Mr Wissanu said.
The second is whether Thailand can still appeal against the ruling, and lastly what would happen if the country does not comply with the ruling, the deputy premier said.
If it is worth ignoring the ruling, the country can take that risk, he said.
Mr Wissanu said the Office of the Attorney-General (OAG) is due to indict the company on Nov 25, and he has informed the cabinet of current events.
The company rejected the government's allegations.
"The media reports that resurfaced recently completely ignore the fact that PMTL's import prices have already been reviewed by various Thai and international agencies having the expertise and authority to address customs matters, and all of them concluded that PMTL did nothing wrong," Pongsathorn Ansusinha, director of PMTL's Corporate Affairs department, said.
The company welcomed the government's recent move to look at the dispute carefully before rushing to any decision, adding: "We believe that this is about Thailand's significant interest in the area of international trade."
Meanwhile, the Commerce Ministry dismissed media reports the ministry had urged the OAG not to indict the PMTL out of fear of a trade backlash.
Commerce Minister Apiradi Tantraporn said the ministry has a clear stance that legal procedures intended to protect the national interest must not be violated by other countries or overseas parties.
"The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO has no authority to interfere in the judicial procedures of its members in a case of tax evasion," Ms Apiradi added.
Also on Wednesday, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Action on Smoking and Health Foundation Thailand (Ash) urged the government to ignore concerns that legal action against the company would affect Thai and US trade.
Foundation executive director, Prakit Vathesatogkit, said even US state agencies have filed lawsuits against HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Philip Morris in several cases.
"If the firm is confident it is innocent, it should prove it in court," he said.
The Post Publishing Public Company Limited
END
 
Josep Bosch, Information Officer
Information and External Relations Division
+41227395681
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.