HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "Democrats Deal Obama Trade Setback--Wide opposition thwarts measure at heart of White House economic agenda
·         HYPERLINK \l "Currency Manipulation Has Emerged as the Big Sticking Point on Trade
·         HYPERLINK \l "The embattled future of global trade policy
·         HYPERLINK \l "India concerned over pace of deciding agenda for next WTO meet
·         HYPERLINK \l "USTR Official Upbeat About Likelihood of Implementing Trade Facilitation Pact
·         HYPERLINK \l "UNECE, IATA strengthen cooperation for trade facilitation implementation
·         HYPERLINK \l "Official urges Japan to check food labeling before involving WTO
·         HYPERLINK \l "International Negotiators Can't Agree on Plan to Control Toxic Stream of Electronic Waste
·         HYPERLINK \l "Canadian Tribunal Confirms National Security Exception on Procurement Review
·         HYPERLINK \l "ADB Pushes Private Sector Awareness of WTO Valuation Rules
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO Center: Local firms will benefit from FTA with Korea Agricultural firms look to higher exports to Korea
 
 
Democrats Deal Obama Trade Setback--Wide opposition thwarts measure at heart of White House economic agenda
By Siobhan Hughes and William Mauldin 
13 May 2015
The Wall Street Journal
 
WASHINGTON -- Senate Democrats undercut a top White House economic priority Tuesday, blocking a bill to give President Barack Obama authority to ease trade deals through Congress and forcing the administration and Republican leaders to regroup on trade policy.

The opposition came from across the Democratic Party, with liberals such as Sen. Elizabeth Warren (D., Mass.), who has publicly feuded with the president over trade deals, teaming up with pro-trade Democrats including Sen. Ron Wyden (D., Ore.), the party's leading advocate for free trade, to protest a package they said would do too little to protect Americans from unfair foreign practices like dumping cheap exports.

Only one Democrat, Tom Carper of Delaware, voted with 51 Republicans to begin debate on the measure -- short of the 60 votes needed. The other 42 Democrats and two independents voted against.

The Senate action almost certainly won't be the last word on advancing trade deals, since a majority of senators are believed to favor both the fast-track measure and the Trans-Pacific Partnership, the big trade deal between the U.S. and 11 nations around the Pacific whose path would be eased by the fast-track legislation. Late Tuesday, Democrats had already proposed a way to bridge the divide.

"This issue's not over," Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R., Ky.) told reporters. He changed his vote to "no" in a procedural maneuver that allows him to immediately push forward on another vote to open debate on the fast-track bill. "I'm hopeful we'll put this in the win column for the country sometime soon."

The Senate has a long history as a bastion of support for trade accords, and the Obama administration worked furiously after the vote to repair the damage. The president sat down with a group of Senate Democrats to discuss a path forward for the bill -- a meeting that included Democratic senators who have voiced support for advancing the fast-track measure, also known as trade promotion authority, an administration official said.

"The president reiterated his view, which he has shared in numerous similar conversations with members over the past several weeks, that passing TPA is an important step toward finalizing the Trans-Pacific Partnership -- the most progressive trade agreement in our history," the official said.

Mr. Obama's efforts to rally Democrats to his side follow a series of speeches and interviews in recent weeks in which he has used sharp rhetoric to blast trade critics on the left. He has accused Democratic opponents of mischaracterizing the Pacific deal, of bending to union pressure and engaging in fear tactics to whip up opposition.

"We cannot rush through the largest trade deal ever while leaving American workers and manufacturers behind," said Sen. Sherrod Brown (D., Ohio), one of the foremost critics of Mr. Obama's trade agenda on Tuesday.

Earlier in the day, as it became clear the motion would be defeated, the White House downplayed it as a "procedural snafu," emphasizing that it wasn't uncommon for legislation to encounter such a glitch.

Still, there was little doubt the vote represented a sharp rebuke by Democrats of their own president on a centerpiece of his economic agenda. It also was a reminder of the staying power of Sen. Harry Reid (D., Nev.), even from his position as minority leader, who organized the opposition and kept his caucus largely together throughout the process.

"It is the president's party and it's amazing to me that they would do this to the president on a bill of this magnitude and this importance," said Senate Finance Committee Chairman Orrin Hatch (R., Utah).

Mr. Reid criticized Mr. McConnell for pushing a package that omitted so many Democratic priorities. "The next time he looks at the mirror, he can understand who is responsible for not having a debate," he said, calling for "a realistic path" on Democratic-backed measures.

Complicating the White House's path forward is the fact that the "no" votes stemmed from a number of different objections. Some Democrats oppose trade agreements like the Pacific deal outright; others are willing to support them but wanted strong protections for labor; and still others wanted to include provisions that would penalize countries that engage in currency manipulation.

Democrats led by Mr. Reid in recent weeks had urged Democrats who backed the fast-track bill to condition their support on inclusion of three other provisions that cleared Senate and House committees last month.

Even after Mr. McConnell made a concession and agreed to combine the bill with one of those measures -- the renewal of a worker-assistance program known as Trade Adjustment Assistance, which would provide $450 million a year for job training for workers displaced by trade deals -- Democrats held firm and insisted on adding in the other two measures as well.

One of those measures would extend popular tariff discounts for African and other developing countries. The other would ease customs procedures and boost trade enforcement.

"Dropping the enforcement bill, in particular, would be legislative malpractice," said Mr. Wyden.

One provision included in the customs bill by Sen. Chuck Schumer (D., N.Y.), with significant bipartisan support, would allow companies to challenge alleged currency manipulation abroad by petitioning the U.S. to impose punitive tariffs on rivals that have benefited from the alleged practice. The Treasury Department, however, has said the currency provision risks violating international obligations and souring trade negotiations.

Late Tuesday, Senate Democrats offered up a new path forward. Under a plan devised by Messrs. Reid and Schumer, the Senate would hold a vote on the currency measure as a stand-alone bill, and then vote on a separate package that would combine the fast-track bill with trade-adjustment assistance, the customs bill without the currency measure, and the measure to extend tariff discounts to developing countries into one bill, according to a Senate aide.

Mr. Schumer made the offer to Sen. John Cornyn (R., Texas), the No. 2 Senate Republican.
 
 
Currency Manipulation Has Emerged as the Big Sticking Point on Trade 
By William Mauldin 
13 May 2015
Dow Jones Institutional News
 
The deepest and most difficult divide in the congressional trade fight has little to do with tariffs, workers or U.S. policy. Instead, it's all about exchange rates.

Key lawmakers from both parties are insisting on finding a way to punish other countries--or firms based in those countries--for alleged currency manipulation carried out in foreign capitals.

Sen. Chuck Schumer (D., N.Y.) and other lawmakers in the House and Senate say they won't let President Barack Obama and Republicans pass trade legislation needed to expedite an agreement spanning the Pacific unless they also move binding rules on currency manipulation.

With tariffs already low, these lawmakers say other countries--especially in Asia--can gain an unfair trade advantage by cheapening their currencies, wiping away any gains from trade agreements.

The Obama administration has sought to deflect such binding rules, saying they risk souring trade talks or putting U.S. monetary policy under scrutiny. So has the Federal Reserve.

After a dramatic debate in the Senate Finance Committee last month, lawmakers defeated an amendment offered by Sen. Rob Portman (D., Ohio) and backed by Ford Motor Co. would have pressed the administration to negotiate currency rules in the Trans-Pacific Partnership, the negotiations Mr. Obama is seeking to include with 11 other countries around the Pacific.

But Mr. Schumer's amendment survived a vote and was attached to a customs bill introduced alongside "fast track" trade legislation. The currency measure would allow U.S. industry to demand the U.S. government impose punitive duties on rivals determined to have benefited from currency manipulation.

On Tuesday, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell moved to open debate on fast track and another bill, but not the customs legislation with the currency amendment.

The handful of Democrats who back Mr. Obama's trade policy cried foul, and blocked Mr. McConnell's motion, largely on the grounds that it didn't contain key trade enforcement provisions in the customs bill. Some also wanted the currency language.

Mr. Schumer, who opposes fast track and the TPP deal, said if the currency measure he backs makes it to the floor it will be hard to remove, since it enjoys bipartisan support.

The currency measure isn't included in the trade bills in the House, and some observers said it could be stripped from the trade package at some point. Still, congressional leaders are under pressure to allow a currency vote at some point.

The Obama administration backs another currency amendment, introduced by Sen. Michael Bennet (D., Colo.) that steers U.S. policy on currency manipulation a broad but doesn't mandate binding trade rules. U.S. officials are also considering transparency rules in the TPP that could deter currency shenanigans.

But critics of Mr. Obama's policy say much of the hubbub on trade this week comes from the failure of the administration and key leaders in Congress to lay out a clear path on currency, despite evidence lawmakers aren't going to back down. 
 
 
COMMENT
The embattled future of global trade policy 
By Martin Wolf on Economics 
13 May 2015
Financial Times
 
Trade deals must not become an alternative to the WTO
 
Should proposed US plurilateral trade agreements be welcomed? This is a big question, not least for those who consider the liberalisation of world trade to be a signal achievement. It is also highly controversial.

Since the failure of the "Doha round" of multilateral negotiations - launched shortly after the terrorist attacks of September 11 2001 - the focus of global trade policy has shifted towards plurilateral agreements restricted to a limited subgroup of partners. The most significant are US-led: the Trans-Pacific Partnership and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership. As a study by the US Council of Economic Advisers puts it, the Obama administration's trade agenda aims to put America "at the center of an integrated trade zone covering nearly two-thirds of the global economy and almost 65 per cent of US goods trade".

The TPP is a negotiation with 11 countries, most importantly Japan. Its partners account for 36 per cent of world output, 11 per cent of population and about one-third of merchandise trade. The TTIP is between the US and the EU, which account for 46 per cent of global output and 28 per cent of merchandise trade. The main partner not included in these negotiations is, of course, China.

Some of the countries participating in the TPP still have quite high barriers to imports of goods. The CEA notes the relatively high tariffs in Malaysia and Vietnam and agricultural protection in Japan. It also argues that the TPP partners and EU have higher barriers to imports of services than the US.

Yet lowering barriers is only a part of the US aim. The CEA report adds that, in the TPP, Washington is proposing "enforceable labor protections and greener policies". But it is also seeking "strong enforcement of intellectual property rights". In the TTIP, "both sides seek agreement on crosscutting disciplines on regulatory coherence and transparency" - in other words making rules more compatible with one another and more transparent for business. Thus, both the TPP and TTIP are efforts to shape the rules of international commerce. Pascal Lamy, former director-general of the World Trade Organisation , argues that "TPP is mostly, though not only, about classical protection- related market access issues . . . TTIP is mostly, though not only, about . . . . regulatory convergence".

Whether these negotiations succeed will depend on whether the administration obtains trade promotion authority from Congress. But should we want them to succeed?

The straightforward points in favour are: plurilateral agreements are now the best way to liberalise global trade, given the failure of multilateral negotiations; their new rules and procedures offer the best template for the future; and they will bring significant gains.

These arguments have force. Yet there are also counter-arguments.

With limited political capital, the focus on plurilateral trade arrangements risks diversion of effort from the WTO. That might undermine the potency of global rules. Jagdish Bhagwati of Columbia University stresses such risks. Furthermore, preferential trading arrangements risk distorting complex global production chains.

Another concern is that the US is using its clout to impose regulations that are not in the interests of its partners. I would be less concerned about labour and environmental standards, though both might be inappropriate, than about protection of intellectual property. It is not true that tighter standards are in the interest of all. On the contrary, if US standards were to be imposed, the costs might be very high.

Finally, the economic gains are unlikely to be large. Trade has been substantially liberalised already and any gains decline as barriers fall. A study of the TPP by the Peterson Institute for International Economics in Washington suggests the rise in US real incomes would be below 0.4 per cent of national income. A study of the TTIP published by the Centre for Economic Policy Research in London comes to slightly higher figures for the EU and US. Completion of the TPP and TTIP might raise US real incomes by 1 per cent of GDP. This is not nothing, but it is not large.

The US-EU agreement does not raise concerns about the US ability to bully its partners. In trade, the two sides are equally matched. There are three further concerns with the TTIP, however.

First, Jeronim Capaldo of Tufts University has argued that estimates of the gains ignore macroeconomic costs. His Keynesian approach argues that the EU will lose demand because of a fall in its trade surplus. This is ridiculous . Macroeconomic problems should be addressed with macroeconomic policies. Trade policy has different goals.

Second, some of the barriers they are attempting to remove reflect different attitudes to risk. The negotiators will have to devise a text that allows co-ordination of regulatory procedures - over drug testing, say, without imposing identical preferences. If Europeans do not want genetically modified organisms, they must be allowed to preserve that preference. If trade policy treads on such sacred ground, it will die.

Finally, we have the vexed issue of investor-state dispute settlement . Many complain that political choices - publicly-funded health systems or the right to control drug prices - might be put at risk by systems biased in favour of business. Negotiators fervently deny this. They had better be right.

On balance, the benefits of the TPP and TTIP will probably be positive, but modest. But there are risks. They must not become an alternative to the WTO or an attempt to push China to the margins of trade policy making. They must not be used to impose damaging regulations or subvert legitimate ones. Tread carefully. Overreaching could prove counterproductive even to the cause of global trade liberalisation.
 
 
India concerned over pace of deciding agenda for next WTO meet 
 
New Delhi, May 12 (PTI) India today expressed concern over slow progress in finalising the agenda for the Nairobi ministerial meeting of WTO members in December to resolve pending issues of Doha round.

At the meeting, India wants to bring back issues related to the long-stalled Doha round including agriculture (export subsidies, cotton and fishery subsidies), intellectual property rights, market access and services.

"What is happening essentially (in the WTO) is a debate going on for setting an agenda for the ministerial meeting. The date which is...July for setting up an agenda seems to be approaching fast but we seem to be going nowhere. This is a clear indication that in the multi-lateral fora, we will continue to show being busy without producing much," Commerce Secretary Rajeev Kher today said at a Ficci event.

The next Ministerial Conference, which is the highest decision making body of the World Trade Organization, is scheduled from December 15-18 in Nairobi, Kenya.

The Doha Round of negotiations launched in 2001 have remained stalled since July 2008 due to differences between the rich and the developing nations mainly over the subsidies given to farmers.

Besides this, the members have to discuss issues which were not deliberated upon in the Bali meeting in 2013 and that include matters related with least developed countries.

WTO members are unable to finalise the agenda because of differences on the priority order of the issues at the Nairobi Ministerial meeting.

"We are at a point where WTO's mechanism has not kept pace with the need of the hour...we are also at a point where the world is going through a transformational phase and therefore it is natural that in this phase it will be very difficult for the WTO to come out with results," he said.

However, Kher added that despite the slow pace of negotiations, WTO have not lost its relevance. And it is an institution of hope for large number of countries and that cannot be undermined.

"It is important for India that it maintains its position in the WTO," he said.

Speaking on the free trade agreements, the Commerce secretary said that Indian industry still have reservations over these pacts.

"India has conventional set of FTAs and therefore the new breed of FTAs have to be much more aggressive and much more strategically and technically evolved," he said.

Chief Economic Advisor Arvind Subramanian said increasing exports would also lead to rise in imports and the country should be prepared for that.

"Trade reform is going to involve political costs domestically. It's great you are going to export, but you are also going to import a lot. There are going to be dislocation cost, political cost, economic costs. Maybe they will be transitory, hopefully, may be they will be overwhelmed by the benefits of this," Subramanian added. 
 
 
USTR Official Upbeat About Likelihood of Implementing Trade Facilitation Pact
By Rossella Brevetti
WTO Reporter, May 13, 2015
 
May 12 — Many countries have begun their ratification processes for the World Trade Organization's Trade Facilitation Agreement, according to Assistant U.S. Trade Representative Bruce Hirsh.
 
Hirsh, assistant USTR for Japan, Korea and the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation forum, spoke May 12 at the 2015 Global Supply Chain Summit held at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. His comment was in response to a question on whether there was cause for concern that so far only a limited number of countries have ratified the agreement.
 
The U.S., Singapore, Hong Kong and Mauritius have ratified the agreement and sent the WTO notices of ratification. A number of WTO members have said they are in the process of doing so, according to statements to the WTO.
 
The TFA aims to reduce red tape and streamline customs procedures and is expected to reduce supply chain costs for participating countries. Two thirds of the WTO membership—or about 107 countries—must ratify the agreement before it enters into force. The U.S. is pushing for that level of support by the WTO ministerial meeting in Nairobi scheduled for Dec. 15-18, 2015. “We think we'll hit that target,” Hirsh said.
 
APEC Working on Reducing Supply Chain Costs
 
The Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum has been at the forefront of reducing supply chain costs, Hirsh said, pointing to work between the U.S. and certain APEC countries on pre-arrival processing, expedited shipments, early release of goods, electronic payments and advance rulings. The APEC Alliance for Supply Chain Connectivity (A2C2) brings officials, stakeholders, experts from APEC economies, companies, industry associations, multilateral institutions and non-governmental organizations together to share expertise.
 
The U.S. is seeking to establish global best customs practices in the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership with the EU in areas such as advance rulings, Hirsh said. In the Trans-Pacific Partnership, the U.S. is pursuing commitments that are similar to but go beyond the TFA in areas such as advance rulings and penalties, he said.
 
The U.S. is negotiating the TPP with 11 other Pacific Rim countries, including Japan, Canada and Mexico.
 
 
UNECE, IATA strengthen cooperation for trade facilitation implementation 
 
GENEVA, May 12 (Xinhua) -- The United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE) and the International Air Transport Association (IATA) signed on Tuesday a memorandum of understanding to strengthen their support to developing countries seeking to implement WTO's Trade Facilitation Agreement.

According to a press release published by UNECE, the agreement promises enormous potential for countries to reduce transport costs by up to 10 percent through more efficient facilitation, making them more competitive in the global economy.

Specifically for air cargo, countries implementing the agreement will need to build capacity to facilitate automated and smart border solutions and secure supply chain processes.

"The Air Cargo industry ships around 35 percent of global trade by value. For up to 90 percent of the 'transport' time the goods may actually be on the ground waiting to be processed," noted Tony Tyler, IATA's Director General and CEO, affirming the WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement presents a great opportunity to reduce these delays and costs, particularly in developing countries.

"This is a win-win scenario for everyone -- the industry, the economy and the community," said Tyler.

UNECE and IATA also promised to help developing countries implement the relevant measures to realize the costs savings.

Christian Friis Bach, UNECE executive secretary, said: "This MoU with IATA will strengthen the implementation of our standards in developing and least developed countries, and as a consequence, help create growth and new jobs." Enditem
 
 
Official urges Japan to check food labeling before involving WTO 
 (By Tang Pei-chun and Lilian Wu) 
12 May 2015
Central News Agency English News
 
Taipei, May 12 (CNA) Japan should check false labeling problems that have given rise to Taiwan's decision to impose tighter regulations on imported Japanese food before taking the case to the World Trade Organization (WTO), the head of an agency dealing with Japan said Tuesday.

Lee Chia-chin, chairman of the Association of East Asian Relations, was responding to remarks made at a news conference earlier in the day by Yoshimasa Hayahsi, Japan's minister of agriculture, forestry and fisheries, that Japan does not rule out the possibility of taking the case to the WTO.

Lee said the government came up with the stricter measures after it was discovered in March that food items from five nuclear-affected prefectures had made their way illegally into Taiwan and that their labels had been tampered with.

After the meltdown of the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant in the wake of Japan's devastating earthquake of March 11, 2011, Taiwan banned foods from the five prefectures -- Fukushima, Ibaraki, Tochigi, Gunma and Chiba.

"Taiwan cannot accept this (the false labeling) and thinks Japan should get to the bottom of the matter," Lee said.

But as Japan has not accepted the suggestions for investigations, Taiwan's Legislature has demanded that Japanese food imports should have official certification.

President Ma Ying-jeou, while receiving a delegation of Japanese lawmakers, also stressed that the matter should be probed and that control measures should be reviewed to prevent any recurrence of the incident.

Only by doing so will Japan have the legitimacy to ask Taiwan to lift the stricter regulations.

Under the new regulations that will take effect May 15, importers of Japanese food products will be required to present certificates of origin to prove that the imports are not from any of the five prefectures. For some imports such as tea, baby food, and dairy and aquatic products, radiation inspection certificates will also be required.

Lee noted that Taiwan is a major consumer of Japanese agricultural products and said it can certainly ask Japan to heed its food safety concerns.

"After Japan has fully investigated the false labeling, it will certainly lessen the pressure to impose stricter regulations," Lee said.

He said he would advise Japan not to threaten to take the case to the WTO.

With such friendly bilateral relations between the two sides, "we can talk about everything, but taking the case to the WTO could sour bilateral ties," he said. 
 
 
International Negotiators Can't Agree on Plan to Control Toxic Stream of Electronic Waste
By Bryce Baschuk 
WTO Reporter, May 13, 2015
 
May 12 — International chemicals negotiators May 12 said they need more time to complete comprehensive guidelines to control the growing stream of toxic electronic waste being shipped around the world.
 
Parties to the Basel Convention—which governs the international trade of toxic wastes—were unable to compromise on several divisive issues regarding the treatment of electronic waste during the conference of parties in Geneva.
 
Specifically, members could not define trade rules for the treatment of cathode ray tubes in obsolete TV and computer monitors, electronic parts for product repairs, and secondhand electronic products with limited life spans.
 
Though parties will seek to adopt a guidance document later this week, debate over the unresolved issues in its annex will continue at next year's meeting of the Basel Convention open-ended working group.
 
“This is kind of unusual,” said Jim Puckett, an activist with Basel Action Network (BAN), a Seattle-based nongovernmental organization. “I have never seen them take a guideline and adopt it with big holes in it. It's unprecedented that they have done this.”
 
UN Warns of E-Waste ‘Tsunami.’
 
During the past three years, chemical negotiators have sought to provide legal clarity on how to deal with the hazardous and costly effects of discarded mobile devices and computer equipment that contain toxic materials like mercury, cadmium, asbestos and lead.
 
Global electronics companies annually generate up to 41 million tons of e-waste—a figure that is expected to grow to 50 million by 2017, the United Nations Environment Program said in a report released May 12.
 
“We are facing the onset of an unprecedented tsunami of electronic waste rolling out over the world,” said Achim Steiner, UNEP's executive director. “Not only does it account for a large portion of the world's non-recyclable waste, but it also poses a threat to human health and the environment due to the hazardous elements it contains.”
 
The issue is considered particularly important to countries in Africa, Asia and Latin America which are struggling to manage the growing stream of hazardous e-waste that arrives at their ports each year.
 
Spare Electronic Parts
 
Basel Convention parties could not agree to terms, advocated by the European Union and the U.S., that would permit technology companies to ship used electronic equipment for recycle and repair.
 
“We believe that to be effective in reducing waste, the guidelines must simultaneously encourage the reuse of used electronic equipment and not discourage trade for refurbishment and repair (i.e., shipments of non-waste electronics),” a State Department spokesman told Bloomberg BNA in an e-mail.
 
The U.S. is not a party to the Basel Convention.
 
Without such an exemption for non-waste electronics, regulatory costs and shipping requirements would increase prices for many consumer products, according to Klaus Hieronymi, a resource efficiency strategist at Hewlett-Packard Co. “All repairs will become much more expensive and that will have a direct impact on the product price, because warranty costs will rise,” he told Bloomberg BNA.
 
Negotiators sparred over a set of customs rules—like contract requirements, due diligence, audits and packaging requirements—to ensure that bad actors would not abuse such a provision.
 
“We've tried to help nations by having strict controls that would eliminate the low-road operators and really make it hard for them with all this different packaging criteria that would keep them out of the game,” Puckett told Bloomberg BNA.
 
Cathode Ray Tubes
 
Basel parties disagreed as to how obsolete televisions and computer monitors should be defined and managed under the e-waste guidelines.
 
High consumer demand for flat-screen panels has increased the risk of improper disposal of cathode ray tube TVs and computer monitors that contain harmful substances like lead and phosphorous pentachloride.
 
Debate on the issue stalled when representatives from the medical industry sought an exemption to permit the transport of expensive medical devices for repair and refurbishment abroad.
 
Limited Life Spans
 
Basel parties also failed to agree on terms to distinguish whether the limited life spans of certain secondhand products qualify them as e-waste.
 
“Countries don't want to get a whole bunch of stuff that dies tomorrow,” Puckett said. “It's technically not a waste because it is still functioning, but it is so lame and obsolete or there is no market for it.”
 
The issue is particularly challenging due to the difficulty of identifying exactly what the life span of each individual product is, he said.
 
“I think they can resolve it by saying, ‘You can have a two- or three-year warranty if you are going to sell this stuff,'” Puckett told Bloomberg BNA. “That will prevent people from selling real crap.”
 
 
Canadian Tribunal Confirms National Security Exception on Procurement Review
By Peter Menyasz
WTO Reporter, May 13, 2015
 
May 12 — The Canadian government can apply a national security exception to exempt from review a procurement under free trade commitments at any time during the procurement process, the Canadian International Trade Tribunal has ruled (Marcomm Sys. Grp. Inc. v. Dep't of Public Works & Gov't Servs., CITT, No. PR-2014-060, 4/22/15).
 
Marcomm Systems Group Inc. based in Ontario had asserted that a national security exception was improperly applied to its bid to supply and install upgraded closed-circuit television systems at two border crossings with the U.S. because the exception had not been indicated in the bid solicitation documents. There was no basis for that assertion, the tribunal said in an April 24 ruling that was made public May 11.
 
Canada's trade agreements, including the North American Free Trade Agreement, World Trade Organization Agreement on Government Procurement and various bilateral agreements, do not prescribe the manner in which the exception must be invoked, and that has been upheld in previous rulings, the CITT said.
 
“While publication of the national security exception in a timely manner is desirable both in the interest of efficiency of the competitive procurement process and for the bid challenge mechanism provided for in the CITT Act, such procedures are not required,” the tribunal said. “Marcomm's argument that such a practice would be consistent with Public Works and Government Services Canada's internal policy speaks to the helpfulness of this practice, but not to obligations under the trade agreements.”
 
The CITT decided on March 4 to review Marcomm's complaint, which alleged that the successful bid for installation of CCTV systems at the Rainbow Bridge crossing in Niagara Falls, Ontario, and in the Windsor-Detroit Tunnel was improperly evaluated, the ruling said. However, Public Works and Government Services on March 23 filed a motion to dismiss the complaint on the basis that it was the subject of a national security exception, it said.
 
Marcomm subsequently argued that the department's handling of the solicitation process did not demonstrate a national security element and it was therefore inconsistent for the department to claim an exception for the solicitation as a whole, it said. The department countered by providing letters dated May 1, 2007, and July 12, 2010, confirming that it invoked the exception.
 
“That the national security exception was not communicated to the bidders until after the present complaint was filed, while unfortunate, has no impact on the validity of the national security exception itself,” it said.
 
 
ADB Pushes Private Sector Awareness of WTO Valuation Rules 
Aung Phyo 
14 May 2015
Myanmar Business Today
 
The Asian Development Bank (ADB) sponsored a series of seminars last week for importers, customs brokers, freight forwarders, and their representative bodies in Myanmar to familiarise them with the World Trade Organization’s (WTO) Valuation Agreement.

“The Myanmar Customs Department will soon be applying the WTO Valuation Agreement to all imports. That is very good news for importers, but it’s essential that they understand how to follow the rules, are clear about their rights, and know what to do if they experience difficulties,” said James Lynch, ADB’s Director for Regional Cooperation and Operations Coordination in Southeast Asia.

An amendment to the Sea Customs Act, recently approved by the parliament, requires Myanmar Customs to apply in full the terms of the WTO Valuation Agreement which provides a uniform system for the customs valuation of imported goods consistent with commercial practices.

The basis for valuation under this system is the transaction value of the imported goods – the price actually paid or payable for the goods. Where the customs value cannot be determined using the transaction value method, the Agreement provides for five other methods, to be used in turn.

The seminars informed importers and their clearing agents about their own responsibilities, and urged them to strictly apply the rules relating to the presentation of import declarations, and the necessary supporting documents to expedite customs processing.

The seminars were held in Mandalay and Yangon for Chambers of Commerce and Industry, the International Freight Forwarders Association, and the Customs Brokers Association. The Manila-based lender said future seminars are planned for the private sector next month in Myawaddy, Tachileik, Muse and Myeik.

ADB said it is also providing assistance for the Myanmar Customs Department to enhance customs processing and strengthen private sector partnerships. 
 
 
WTO Center: Local firms will benefit from FTA with Korea Agricultural firms look to higher exports to Korea
By Tu Hoang and Thuy Dung The Saigon Times Daily 
13 May 2015
The Saigon Times Daily
 
HANOI – Vietnamese and South Korean enterprises will benefit much from the Vietnam-South Korea free trade agreement (FTA) when it is ratified and implemented, according to the WTO Center.

The long-awaited FTA was signed in Hanoi last week. Research by the center under the Vietnam Chamber of Commerce and Industry (VCCI) showed when the FTA comes in force, it would be more beneficial for Vietnamese goods than the ASEAN-Korea FTA.

“Many products of Vietnam will be free from tariffs when they are shipped to Korea,” said Nguyen Thi Thu Trang, director of the WTO Center.

Korea will remove 95.4% of tariff lines for goods imports from Vietnam, including farm produce, seafood, fruit, wooden items and manufactured products.

Vietnam is the first FTA partner to gain access to Korea’s sensitive sectors like garlic, ginger, honey and sweet potato whose import tariffs are very high, at 241-420%. Therefore, the FTA will offer a great opportunity for Vietnam’s goods to compete with those from China, Indonesia, Malaysia and Thailand.

Vietnamese enterprises will be able to import goods at lower prices, especially materials used for Vietnam’s major sectors like textile, garment, footwear and electronics to reduce dependence on imports from other countries.

According to the center, Vietnam will remove 89.2% of tariffs lines for imports from Korea, mainly materials for textile, garment, electronic components and auto parts, to meet demand of domestic manufacturers.

Korea ranked third among the top ten trade partners of Vietnam, and was the fifth biggest exporter and the second importer of Vietnam last year. Besides, the northeast Asian country is currently the biggest investor in Vietnam.

Vietnam will have to cope with many challenges, according to the WTO Center. Local producers will deal with rising competition with more imports from Korea.

However, Trang said the challenges would not be big as products of both sides would support each other to some extent, and imports of certain products would increase competitiveness of domestic products. Moreover, Vietnam has opened its market to Korean goods under the ASEAN-Korea free trade agreement (AKFTA).

Competition in the service and investment sector for domestic service providers and investors might intensify as Vietnam commits to support Korean services and investments in the FTA.

However, competition would force Vietnamese service enterprises to sharpen their competitiveness as they will have to compete with counterparts from the U.S. and the EU when Vietnam signs trade agreements with these partners, according to Trang.

* Domestic agricultural enterprises are pinning high hopes that their exports to South Korea might jump in the coming time as it lifts more than 90% of tariff lines for imports from Vietnam under the FTA between the two nations.

Nguyen Ton Quyen, general secretary of the Vietnam Timber and Forest Products Association (Vifores), said the tax rates charged on Vietnam’s wooden products exported to South Korea and imported machines to process wood will be cut to 0%, helping enterprises lower costs.

With wood imports from Vietnam, Korea now stands at the fifth place with turnover reaching over US$300 million last year. The FTA signed early this month will create more opportunities for Vietnam’s wood processors.

Quyen said many Korean enterprises have visited Vietnam to explore the wooden goods market and prospects for cooperation.

Quyen’s optimism was shared by Truong Dinh Hoe, general secretary of the Vietnam Association of Seafood Producers and Producers (Vasep), and Nguyen Viet Vinh, general secretary of the Vietnam Coffee and Cocoa Association (Vicofa). According to them, the FTA will pave the way for more of Vietnam’s seafood and processed coffee to enter Korea.

“Vicofa and a group of Vietnamese coffee enterprises have recently attended a coffee expo in Seoul and met a number of Korean coffee importers. The possibility of exporting coffee to the Korean market is high,” Vinh said.
END
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.