HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO Members Reach Impasse in Doha Talks Over Safeguard Terms Ahead of Ministerial
·         HYPERLINK \l "APEC Ministers Aim For TFA Ratification By Nairobi, Urge Others To Act
·         HYPERLINK \l "OMC presenta sitio web del Mecanismo para el Acuerdo sobre Facilitación del Comercio
·         HYPERLINK \l "Why India is not joining trade in services agreement
·         HYPERLINK \l "B. Sagintayev commented on situation regarding delays of WTO accession for Kazakhstan
·         HYPERLINK \l "G7 to include developing nations in tax projects - German official
·         HYPERLINK \l "EU trade chief calls on Japan to accelerate market access talks
·         HYPERLINK \l "Revised WIPO Lisbon Agreement to Cover Geographical Indications
·         HYPERLINK \l "Nigerian Adesina wins race to run African Development Bank
 
WTO Members Reach Impasse in Doha Talks Over Safeguard Terms Ahead of Ministerial
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, May 29, 2015
 
May 28 — Trade negotiators in Geneva confronted yet another roadblock in their most recent effort to conclude the 2001 Doha round of trade negotiations.
 
Amid decreased expectations for terms to liberalize global trade in agriculture and industrial goods, World Trade Organization members are considering whether emerging economies should be permitted special exemptions for unexpected trade surges.
 
The impasse arose at a May 28 “Green Room” meeting hosted by WTO Director-General Roberto Azevedo with more than 30 trade envoys to discuss agricultural terms for inclusion in the July work program.
 
One ambassador in attendance told Bloomberg BNA the development does not bode well for the broader Doha negotiations as global trade ministers prepare for next week's high-level meeting hosted by the Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD).
 
SSM Demands
 
At the May 28 meeting, several developing nations—including China, India, Indonesia and South Africa—insisted that any Doha round terms must include a special safeguard mechanism (SSM) proposal.
 
Specifically, the developing members are seeking terms to permit them to temporarily hike tariffs on farm imports to shield vulnerable sectors from sudden and disruptive import surges, which could result from lowered tariffs in a future Doha round deal.
 
India specifically said it could not imagine an outcome for the round that did not include an SSM mechanism, according to those in attendance. India did not respond to Bloomberg BNA's request for comment.
 
A group of nations that included Argentina, Australia, Chile, Columbia, the European Union, Paraguay, Thailand, the U.S. and Uruguay expressed concern with such a demand considering the lowered ambitions regarding market access terms.
 
In recent weeks, members have acknowledged that any Doha agreement will include significantly decreased tariff reduction terms for industrial and farm goods. It also remains questionable whether members will agree to any new disciplines regarding domestic support.
 
Echoes from 2008
 
Two other ambassadors who attended the May 28 meeting told Bloomberg BNA that the SSM issue remains just as difficult as it was in 2008.
 
Prior differences over the SSM proposal—particularly between the U.S. and India—led to the collapse of a ministerial meeting in July 2009 where WTO members failed to reach a breakthrough in the negotiations on agriculture and industrial tariffs.
 
U.S. officials argued at the time that the SSM could negate market access gains in developing countries arising from the general formula cuts on farm tariffs.
 
It remains unclear if the most recent SSM disagreement will derail the latest negotiations but it will certainly complicate members' efforts to do so, Geneva trade officials said.
 
Balance Needed
 
Brazilian Minister of Agriculture Katia Abreu told Bloomberg BNA that “no country should take the hard line because we need to reach an outcome that will be beneficial to all of us. It is vitally important that we strike a balance between developed and developing countries in these negotiations.”
 
“It is very important for us that the [Doha] round be finalized in December,” Abreu told reporters in a May 28 press conference in Geneva. “We are confident it is not impossible and we think there can be progress in that regard.”
 
“We have been part of this discussion for many years,” said Brazilian Ambassador Marcos Galvao at the press conference. “We hope that we can, despite the differences, reach an agreement on the SSM.”
 
 
APEC Ministers Aim For TFA Ratification By Nairobi, Urge Others To Act
Inside U.S. Trade - 05/29/2015
 
Trade ministers representing the 21 members of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum said after May 23-24 meeting they will each aim to ratify the Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA) by the World Trade Organization's tenth ministerial in Nairobi, Kenya this December and called for all other WTO members to do the same.
 
"We are committed to submit our instruments of acceptance to the WTO as soon as possible, ideally by [Nairobi], in order to express strong APEC support for a successful Ministerial Conference," the APEC ministers said in a May 24 joint statement. "We encourage other WTO Members to do the same, contributing to the expeditious entry into force of the TFA."
 
"Achieving entry into force of the Trade Facilitation Agreement by [Nairobi] would bring significant contribution to the sustainability of global trade, and highlight the value of the WTO to its stakeholders around the world," the statement continued.
 
Three APEC countries have already ratified TFA: the United States, Hong Kong and Singapore. A fourth, Malaysia, has indicated it will soon ratify the agreement, according to WTO Director-General Roberto Azevedo. Mauritius is the only other country to submit its instrument of acceptance for TFA.
 
Two-thirds of the WTO membership, or 108 members, must ratify TFA before it enters into force. Several members, including the U.S., European Union and Kenya have set the December ministerial as a goal for implementing TFA.
 
If each member of APEC and the EU ratified the agreement, TFA would still be 57 members shy of entering into force. The EU counts as 29 members because each individual member state is a member of the WTO, as is the EU as a super-national body.
 
 
OMC presenta sitio web del Mecanismo para el Acuerdo sobre Facilitación del Comercio
LRM - Editor | 28 Mayo del 2015 
Marco Trade News
 
El sitio funciona como un punto de coordinación para los miembros de la Organización Mundial del Comercio (OMC), donantes y otras partes interesadas que buscan información precisa sobre el Mecanismo para el Acuerdo sobre Facilitación del Comercio (TFA, por sus siglas en inglés).
 
Asimismo, el sitio proporciona antecedentes sobre el Acuerdo y el Grupo de Acción -este último creado para ayudar a garantizar que reciban la ayuda necesaria los países miembros en desarrollo y menos adelantados (PMA)-, información sobre los programas que promueven la aplicación del TFA y sobre los puntos de contacto nacionales para la facilitación del comercio.
 
También permite acceder a información sobre la colaboración del Grupo de Acción para la preparación de las categorías de compromisos, la asistencia y el apoyo a la creación de capacidad.

No obstante, la OMC advirtió que el sitio web, que puede ser consultado en inglés, francés y español, es un “trabajo en progreso” y se actualizará continuamente para proporcionar información útil para los miembros de la OMC.

Según precisó la OMC, el Mecanismo se estableció el 22 de julio de 2014 y entró en funcionamiento el 27 de noviembre, cuando los miembros adoptaron el Protocolo de Enmienda.
 
A través de esta nueva herramienta se prevé ayudar a los PMA y a los países en desarrollo a evaluar sus necesidades específicas e identificar posibles asociaciones para fortalecer el desarrollo.
 
Cabe recordar que el TFA contiene disposiciones para agilizar el movimiento, la liberación y despacho de mercancías, incluidas las mercancías en tránsito. Además, establece medidas para la cooperación efectiva entre las aduanas y otras autoridades competentes en materia de facilitación del comercio y las cuestiones de cumplimiento de aduanas.
 
Hasta la fecha, indicó la OMC, cinco miembros que incluyen Hong Kong (China), Singapur, Estados Unidos, Mauricio y Malasia, aseguraron la aceptación interna del TFA, lo que significa que dos tercios de los 161 miembros de la OMC tendrán que ratificar el TFA para que entre en vigor.
 
 
Why India is not joining trade in services agreement 
Asit Ranjan Mishra 
28 May 2015
Mint
 
New Delhi, May 28 -- Even though India has been insisting on negotiating services agreements in all ongoing bilateral trade agreements, including the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership, to tap its rapidly growing young skilled workforce, it has so far desisted from joining a plurilateral trade in services agreement (Tisa) being negotiated among 24 countries.

Launched in April 2013, Tisa aims at opening up markets and improving rules in areas such as licensing, financial services, telecom, e-commerce, maritime transport, and professionals moving abroad temporarily to provide services. Together, the negotiating countries, including the US and the European Union, account for 70% of world trade in services.

Tisa has three contentious clauses-standstill, ratchet and MFN (most favoured nation)-forward-that India thinks are detrimental to the interests of developing countries. 'Standstill' binds the current level of domestic liberalization in services that a country cannot reverse in future. 'Ratchet' implies that future domestic policy changes by a member country will also automatically get committed under Tisa, while 'MFN-forward' means any future concession given to a trading partner under a bilateral treaty will automatically get extended to other members of Tisa.

"These three clauses for a developing country like India are difficult to commit because our policies are still evolving. We cannot bind ourselves in a situation where the domestic policy space is completely taken off," said a government official, on the condition of anonymity.

Joining Tisa would mean that if the National Democratic Alliance (NDA) government wishes to withdraw the 51% foreign direct investment (FDI) in multi-brand retail, which was allowed by the earlier United Progressive Alliance (UPA) government, it cannot do so, despite its well-known stand of not allowing foreign investment in this sector.

But it appears India does not want to miss the bus on growing opportunity in trade in services either. It has recently made a unilateral preferential market access offer for services suppliers from the poorest countries at the WTO (World Trade Organization) to mount pressure to push for a multilateral agreement on services.

The Indian offer includes market access for short-term contractual services suppliers and independent professions (what is called Mode 4 supply of services in trade jargon) in sectors such as engineering services, integrated engineering services, computer and related services and management consulting services.

The offer also includes access to project management services other than for construction, hotel and other lodging services, travel agency and tour operator services and a quota of 250 tourist guides in non-English foreign languages. New Delhi has announced that it will waive the visa fee for applicants from these countries applying for Indian business or employment visas. High visa fee in industrialized countries is one of the biggest barriers for services suppliers from poor nations.

As part of the Bali ministerial declaration, trade ministers had directed industrialized countries and developing countries to indicate what they are willing to offer to LDCs (least developed countries) on services trade. Offers from countries like India is likely to be taken up for discussion at the Nairobi ministerial of WTO members later this year.

Services contributed 53% to India's economy in 2013-14, according to the latest estimates. India's annual export of services is pegged at $160.4 billion in 2014-15, while the export of merchandise stands at $310.5 billion during the same year.

To boost its services exports, which is currently dominated by information technology (IT) and IT-enabled services (ITeS), India has been organizing services conclaves for the last few years. India is also trying to make executive and legislative changes to domestic services regulations in the fields of law, education, healthcare and logistics to improve competitiveness and boost exports.

 
B. Sagintayev commented on situation regarding delays of WTO accession for Kazakhstan
28 May 2015
 
ASTANA. KAZINFORM - First Deputy Prime Minister of Kazakhstan Bakytzhan Sagintayev commented on the situation regarding delays in the process of the WTO accession for Kazakhstan with Mongolia playing a role.

"The issue is not about rejection. There are just some issues that they would like to discuss. We have discussed all the issues with our Mongolian colleagues and reached mutual understanding. There were some disputes between legal business entities," he answered journalists' questions after the sitting of the Eurasian Economic Commission in Astana.

"So far, we have a plan to join the WTO by the end of 2015," he added.

Click to view image [http://www.inform.kz/fotoarticles/20150528150612.jpg]

 
G7 to include developing nations in tax projects - German official 
 
DRESDEN, Germany, May 28 (Reuters) - The finance chiefs from the Group of Seven countries agreed on Thursday they wanted to involve developing countries in all their tax projects, such as an initiative to clamp down on corporate tax evasion, a German G7 delegation official said.

Helping poor countries to build up their tax administration would increase their own tax revenues and so improve their economic prospects, the official said.

"That's why there is a clear intention to involve the developing countries in all current tax projects as far ... as this is possible," the official told reporters.

The official said the G7 wanted to stick to a planned end-2015 deadline for implementing an anti-tax avoidance action plan -- known as the anti-BEPS (Base Erosion, Profit Shifting) directive -- to tackle the way corporations shift profits from one country to another in order to reduce tax.

More than 80 developing nations and countries which are not part of the Group of 20 leading economies or the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries have been consulted since the BEPS project was started, according to the OECD.

The G7 also aims to establish joint monitoring groups of countries for the taxation of international companies and set up a system to resolve disputes over where a company should pay taxes, the official said, adding: "But that's a long-term task."

Combating tax avoidance and tax evasion is one of the key themes at the G7 meeting in Dresden. (Reporting by Frank Siebelt and Gernot Heller; Writing by Michelle Martin) 
 
 
EU trade chief calls on Japan to accelerate market access talks 
 
TOKYO, May 28 (Reuters) - EU Trade Commissioner Cecilia Malmstrom on Thursday called on Japan to accelerate negotiations on tariffs and market access to create potentially one of the world's biggest free trade deals.

Officials from the two sides had held productive talks and Japan had made some progress in agreeing to regulations that would lift non-tariff barriers, but removing barriers for services and procurement remained unresolved, she said.

"We need to enter a more intensive phase of negotiations," Malmstrom told reporters in Tokyo. "There is a lot of work to be done to unlock potential trade with Japan."

Malmstrom made the comments ahead of a EU-Japan summit to be held on Friday in Tokyo.

Japan has been locked in negotiations with the United States for the Trans Pacific Partnership (TPP), a U.S. free trade proposal that would link 12 economies.

An agreement to form TPP should give Japanese negotiators the momentum to negotiate a deal with the European Union, Malmstrom said.

Japan is Europe's seventh most important trading partner, accounting for 3 percent of EU trade outside the bloc last year, EU data show.

A free trade agreement could help Europe gain some economic momentum as it struggles to put an end to a sovereign debt crisis that grips Greece and some other southern countries.

Creating a free trade pact with the EU could also benefit Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe as he has said free trade can be used to encourage more competition and structural reforms in Japan. (Reporting by Stanley White; Editing by Nick Macfie) 
 
 
Revised WIPO Lisbon Agreement to Cover Geographical Indications
Bridges
28 May 2015
 
Parties to the Lisbon Agreement protecting “appellations of origin” (AOs) have agreed to broaden the deal’s scope to cover geographical indications (GIs), beyond the narrower AOs category to which it was confined since its inception. 
 
The decision was made during a diplomatic conference held from 11-21 May at the World Intellectual Property Organization’s (WIPO) Geneva headquarters. The UN agency is responsible for administering the agreement, even though only some of WIPO’s members are parties to Lisbon.

A geographical indication is used to denominate products with a specific geographical origin and which possess qualities, reputation, or characteristics that are essentially attributable to that same place.

While similar, an appellation of origin has stricter criteria for usage. Products that currently fall under the scope of Lisbon include, for instance, Scotch whisky or Darjeeling tea, according to WIPO.

The Geneva Act of the Lisbon Agreement on Appellations of Origin and Geographical Indications was adopted on 20 May, with a signing ceremony held the day after. The new text was reached following negotiations between the 28 contracting parties of the Lisbon Agreement and two “special” delegations, the EU and the African Intellectual Property Organisation (OAPI, by its acronym in French).

Algeria, a Lisbon party, reportedly called the treaty “a historic step forward” for the UN agency in terms of protecting both AOs and GIs, deeming it a “breakthrough” for developing countries.

Various key non-members of the Lisbon system participated in the diplomatic conference as observers without voting rights.

A group of these non-member countries – Argentina, Australia, Canada, Chile, New Zealand, Panama, South Korea, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, the US, and Uruguay – had resubmitted a proposal prior to the meeting asking for the participation rules to be amended to give all WIPO members voting rights, warning that the lack of full and equal participation was a deviation from existing practice.

The proposal was unsuccessful, with the US cautioning afterward that this “departure from precedent” on participation could have alarming implications for the UN intellectual property agency, warning that it placed the “legitimacy of the Lisbon outcome… in grave doubt.”

Nevertheless, non-members Romania and Mali have signed the Geneva Act. The EU, Russia, and Switzerland have also expressed satisfaction with the outcome.

The revision process was aimed at enhancing the attractiveness of the Lisbon system to new members, revamping its financing structure to ensure greater self-sustainability, and permitting inter-governmental organisations, such as the EU, to accede to the Lisbon system.

Wider scope of protection

The Geneva Act significantly expands the scope of the Lisbon Agreement from just AOs, which are a narrower subset of GIs in which products are exclusively or essentially linked to a geographical environment, to the broader category of GIs.

The latter includes any product identifier indicating an association with the quality, reputation, or other characteristics attributable to a geographical area. The link with the place of origin is stronger in the case of an appellation of origin.

The treaty contemplates an international GI registration system applying across all contracting states. GI owners will benefit from collective enforcement provisions, whereby infringement proceedings may be initiated by any public authority or interested party, as outlined by Article 14 of the Act.

OriGIn, an international non-governmental organisation that represents GI owners, was among those who welcomed the news.

“By providing adequate legal means to fight against GIs misappropriations, the Geneva Act will improve legal certainty and predictability for producers and consumers of origin goods around the world,” said Ramón González Figueroa, President of oriGIn and Director General of the Consejo Regulador del Tequila (CRT).

Globally, GIs are currently governed by the WTO Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS). The US, however, has noted that the changes adopted by the diplomatic conference go “well beyond” WTO rules in this area.

Compatibility with national GI systems  
 
Some observers at the diplomatic conference, such as the US, Australia, and China, reportedly questioned the compatibility of the Geneva Act with their existing national systems for GI protection.

These countries, which protect GIs as a form of trademark and/or as certification marks, apply a different standard of protection, which is limited in time. They also have different rules for invalidation of trademarks.

During the negotiations, the US said that the text appears to prevent trademark systems from joining, reportedly adding that it “feels like a slammed door to us.”

Signatories, however, say that the treaty will make the Lisbon system more effective, while also attracting new accessions. France reportedly commented that the treaty has helped address many traditional divides within the membership, arguing also that observer delegations participated fully in the negotiation process.

No agreement on maintenance fees

Lisbon parties have allowed countries to charge individual fees to applicants for registration, as they see fit. However, maintenance fees on GI registrations, such as fees for renewal, receive no explicit mention in the agreement.

According to France, maintenance fees “don’t fit” with the philosophical notion of a GI that is perpetual in nature. Alternative sources of funding, including special contributions by countries based on their usage of the system, are instead envisaged.

Maintenance fees are also viewed as an avoidable financial burden on applicants, especially small enterprises and developing country applicants.

Disagreements over funding 
 
Currently, Lisbon parties do not contribute to the system’s expenses, which are financed by WIPO’s income from other IP registration systems.

The additional workload WIPO faces in administering the newly set-up GI register has drawn criticism from some of the UN agency’s members. 
 
The US, for example, has characterised this situation as one of “subsidising of GI beneficiaries and the Lisbon parties themselves,” and has promised to “continue to scrutinise these issues closely.”

The Geneva Act of the Lisbon Agreement will enter into force three months after five eligible parties have deposited their instruments of ratification or accession.
 

Nigerian Adesina wins race to run African Development Bank 
By William Wallis and Maggie Fick in London 
28 May 2015
Financial Times (FT.Com)
 
Nigeria's long quest to take charge of the African Development bank was finally rewarded on Thursday when Akinwumi Adesina, agriculture minister in the outgoing government of Goodluck Jonathan, was elected as the bank's new president.

The result provides Africa's leading economy with an additional boost on the eve of the inauguration as Nigerian president of Muhammadu Buhari, a former military ruler who became the first opposition candidate in the country's history to unseat an incumbent at the polls.

Mr Adesina is a technocrat credited with having driven a new commercial approach to agriculture, boosting domestic production of rice and helping to reduce corruption in the allocation of fertiliser subsidies. He takes the reins of the AfDB from Donald Kaberuka, who steps down at the end of August having served the maximum of two five-year terms.

Mr Adesina fought off competition from seven other candidates including the finance ministers of Cape Verde, Chad and Ethiopia. It is the first time a Nigerian has been elected by the board , which includes representatives from African members states as well as foreign donor governments.

Mr Kaberuka, a former finance minister in Rwanda who rose through the bank's highly unpredictable and democratic selection process, has presided over a dramatic expansion in the bank's capital and influence over the past decade. At one point - in the aftermath of the global financial crisis in 2007 - he led the bank to become the top development lender to the continent ahead of the World Bank.

He also took over at a time that many African economies were turning a corner. The terms on which the continent trades were improving as global demand for African resources rose, particularly from China. Consumer spending in Africa was also rising and foreign investment was flooding in. Mr Kaberuka shifted the bank's lending priorities onto infrastructure projects. The challenge for his successor, he told the FT ahead of this week's meetings, would be to ensure the bank's lending supported more inclusive growth.

He described the events in Tunisia in 2010, at the outset of the Arab Spring which he witnessed at first hand, as sounding a warning across the continent about the dangers of income inequality. "I do think that the next leadership of the bank, and other institutions, must put this - economic transformation, inclusion and sustainability - at the centre of what they do," he said.

"Economic growth is only a means, but the end is economic transformation, and along the way, there has to be economic inclusion: it's about expanding market power. It's about expanding market diversity. It's about creating a stakeholder economy," he said, adding that the bank has adopted a ten-year strategy with this thinking at its heart.

The AfDB's annual report, released this week at the bank's 50th anniversary meetings in Abidjan, forecasts GDP growth for the continent at 4.5 per cent in 2015. But Mr Adesina's job will be complicated by the growing debt profile of some client states, and the fall in commodity prices which has affected the big exporters of oil and mineral products.

"I am humbled by this remarkable vote of confidence in me by @AfDB_Group. I will not let Africa down," Mr Adesina tweeted on Thursday evening.
END


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.