HEADLINES:
 
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO Efforts On Doha Work Program Face Obstacles, May Miss July Deadline
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO Chief Urges Members to Focus on Solutions as July Deadline Looms
·         HYPERLINK \l "USAID Official Says Countries Will Need Help Implementing Trade Facilitation Agreement
·         HYPERLINK \l "UE pide a OMC que se pronuncie sobre aranceles rusos, que considera excesivos
·         HYPERLINK \l "OMC: nouveau conflit commercial entre l'UE et la Russie
·         HYPERLINK \l "EU requests WTO dispute panel over Russian import duties
·         HYPERLINK \l "India's Stockholding Policies to Undergo Scrutiny in WTO Agriculture Meeting
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO Delays Ruling in Chinese Complaint Against U.S. Use of Targeted Dumping Rules
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S. Moves Toward Greater Trade With Africa
·         HYPERLINK \l "White House announces rural export initiatives
·         HYPERLINK \l "Cheap is king: Russia, Ukraine add to China steel export flood
·         HYPERLINK \l "U.S. aviation giants split on Gulf carrier subsidy row
·         HYPERLINK \l "WTO rules make it difficult for Cisco and Apple to challenge Chinese government 'black list'
 
 
WTO Efforts On Doha Work Program Face Obstacles, May Miss July Deadline
Inside U.S. Trade - 02/27/2015
 
World Trade Organization members are facing such fundamental differences and are at such a preliminary stage in their efforts to devise a work program to conclude the stalled Doha round that Geneva sources expressed doubts they can meet their July 31 deadline for establishing a detailed blueprint for potential negotiations.
 
Others sources said WTO members will likely be able to develop more general guidelines for a work program by the July deadline.
 
The July 31 deadline was set forth in a decision WTO members approved at a November 2014 General Council meeting at which they resolved a stalemate over implementation of the Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA). The deadline for producing the Doha work program was originally December 2014, but it was pushed back due to the TFA impasse.
 
Among the fundamental differences is whether the 2008 blueprints for agricultural and non-agricultural market access (NAMA), known respectively as Revs. 4 and 3, should be the basis for negotiation or should be changed with respect to certain obligations, such as the formula for negotiating market access and the exceptions from that formula.
 
Another fundamental issue is whether the core negotiations on agriculture, NAMA and services should proceed at the same time, as the EU has demanded, or whether the agriculture area takes priority, as some developing countries have demanded.
 
Coupled with that, the members advocating for changes to the 2008 texts have been floating only ideas, not specific proposals, partially for fear that they could be asked to pay for their demands, a Geneva source said. He speculated that talks could continue for months before members start tabling proposals. Other Geneva sources said countries are holding off for fear of having their proposals shot down.
 
The U.S. and European Union have been frontrunners in talking about the need to have a simpler approach to the market access rules in agriculture, but have not specified what that would entail. "The need for a simpler, more realistic market access approach has been stressed by a large number of members during our conversations up until now," EU Ambassador Angelos Pangratis said at a Feb. 20 General Council meeting.
 
At a January Trade Negotiations Committee (TNC) meeting, Pangratis mentioned average tariff cuts as a potential alternative. Others have mentioned the possibility of considering the approach used in the Uruguay Round negotiations, which was an average cut coupled with a minimum cut to ensure countries were not completely shielding all their sensitive products, one source said.
 
But some Latin American members of the Cairns Group including Paraguay and Chile have said that would undermine the transparency and predictability on market access. If members were to endorse an average tariff cut in the work program with no other stipulation, it would be impossible to tell what tariff level they would get for their products such as beef and wheat, a Geneva source said.
 
Therefore, some countries are seeking the transparency and predictability provided by a formula approach. Under this approach, members would know exactly what the tariff cuts others are offering in contrast to the request-offer approach that is dependent on bilateral negotiations.
 
It is unclear exactly how specific the work program will be in terms of the methodology for negotiating market access. If the work program simply lists a given approach, such as average tariff cuts, the countries seeking transparency and predictability will likely haggle until they can get more specifics, one source said. If they want more before the work program is agreed, it will take longer to develop, he said.
 
On Feb. 3, Argentina floated a non-paper that also advocated a simpler approach to market access negotiations in agriculture, NAMA and services that consists of the request-offer method, which already applies to services.
 
Argentina suggested that negotiating using the request-offer approach could be a potential solution to the negotiating "log-jam" experienced by the WTO on agriculture and NAMA since 2008.
 
According to the non-paper, the request-offer method could cover cuts and elimination of tariffs, binding of unbound products and the creation of a tariff-rate quota or the volume expansion of an existing one. So far, no WTO member has rejected the idea outright.
 
At the Feb. 20 General Council, U.S. Ambassador to the WTO Michael Punke did not rule out that approach but he warned that it would be considerably more complex and time-consuming, a point also made by Japan. Punke said with the acceptable parameters, which he did not specify, it could be "well worth further exploration."
 
On market access, the 2008 agriculture modalities contain complicated tariff formulas aimed at cutting higher tariffs more than lower ones, but they are coupled with exceptions for special and sensitive products that developing and developed countries could exempt from tariff cuts, as well as special safeguards that developing countries could invoke against imports.
 
These flexibilities were fought for by the African, Caribbean and Pacific Group, the African Group, and the Least Developed Countries group, and these groups have thus far insisted on maintaining the agriculture and NAMA modalities because of those provisions, Geneva sources said.
 
In NAMA, the 2008 modalities envision a Swiss formula, which applies different coefficients to developing and developed countries but aims to cut higher tariffs more than lower tariffs.
 
At the General Council, Punke strongly criticized the 2008 agriculture text for its imbalance on domestic subsidies obligations.
 
The U.S. would be the only country that would have to cut its domestic agriculture subsidies under that text while emerging economies that have increased their domestic subsidies significantly since 2008 would not have to undertake any cuts, he said in an apparent reference to India, Brazil and China. That finding came from a Jan. 28 analysis prepared by the Cairns Group on how the 2008 agriculture modalities would affect members' subsidies programs.
 
"Meanwhile, those Members have stated clearly their expectation that this mind-boggling imbalance, which would clearly fall short of any true effort to reform trade-distorting agricultural subsidies, should be preserved," he said. The U.S. cannot endorse such an outcome, according to Punke.
 
Geneva sources said that Canada and Australia were among the countries that called for the U.S. to reform its agriculture programs when the Cairns Group analysis was discussed at an informal special session of the agriculture committee held on Jan. 28. But they also acknowledged that there would be a "price to pay" by other trading partners to the U.S. in terms of concessions if the U.S. accepted the 2008 text.
 
Punke made clear that an agriculture text acceptable to the United States needs to include concessions from developing-country members that currently maintain significant domestic subsidies and have the production capacity to influence global trade. He made clear that this amounted to a differentiation among developing country members, but failure to reflect those difference will make it impossible to advance negotiations.
 
In the informal meeting of the agriculture negotiating committee, India and China endorsed Rev. 4 and made clear they are unwilling to take on more obligations to cut their domestic subsidies.
 
Punke summed up the efforts on the Doha work program by saying that members are "nowhere near consensus" on it. "We are quite distant from a common view of what a work program should look like, or how it could realistically enable us to conclude the Round in a manner that works for everyone," he said.
 
In the same meeting, WTO Director-General Roberto Azevedo also told the General Council that the views of members have not changed significantly since negotiations on establishing modalities fell apart in December 2008. But he said members are now substantively engaged. "Progress is slow but we are moving forward," he said.
 
There are two parallel sets of consultations in the WTO in an effort to advance the work program, Azevedo announced at the General Council. One track is conducted by the chairs of the negotiating groups on agriculture, NAMA and services, and it focuses on more technical work, he said.
 
Parallel to that, Azevedo is holding his own consultations at the ambassador level in his role as the TNC chairman. He said the aim of his consultations, held on Jan. 21 and 29, has been a "deeper political discussion" that up to now has focused on agriculture, NAMA and services.
 
Azevedo's consultations include so-called "green room" meetings on agriculture with select members, including the U.S., EU, India, China, Argentina, Brazil and Mexico, one source said. Azevedo said he has shared the outcome of his consultations with the wider membership, including at the TNC and the General Council.
 
The agriculture negotiating group has met informally on Jan. 28, and after the General Council meeting. The focus of its work has been on domestic subsidies and the market access pillar. That is because the export competition segment is unlikely to undergo major changes.
 
Negotiations on NAMA and services are at a more preliminary stage as the NAMA chairman has only met with about 40 members bilaterally, with the main focus on tariffs. An open-ended meeting of the negotiating group has been scheduled for March 2, Azevedo said.
 
Progress in those two areas has been stymied by some members' insistence that the level of ambition on agriculture must be established before work can begin in earnest there. -- Brett Fortnam
 
 
WTO Chief Urges Members to Focus on Solutions as July Deadline Looms
ICTSD Bridges
26 February 2015
 
WTO members need to shift into “solution-finding mode” if they aim to develop a work programme that would lead to a quick conclusion of the Doha Round trade talks, Director-General Roberto Azevêdo said on Friday at a meeting of the organisation’s General Council.

The global trade body’s members have only five months left – until July – to sign off on this work programme, after a previous end-2014 deadline was extended last November.

“In the past few weeks, members have started to engage more substantively – particularly in the three core areas,” Azevêdo reported on Friday. “Progress is slow, but we are moving forward.”

The WTO chief characterised the tone of the past month’s talks to date as positive, even if no major changes have been seen in members’ known positions across the Doha areas. “And from my conversations with ministers I am confident that there is now real political will behind our work. That is truly invaluable.”

Since the start of the new year, Azevêdo has been holding his own consultations with members on the planned work programme, as well as two broader “Room W” meetings that brought together the full membership.

The latter meetings involve ambassadors plus one official for each member, and are geared toward allowing members to interact directly across all Doha issues, rather than repeat past positions. Negotiating group chairs have also been holding their own meetings, which have continued this week.

In some negotiating areas, for example, information or stocktaking sessions have been held to familiarise members with the past discussions. While useful, the WTO chief has said that members now need to move to the next stage if they hope to make real progress.

“If we are to do this then members need to be ready, willing, and able to discuss the shape of the deals that they believe to be achievable,” Azevêdo said.

Members divided on approach to 2008 draft texts

The three core issues of a potential Doha Round work programme are broadly agreed to be agriculture, non-agricultural market access (NAMA), and services.

In that context, members have been debating on whether to use the 2008 draft texts for both agriculture and NAMA – known as Rev. 4 and Rev. 3, respectively – as the starting point for the work programme discussions, and if so to what extent.

“When we connect the dots, what is revealed, undeniably, is that we are nowhere near consensus,” US Ambassador Michael Punke said on Friday.

“To illustrate what I mean by a lack of consensus, I would cite the fact that we now have clear indications from a number of members, both developed and developing, that Rev. 3 in NAMA is not a viable basis for concluding our negotiations, while others remain attached to that text,” he added.

Regarding Rev. 4 in agriculture, the US official cited the “very stark presentation of facts” that Washington would be the only member that would need to cut its current domestic support programmes, should the 2008 draft text on agriculture be applied. (See Bridges Weekly, 5 February 2015)

“Meanwhile, those members have stated clearly their expectation that this mind-boggling imbalance, which would clearly fall short of any true effort to reform trade-distorting agricultural subsidies, should be preserved,” Punke said, adding that the US will not be able to endorse such a result.

In recent weeks, a series of new formal and informal proposals have been tabled by members in the agriculture talks, on issues such as export subsidies and tropical products. Issues of market access have also been raised, with the US strongly pushing for increased access in large developing economies, as well as domestic support concessions from China and India. (See Bridges Weekly, 19 February 2015)

Washington has been specifically advocating for “differentiation” regarding market access – an approach that has been criticised by some major developing country members such as India – with Punke stressing on Friday that this suggestion would not entail “graduation” or a new category of members under the WTO.

Rather, the US official said, those developing countries with large agricultural domestic support programmes and influence on global markets “will necessarily have to participate in negotiations, and contribute to outcomes,” at a level that other developing countries that do not meet this criteria would not.

“Such developing countries are different from other developing countries, and we cannot succeed if we pretend otherwise. But let me also be clear: the United  States is not seeking new market access outcomes in Doha from those WTO members who would not have applied the formula under the existing NAMA framework,” he said.

India, for its part, reportedly said on Friday that the trading system was highly inequitable and trade often did not lead to development.

NAMA, services

The outcome of the talks on agriculture are widely expected to set the level of ambition for the other two core areas of the negotiations, though some members reiterated on Friday the importance of balance across the three topics.

“All of the core issues need to be taken forward in parallel and will have to achieve commensurate levels of ambition,” EU Ambassador Angelos Pangratis said at Friday’s meeting. “Still, the EU accepts that agriculture may determine what will and won’t be possible in the [Doha Round] overall, keeping in mind, however, that finally a balance will be needed within the agriculture pillar as between all the areas of a possible outcome.”

Regarding NAMA, discussions so far have taken the form of bilateral meetings with that negotiating group’s chair, with the focus mainly being on tariffs. The group will hold an open-ended meeting next Monday to discuss the results of these consultations.

One of the main questions that has come up so far is whether to continue with the so-called Swiss formula outlined in Rev. 3, or to pursue alternative approaches, as advocated by some members. The Swiss formula in the 2008 draft text involves using separate coefficients for developed and developing country members in calculating tariff cuts for industrial products, with higher coefficients meaning lower tariff reductions.

Formula-applying members would only be around 40 of the WTO’s 160, with others having special provisions. However, those members that would use the Swiss formula under Rev. 3 make up approximately 90 percent of global trade.

Under this formula, developed countries would be subject to the same coefficient of 8, while developing countries will have a few options (20,22, 25) depending on the level of flexibilities they would like to use, with a lower coefficient involving high flexibility, and vice versa.

Some members in favour of moving away from the current version of the Swiss formula appear to be interested in either more flexibilities or coefficients, sources say. One potential factor in the talks would be how the EU pursues its suggestion of “simplification” in NAMA, one official suggested, as well as what other members who have advocated for “alternative approaches” might suggest.

On services, an open-ended meeting was held on Tuesday, following up on bilateral consultations that the negotiating group chair has held in recent weeks with over 40 members.

The chair, Colombian Ambassador Gabriel Duque, urged members on Tuesday to consider “what” their aspirations would be for a Doha services outcome at this stage, rather than discussing “how” to get there.

Talks on the latter would likely depend more on the progress seen in parallel discussions in agriculture and NAMA, sources familiar with the services talks said.

Some members, reportedly led by the African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) country group, requested that an informative meeting be organised as a refresher on the services negotiations to date. Similar exercises have already been held in recent weeks in other negotiating groups, such as the discussions on a geographical indications (GI) register for wine and spirits under the TRIPS Council.

Request-offer suggestion

Argentina recently suggested in an informal non-paper the possibility of using a “request-offer” approach for market access in agriculture and NAMA, which would essentially entail countries requesting trade concessions from negotiating partners, and also identify areas in which they could make reciprocal offers.

The suggestion is not yet a formal proposal, sources say, but has already sparked some discussion among the membership.

Some sources familiar with the discussions have said that, while the suggestion as a stand-alone approach would be unwieldy and probably unlikely to gain much traction, it could possibly work in tandem with other methods. For instance, request-offer could be used by interested members in the NAMA talks on top of using formulas, one suggested.

The subject was raised at last Friday’s General Council meeting, with the US ambassador among those expressing an interest in further discussions, without specifically backing the idea.

“We welcome this contribution to the discussion as a much-needed element of the fresh thinking the United States has long been seeking,” Punke said in his intervention, indicating that the US would like to study the suggestion and discuss it with proponents in further detail.

While advocating caution in pursuing the request-offer approach, given that it “could prove to be significantly more complex and time-consuming than any of us might current envision,” the US official said that the topic could be worth exploring at greater length – provided that the approach was framed by “acceptable parameters” on areas such as duration and scope.

Next steps

While no dates have been confirmed for the next Room W meetings at this stage, the WTO chief said that more will be held in the months to come following his return from various meetings abroad.

For the moment, negotiating chairs are holding additional group meetings to discuss next steps, in an effort to move from the general to the specific.

The next meeting of the General Council is currently scheduled for 5-6 May.
 
 
USAID Official Says Countries Will Need Help Implementing Trade Facilitation Agreement
By Brian Flood
WTO Reporter, February 27, 2015
 
Feb. 26 — Trade assistance officials are beginning to get a picture of the areas of the Trade Facilitation Agreement that developing countries will need the most assistance in implementing, said Virginia Brown, director of the Office of Trade and Regulatory Reform at the U.S. Agency for International Development.
 
Based on the submission to the World Trade Organization of developing countries' “Category A” commitments—those TFA commitments that these countries pledge to immediately implement—Brown said developing WTO members likely will need assistance with TFA obligations to implement a single window for customs documentation, authorized operator schemes, notifications for enhanced controls and inspections, test procedures and the periodic publication of average release times of goods.
 
Speaking at a trade roundtable held by Georgetown Law School Feb. 26, Brown said USAID would pursue a public-private partnership in offering TFA assistance, as private businesses will be well-positioned to identify what roadblocks to the movement of goods across borders need particular attention. To that end, she said, USAID will partner with five other donor countries as well as the private sector to put together a “Trade Facilitation Alliance.”
 
The TFA will only enter into force once it has been domestically ratified by two-thirds of WTO members. The WTO was delayed for almost six months in its plans to open up the TFA for ratification, however, over India's demands relating to the issue of food security (12 WTO, 1/20/15). Richard Eglin of White & Case LLP, and former director of the WTO Secretariat, said the WTO's original deadline of July 2015 to begin implementing the agreement is now “completely implausible.”
 
To date, only the U.S., Singapore and Hong Kong have domestically ratified the agreement, while Chile has prepared legislation to do so (37 WTO, 2/25/15).
 
Ultimately, the degree to which the TFA is implemented by its individual members will determine whether it is remembered as a success for the WTO, Eglin said.
 
Reaching for Capacity
 
However, the WTO itself is not a capacity-building operation and does not have the institutional capacity to provide much support to members' implementation efforts, Eglin said. Rather it must work with the World Bank, multilateral and regional donors and the private sector.
 
To ensure countries are not making empty promises to implement the provisions of the TFA, there should be a mechanism for the private sector to provide continuous feedback about the actual progress member governments have made to reduce border wait times and other barriers to the movement of goods, said Amgad Shehata, a senior vice president of UPS.
 
The most important factor in the success of the implementation effort is the political will within member governments, said Evelyn A. Suarez of The Suarez Firm. The will for such reforms is undercut, however, by the high level of corruption in some countries around the world, she said.
 
 
UE pide a OMC que se pronuncie sobre aranceles rusos, que considera excesivos 
 
Bruselas, 26 feb (EFEAGRO).- La Unión Europea solicitó hoy a la Organización Mundial del Comercio (OMC) que establezca un grupo que decida sobre los derechos de importación que establece Rusia, en particular a los productos papeleros, los refrigeradores y el aceite de palma producidos en la UE, que considera excesivos.

La Comisión Europea (CE) señaló en un comunicado que ha decidido hacer esta petición a la OMC al no llegar a una solución bilateral con Rusia, país con el que mantuvo consultas formales en Ginebra en noviembre pasado.

Rusia, que se adhirió a la OMC en agosto de 2012, "se comprometió a mantener sus derechos de importación por debajo de los límites señalados en los documentos de acceso" a esa organización, recordó la CE.

En cambio, subrayó que Moscú "ha seguido imponiendo impuestos más altos de lo acordado a productos de diferentes sectores", y enfatizó que ése "es el caso hoy para ciertos productos de interés de la UE".

Según Bruselas, Rusia no ha cumplido sus compromisos al unirse a la OMC al aplicar una tasa de aranceles más alta, como por ejemplo del 15 % frente a un 5 % para los productos de papel, y al fijar una cantidad mínima que hay que pagar "aunque no esté justificada por la tarifa de arancel acordada, expresada en un porcentaje del valor del producto".

"Esos aranceles más altos tienen un claro impacto negativo en las exportaciones europeas de productos papeleros, refrigeradores y aceite de palma, que tienen un valor aproximado de 600 millones anuales", afirmó la CE.

Añadió que "la violación de los compromisos sobre tarifas eleva también una preocupación sistémica al constituir una violación de uno de los principios clave de la OMC".

Este caso es el cuarto que implica a Rusia en el que se ha solicitado intervenir a la OMC desde que el país entró en la organización, recordó Bruselas.

La petición europea de crear un panel para abordar este caso se abordará por primera vez en la reunión del organismo de resolución de disputas de la OMC, que tendrá lugar el próximo 10 de marzo, apuntó la Comisión, que especificó que, en esa cita, Rusia tendrá la oportunidad de objetar el establecimiento del panel.

Si la UE vuelve a poner sobre la mesa el asunto en la siguiente reunión del organismo, prevista para el 25 de marzo, Rusia ya no podrá bloquear la creación del panel, explicó la Comisión Europea.

Rusia es el tercer socio comercial más importante de la UE y las exportaciones europeas a Rusia ascienden a 120.000 millones anuales y están dominadas principalmente por maquinaria, equipos para transportes, químicos, medicamentos y productos agrícolas. EFEAGRO

 
OMC: nouveau conflit commercial entre l'UE et la Russie 
26 February 2015
Agence France Presse ECOFI
 
L'Union européenne a décidé de demander l'arbitrage de l'Organisation mondiale du commerce (OMC) pour un conflit commercial l'opposant à la Russie et ses droits de douane, a-t-on appris jeudi de source européenne.

L'UE a demandé concrètement la mise en place d'un groupe d'experts, appelé "panel" dans le jargon de l'OMC, chargé de trancher ce conflit avec la Russie, qui n'a pas pu être résolu par des consultations diplomatiques bilatérales.

Il s'agit concrètement des droits de douane imposés par Moscou sur les produits à base de papier, les réfrigérateurs et l'huile de palme.

Les consultations diplomatiques ont eu lieu en novembre dernier.

En rejoignant l'OMC en 2012, la Russie s'est engagée à maintenir en dessous d'une certaine limite ses taxes sur les produits importés.

Selon l'UE, la Russie "a cependant continué à taxer lourdement un certain nombre de produits dans plusieurs secteurs".

"C'est toujours le cas aujourd'hui pour certains produits qui intéressent l'UE", ajoute-t-on de source européenne.

Bruxelles estime que ces surtaxes imposées par Moscou lui causent un préjudice financier d'environ 600 millions d'euros pas an.

La Russie est le 3e partenaire commercial de l'UE. L'UE exporte vers la Russie des biens d'une valeur de 120 milliards d'euros par an.

La demande pour un panel sera examinée en mars par l'OMC.

Selon l'OMC, ce dossier constitue le 5e conflit commercial contre la Russie.

La Russie de son côté a engagé deux procédures contre l'UE devant l'OMC.

 
EU requests WTO dispute panel over Russian import duties 
 
BRUSSELS, Feb 26 (Reuters) - The European Union said on Thursday it was escalating a dispute with Russia at the World Trade Organisation over what it said were excessive import duties on paper products, refrigerators and palm oil.

The challenge is the latest in a series of WTO disputes with Russia, the EU's third-biggest trading partner, since Moscow joined the body in 2012, although they have been overshadowed by tit-for-tat sanctions triggered by the crisis in Ukraine.

"The EU requested today the establishment of a dispute settlement panel at the World Trade Organization in Geneva concerning Russia's excessive import duties, in particular on paper products, refrigerators and palm oil," the European Commission said in a statement.

The European Union said it had sought a solution with Moscow in consultations at the WTO in November, but that it had failed to convince Moscow to reduce its 15 percent tariff on paper products.

In the case of refrigerators and palm oil, the European Union said Russia sets a minimum sum for its tariff, which is sometimes higher than the agreed duty expressed as a percentage of the product's value.

The dispute settlement panel continues a lengthy process that could eventually result in Moscow being fined and told to drop the tariffs, as well as allowing the European Union to adopt counter measures.

Trade ties between Brussels and Moscow are already at a low ebb. The EU accuses Moscow of a string of restrictive trade practices including policies to protect the Russian car industry.

Meanwhile, Russia banned imports of food from Europe in August, part of its response to EU sanctions imposed over Russia's seizure of Crimea from Ukraine and its backing for pro-Russian rebels. The one-year ban is expected to cost the European Union 5 billion euros ($5.7 billion). ($1 = 0.8807 euros) (Reporting by Robin Emmott; Editing by Kevin Liffey) 
 
 
India's Stockholding Policies to Undergo Scrutiny in WTO Agriculture Meeting
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, February 27, 2015
 
Feb. 26 — World Trade Organization members will seek greater clarity on the extent of India's public stockholding programs for food security purposes during the March 4-5 meeting of the WTO Agriculture Committee.
 
The U.S. recently asked India for more details about its domestic food security programs, an issue that was hotly debated during the 2014 Trade Facilitation Agreement impasse.
 
One key responsibility of the Agriculture Committee is to evaluate how countries are complying with their commitments on subsidies and market access.
 
The Agriculture Committee will also review the negotiations being discussed in the Special Session of the Committee on Agriculture.
 
Indian Public Stockholding
 
The U.S. asked whether the $12.28 billion India spent on public stockholding for food security purposes in 2009-2010 included hundreds of millions of dollars worth of agricultural bonuses issued by Indian states.
 
The U.S. specifically asked India to confirm the amounts of state-level bonuses and total state-level funding expenditures from 2009-2010.
 
The U.S. asked India to confirm that it had not exported grains from its government stocks since 2006-2007. The U.S. cited public government data that showed the Food Corporation of India exported 3.07 million metric tons of wheat in 2012-2013 and 2.34 million metric tons of wheat in 2013-2014.
 
Members are working to update the organization's 1986-1988 pricing benchmark used to calculate trade-distortion measures. Their negotiations are driven by a 2014 agreement to devise a permanent solution to the food stockholding issue by the end of 2015 (230 WTO, 12/1/14).
 
U.S. Agriculture
 
Several members including the European Union, India and Australia asked the U.S. why it no longer notified the WTO secretariat about its subsidies related to crop insurance premiums as non-product-specific aggregate measurements of support (AMS) but on a product-specific basis instead.
 
India asked the U.S. to explain why it calculated market price support for dairy products in certain years and calculated support for butter, non-fat dry milk and cheddar cheese in others.
 
India also asked why certain U.S. agricultural insurance programs do not include crop-specific provisions and urged the U.S. to disclose the per unit rate charged for electricity used to transport irrigation water.
 
Australia asked the U.S. to explain how it calculated subsidies for barley, canola, corn, cotton, dry peas, flaxseed, honey, oats, peanuts, rice, sorghum, soybeans, sugar and sunflowers.
 
Canada asked the U.S. to explain why chickpeas, lentils and wool are no longer included in the list of products receiving product-specific support.
 
Cotton Subsidies
 
The U.S. asked China about the long-term impacts of its subsidies for domestic cotton production, which totaled nearly $6 billion in 2012-2013.
 
“While it is true that China's minimum support price did not immediately have a large negative impact on world markets, given that China continued to import and stockpile cotton, it appears the long-term impacts may differ,” the U.S. said in its inquiry. “China is the world's largest producer, consumer, and importer of cotton,” the U.S. said. “A change in any of these variables can have significant impacts on world markets.”
 
The U.S. again asked China why it has not yet submitted its notifications for 2009 and 2010.
 
The U.S. prodded India about its decision to increase the minimum support price for cotton in 2015 given reduced import demand in China, the decrease in global cotton prices and historic levels of Indian cotton production.
 
The U.S. asked India to ensure that the release of its cotton stocks does not further exacerbate international cotton markets and to pledge to avoid using export subsidies or export at below the cost of procurement to dispose of cotton stocks.
 
Canadian Dairy
 
The U.S. said it was concerned with the “proliferation” of Canada's 39 special milk-pricing classes, according to the WTO document. “These products are produced using heavily discounted dairy inputs and are then sold in domestic and foreign markets,” the U.S. said.
 
The U.S. noted that Canada offers special milk class prices to domestically manufactured frozen pizza products, something “which displaces and substitutes imports from trading partners with duty-free access,” according to the inquiry.
 
New Zealand sought reassurance that the proposed changes to Canada's tariff quota for cheese under the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement with the European Union will comply with its WTO commitments.
 
Canada said it plans to introduce a Cairns Group paper detailing recent trends in domestic support. The Cairns Group is a coalition of agriculture-exporting countries concerned with reforming agriculture trade; Canada, Australia and New Zealand are members, but the U.S., China and India are not.
 
 
WTO Delays Ruling in Chinese Complaint Against U.S. Use of Targeted Dumping Rules
By Bryce Baschuk
WTO Reporter, February 27, 2015
 
Feb. 26 — A World Trade Organization panel said it would delay its report on a trade dispute regarding U.S. antidumping duties on Chinese goods until mid-2016, according to a recent notice.
 
The dispute stems from China's objection to the U.S. Commerce Department's targeted dumping methodology and its use of a controversial “zeroing” methodology.
 
Commerce applied targeted dumping and zeroing methodologies in three investigations regarding imports of Chinese coated paper, oil country tubular goods and high-pressure steel cylinders, as well as the review of an existing duty order on imports of polyethylene terephthalate film, sheet and strip.
 
The WTO Dispute Settlement Body said it would defer its panel report until June 6, 2016, due to the complexity of the dispute and the unavailability of secretariat lawyers to assist the panel. The panel report had been expected in early 2015.
 
Zeroing Practices
 
Zeroing is the practice by which an investigating authority compares the export price and domestic price of an allegedly dumped good and then aggregates the results of the comparisons to calculate a dumping margin for the product as a whole. When aggregating the prices, the investigating authority ignores negative dumping results where the product is sold at a higher price abroad than domestically.
 
Critics of zeroing practices say they illegally inflate dumping margins and result in higher antidumping duties.
 
The WTO permits the use of targeted dumping methodologies if an investigative authority identifies a pattern of export prices for allegedly dumped goods that differ among different purchasers, regions or periods of time.
 
In its complaint, China argued that Commerce's practice in determining whether targeted dumping exists did not appropriately identify significantly different patterns of export prices needed to justify the use of the methodology.
 
 
U.S. Moves Toward Greater Trade With Africa 
By Neanda Salvaterra 
26 February 2015
Dow Jones Institutional News
 
The U.S. completed a deal that commits five African countries to reducing trade barriers in a plan that also provides them with technical assistance to export mostly African agricultural products to American consumers.

Private-sector analysts said they view Thursday's deal as a major step toward a full free-trade agreement on a continent where the U.S. has no such accords. The countries in the East African Community trading bloc--Burundi, Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania and Uganda--have been strategic partners with the U.S. in a bilateral trade initiative since 2013.

Trade in goods among the five bloc countries and the U.S. totaled $2.8 billion in 2014, according to the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative. Exports from the bloc to the U.S. have primarily consisted of apparel, while the top U.S. exports to the bloc include aircraft and heavy machinery. U.S. imports from the bloc totaled $743 million in 2014, while U.S. exports to the countries amounted to $2 billion.

The U.S. is playing catch up to China, which surpassed the U.S. as Africa's largest trading partner in 2009, and the European Union, which has already signed free-trade agreements with 33 African countries in which European goods receive preferential treatment even ahead of African exporters--a move some critics say undermines intra-African trade.

At the deal-signing ceremony in Washington on Thursday morning, U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman called the agreement "an important steppingstone for deepening what has already proven itself to be a promising and impactful partnership."

The EAC countries have already implemented numerous changes, such as removing checkpoints to reduce the transit time to Kigali, Rwanda, from the port city of Mombasa, Kenya, to six days from 21.

Mr. Froman said the trade initiative would be expanded to include other African nations.

The U.S. has an existing trade framework with the continent but the African Growth and Opportunity Act, which gives 40 African countries tariff-free access to the U.S. market, is set to expire in September and was chiefly created to boost development in Africa.

The new agreement commits stakeholder countries to implement customs overhauls like those laid out by the World Trade Organization Trade Facilitation Agreement.

Under the deal, the U.S. will also help the trade bloc meet the technical and sanitary standards for food exports to the U.S.

Paul Ryberg, president of the African Coalition for Trade, an association of African private-sector groups trading with the U.S., said he considers the deal a building block toward a free-trade agreement between the U.S. and the EAC.

African exporters say the goal is a free-trade pact with the U.S. that would eliminate barriers to trade for African and U.S. exports.

"It's opened the U.S. market for more African products," said Ambassador Tuvako Nathaniel Manongi from the permanent mission from Tanzania to the United Nations. " I have seen chocolates from Tanzania in Whole Foods," he said, adding it was enabled by Trade Africa--the initial agreement between the U.S. and the EAC.

Total trade in goods has grown 103% in the past five years, 52% in 2014 alone, according to the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative.

Danielle Walker, director for African affairs at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, said she thinks the deal sends a strong signal.

"The East African Community has really embraced free trade and they are reaping the benefits, " she said.
 
 
White House announces rural export initiatives
POLITICO
2/26/15 5:00 PM EST
 
The White House today announced a number of initiatives aimed at boosting exports from rural America as the administration continues to make the case to Congress to pass trade promotion authority.
“Ninty-five percent of the consumers live outside of the United States, but less than 5 percent of U.S. businesses export and most of those export just to a single country,”  Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack said in a call.
To help change that, the administration will organize a series “reverse trade shows” to bring in foreign buyers and trade experts to meet with rural businesses and help them to access overseas markets, Vilsack said.
The administration also wants to double the number of rural businesses attending international trade shows and missions, he said.
Other initiatives include:
-A new National Rural Export Innovation Team to help more rural businesses access export-related assistance, information and events.
-A new partnership with community banks to help increase access to capital for rural exporters.
-A new partnership with the U.S. Postal Service to host “Grow Your Business Day” events throughout rural America.
-A new financial index for rural infrastructure projects that will encourage additional investments in infrastructure vital to manufacturing and exports.
-A new effort to promote an entrepreneurial mentorship program for rural communities.
-Launching an i6 Rural Challenge grant program, which will focus on providing funding to rural communities to build capacity for commercializing technology through agency collaboration.
— Doug Palmer
 
 
Cheap is king: Russia, Ukraine add to China steel export flood 
By Manolo Serapio Jr and Maytaal Angel 
 
SINGAPORE/LONDON, Feb 27 (Reuters) - Steelmakers from Asia to Europe are facing increasing pressure from a rise in cheap imports as Russia and Ukraine, armed with weaker currencies, join China in pushing surplus output on to world markets. 
 
The flood of low-priced material and weak demand will keep a lid on global prices, already at their weakest level since 2009, threatening the future of producers elsewhere and raising the risk of protectionist measures. 
 
"We are feeling hopeless, totally hopeless. I am not sure we will be able to survive," said R.K. Goyal, managing director at Indian mid-tier producer Kalyani Steels Ltd. "Some of our customers are demanding a heavy reduction in prices." 
 
Russia and Ukraine boosted their steel shipments abroad to 46.4 million tonnes in 2014, according to consultancy CRU, nearly half of the record 93.78 million tonnes of steel shipped by China, the world's top exporter. 
 
"One could legitimately ask whether Ukraine and Russia are becoming a new China in the export markets, not in terms of volume, but in terms of their impact on price," said Dmitry Popov, who watches the steel sector in the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) at CRU. 
 
Despite the recent removal of some tax rebates, Chinese exports are expected to hold at 80 million to 90 million tonnes this year due to chronic overcapacity and shrinking demand at home, says the China Iron and Steel Association. 
 
Even without the rebate, Chinese steel may still be $5 a tonne cheaper than most other suppliers, but this is an edge that Russian producers can now match or even surpass, said Roberto Cola, head of the Philippine Iron and Steel Institute. 
 
"China's competition will be Russia. Like China, Russia is also battling overcapacity," said Cola. 
 
China has an advantage over Russia in Asia given its proximity and a number of free trade deals that limit regional trade barriers. The Philippines, which once imported steel from Russia, was China's third-biggest market last year. 
 
But Russian exporters have a similar advantage in Europe, strengthened by the recent collapse in the rouble. 
 
"At present, Russian material is perhaps the most attractive foreign steel in the European Union given the weak rouble," said Jeremy Platt, analyst at MEPS. 
 
The Russian currency has nearly halved against the dollar over the past year, while the Ukrainian hryvnia has fallen more than 60 percent. This has put their steel producers at the lowest levels on the global cost curve, said CRU's Popov. 
 
Russian producers are better placed to increase shipments than their Ukrainian rivals who face output disruptions from an ongoing war, but Ukrainians are still able to cut prices. 
 
In January, the export price of hot-rolled coil from the CIS, made up of mostly Russian and Ukrainian steel sales, briefly dipped to $435 a tonne, $10 below Chinese prices, according to Popov. 
 
PROTECTIONISM ON THE RISE 
 
Amid rising exports, share prices of Chinese and Russian steelmakers have outperformed their global rivals, including Luxembourg-based Arcelormittal and South Korea's POSCO . 
 
Russian producers such as Severstal, Evraz and NLMK have extended their rally into 2015. 
 
But the growing steel glut is spurring protectionist calls. 
 
In Asia, Indonesia has imposed duties of 26 percent on imports of construction steel products from this year, easing slightly in two years, applying mainly to top supplier China. 
 
India is considering raising import tariffs after producers such as JSW Steel Ltd and Jindal Steel and Power lobbied the government. 
 
In January, Turkey launched an investigation into hot-rolled coil imports from a range of countries, while European steel body Eurofer has called on the EU for greater protection for its members. 
 
"Definitely we are seeing the risk of protectionism on the rise," said Andrey Laptev, head of corporate strategy at Severstal, which increased exports by 5 percent last month and plans to grow shipments further. 
 
But with global steel consumption forecast to rise by just 2 percent this year, smaller producers face being shut out. 
 
"Steel mills are operating in an increasingly competitive environment and without a major change in the present supply/demand situation the threat of closures will only increase," said MEPS' Platt. 
 
 
U.S. aviation giants split on Gulf carrier subsidy row 
By Jeffrey Dastin and Tim Hepher 
 
Feb 26 (Reuters) - A push by three U.S. airlines to curb competition from Gulf state carriers has exposed divisions over free trade with other powerful U.S. aviation players including Boeing Co and FedEx Corp, potentially complicating the airlines' campaign for Obama administration support. 
 
Delta Air Lines Inc, United and American Airlines have asked the White House to look into the financial statements of competitors from Qatar and the United Arab Emirates, which they accuse of receiving more than $40 billion in government subsidies since 2004. 
 
But calls for the United States to tamper with Open Skies agreements with the Gulf nations are at odds with the stance of other major U.S. companies that benefit from the pacts. 
 
The agreements eliminate barriers that would block some FedEx operations and slow the expansion of carriers like Emirates that have showered Boeing with orders. 
 
Boeing, which like European rival Airbus has filled its order book with commitments from Gulf carriers, said it would continue to support pacts such as the more than 100 Open Skies agreements negotiated by the U.S. since the 1990s. 
 
"Boeing supports a commercial-aviation industry based on open and fair competition, and Open Skies has long been a key factor in this, benefiting both U.S. and international airlines," spokesman Jim Proulx said in an emailed statement. 
 
Boeing later added that it was not jumping directly into the feud between some of its biggest airline customers. 
 
"We are in no position to make judgments about the allegations, nor is it our role to do so," spokesman Tim Neale said. 
 
But experts say the groundswell of support for Open Skies from Boeing, FedEx and others could make it easier for the White House to resist renegotiating individual agreements. 
 
"I think the entry into the fray of Boeing and the others as countervailing pressures to the airlines will make it easier politically for the administration to do what I believe the Department of Transportation wants to do, namely, to continue to pursue its successful Open Skies strategy," said New York University law professor Michael E. Levine. 
 
Other companies were more blunt. 
 
"The U.S. should not capitulate to the interests of a few carriers who stand ready to put their narrow, protectionist interests ahead of the economic benefits that Open Skies provides," David Bronczeck, chief executive of FedEx's Express air cargo unit said in a Feb. 18 letter to the heads of the U.S. Departments of State, Transportation and Commerce. 
 
JetBlue Airways Corp, which has a codeshare agreement with Emirates, wrote a similar letter. 
 
Meanwhile, a group representing 200 North American airports said it had written to the Obama administration warning that the U.S. "leadership role" in international aviation could be threatened by any weakening of the Open Skies policy. 
 
LIBERALIZATION DISPUTES 
 
Delta, United Continental Holdings Inc and American Airlines Group Inc say in the report - which has been reviewed by Reuters but not yet been made public - that they support Open Skies agreements but not their abuse through what they regard as trade-distorting Gulf subsidies. 
 
Historically, however, analysts say the top U.S. carriers have been involved in frequent disputes about liberalization. 
 
"The major U.S. carriers have opposed Open Skies and deregulation all along the way, even from the word go, and yet have been major beneficiaries due to domestic consolidation and also globally in terms of market access," said Peter Harbison, a chairman of Sydney-based consultancy CAPA-Centre for Aviation. 
 
Emirates, Qatar Airways and Etihad Airways deny receiving subsidies. So far, the Obama administration says it is reviewing the U.S. airlines' claims but has made no decisions. 
 
In an interview with Reuters Wednesday, Emirates President Tim Clark hinted at possible legal action over potential commercial harm done by the U.S. airlines' campaign. 
 
The clash between Delta and the Gulf airlines has taken a caustic turn, including remarks by Delta's chief executive that were perceived as linking the Gulf carriers with the Sept. 11 attacks on the United States in 2001.. Delta later clarified its remarks and apologized. 
 
Clark also called his U.S. rivals' service "shoddy" and said they would do better to focus on improving their own product. 
 
The Business Travel Coalition, a for-profit company whose clients include travel agents and corporate travel managers, agrees that the top U.S. airlines have only themselves to blame for the market share loss, a contention disputed by Delta. 
 
 
WTO rules make it difficult for Cisco and Apple to challenge Chinese government 'black list'
South China Morning Post 
Friday, 27 February, 2015, 11:13am
Bien Perez 
 
Complex World Trade Organisation (WTO) regulations will make it very difficult for the US government and major technology companies to take legal action against Beijing's decision to drop Apple and Cisco from its approved state procurement lists. 
 
When the Chinese government joined the WTO in December 2001, Beijing did not sign up to a plurilateral treaty on government procurements. As a result, China is able to remove any foreign brands that the government doesn’t like from its state procurement lists with little potential WTO blowback.

Among the global technology brands that Beijing took off its approved state procurement lists – a de facto “black list” for state purchases of certain foreign brands in what some analysts said was a response to revelations of widespread Western cybersurveillance – the chief casualty was US network equipment maker Cisco Systems. In 2012 the company had 60 products on the Central Government Procurement Centre's (CGPC) list, but by late 2014 had none, Reuters reported earlier this week, quoting an analysis of official data.
  
 "Virtually all leading US tech companies are at risk of being affected, including Cisco Systems, Intel, Microsoft, EMC, Qualcomm, Citrix and Apple," said Stephen Ezell, a senior analyst at United States-based think tank the Information Technology and Innovation Foundation.
  
 "Unfortunately, direct options for recourse by trading partners through multilateral venues are limited, largely because China has failed to accede to the Government Procurement Agreement (GPA), despite a commitment to do so after the country joined the WTO in 2001."

File photo of workers preparing for the opening of an Apple store in Hangzhou. Photo: Reuters
  
 The GPA was implemented under the auspices of the WTO in 1996 to ensure open, fair and transparent competition in the government procurement markets of the parties to the treaty.
  
 It currently consists of 43 WTO members, including Hong Kong and Taiwan. China and 27 other WTO members participate as observers.
  
 While business see their prospects in the mainland's public sector decrease, affected foreign hi-tech companies may find it difficult to simply pack up and leave since the mainland remains the world's third-largest information technology market, behind the US and Japan.
  
 Total government and enterprise spending on information technology goods and services on the mainland is estimated to reach 807 billion yuan (HK$1.02 trillion), up 8 per cent from last year, according to the latest industry forecast by Forrester Research.
  
 The Forrester report, which excluded consumer and corporate telecommunications services expenditure, projected the US market to reach US$862.8 billion this year, followed by Japan at 19.9 trillion yen (HK$1.3 trillion). 
 
A man walks past an advert for the iPhone 6. Photo: Reuters
  
 It also predicted that China would record the second-fastest growth, behind India, in the US$2.3 trillion global information technology market this year, despite concerns about the mainland economy slowing down.
  
 Charlie Dai, an analyst at Forrester Research in Beijing, said the public-sector strategy to buy less foreign information and communications technology products "does not violate China's WTO commitments because it's only the purchase guideline for the government, not a regulation that affects the whole market".
  
 "[Mainland] Consumers normally don't care about the regulations in the public sector," Dai said.
  
 China's decision to raise spending on domestic information technology products was said to be in response to revelations of widespread Western cybersurveillance, which former US National Security Agency contractor Edward Snowden exposed in 2013.
  
 A Forrester survey of 3,190 business and technology decision makers in 10 countries published early this month showed that Snowden's revelations about NSA spying have had some impact. Around 30 per cent of respondents said their companies halted or reduced spending with US suppliers of internet-based data-hosting and outsourcing services.
  
 Ezell, however, said concerns about cybersecurity have become "a convenient excuse for a new set of policies that favour domestic technology suppliers". 
  
 "The reality is that China has been trying to find ways to replace foreign-produced information and communications technology products with domestically produced ones going back to the country's indigenous innovation government policies which began as early as 2009, well before anyone ever heard the name Snowden," he said. END
 


  ________________________________  
Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.