
 

U.S., China Continue Farm Subsidy Debate
Tire makers in China subject to US punitive duties
Falling exports spell policy paralysis
‘Centre Should Not Sign WTO-GATS Pact’
Down the path of restrictive regulation
Economic expert shares possible scenarios post-TPP and impacts on Vietnam's economy
Column: A bitter outlook without higher subsidies
[Joseph E. Stiglitz] America in the way


 
U.S., China Continue Farm Subsidy Debate
By HYPERLINK "mailto:correspondents@bna.com" Bryce Baschuk
Aug. 7 — World Trade Organization members are again confronting the prospects of an uncertain future for the Doha round due, in part, to an ongoing farm subsidy spat between China and the U.S.
Despite seven months of increased engagement led by WTO Director-General Roberto Azevedo, the debate over farm subsidies continues to be the most difficult issue due to its potential impact on the livelihoods of the world's farmers.
When members return from their summer break in September, they will have 14 weeks to achieve some sort of consensus before the WTO's Dec. 15–18 biennial ministerial conference in Nairobi, Kenya.
China and the U.S. must either resolve their differences or eliminate the domestic support issue from the broader Doha Development Agenda negotiations if they are to ensure any multilateral agreement this year.
Doha Declaration
WTO members agreed at the 2001 Doha ministerial conference to reduce the amount of direct and indirect funding that their governments provide to farmers.
According to the Doha HYPERLINK "https://www.wto.org/english/thewto_e/minist_e/min01_e/mindecl_e.htm#agriculture" mandate, WTO members agreed to achieve “substantial reductions in trade-distorting domestic support.”
Despite the Doha round's lofty ambitions, the domestic support pillar has become the most deadlocked area of the agriculture negotiations, due in part to the dramatic increases in payments from large, emerging economies like China and India.
In his last oral report as chairman of the WTO negotiating group on agriculture, Ambassador John Adank said, “there are no signs of any breakthrough in the area of domestic support.”
The current negotiations center on the U.S.-Chinese debate over new curbs on domestic farm subsidies categorized as overall trade-distorting support (OTDS).
OTDS is calculated by adding a member's trade-distorting “Amber Box”subsidies with its permitted “de minimis” support level and an agreed level of “Blue Box” payments.
There is no political support among U.S. lawmakers to make major—or even minor—changes to the domestic support provisions in the 2014 farm law unless China agrees to cap its domestic support expenditures.
U.S. trade negotiators have sought concessions from China due to its substantial increase in subsidy expenditures since the Doha round began in 2001. However, China has sharply resisted U.S. efforts to reduce its OTDS for farm goods.
Room to Negotiate
A recent paper authored by Australia and Canada revealed that large members are only using a fraction of their permitted support levels and could theoretically agree to new domestic support commitments without having to make any immediate adjustments to their current agricultural policies.
The Australian/Canadian paper said the gaps between current WTO limits on total trade-distorting domestic support and the reported current trade-distorting support for the U.S. and China are $46 billion and $142 billion, respectively.
Despite the alleged policy space between members' domestic support levels and the current WTO limits, China refused to accept any numerical cut to its domestic support levels.
Instead, China insists that members adhere to the terms of a 2008 negotiating text, known as Rev. 4, which exempt it from any farm subsidy limits as it is considered a recently acceded member (RAM).
‘Major Threshold Issue.’
Rev. 4, which is also known as the 2008 revised draft modalities, contains proposals to limit trade-distorting domestic support that depresses world prices and discourages agriculture production in poor countries.
Specifically, Rev. 4 would require the European Union to cut its OTDS by 80 percent, Japan and the U.S. to cut theirs by 70 percent and the rest of the WTO members to cut their OTDS by 55 percent. Rev. 4 also contains exemptions for least-developed countries and RAMs like China, which joined the WTO in 2001.
Earlier this year, U.S. trade officials failed to persuade China to forego an exemption of its de minimis entitlements. China's ambassador to the WTO, Yu Jianhua, rebuffed the U.S. offer and said Beijing “would make no contribution toward new disciplines on domestic support.”
The “sharp divergence” between China and the U.S. over the RAMs exclusion from binding OTDS remains “a major threshold issue” in members' efforts to conclude the Doha round, according to a recent negotiating matrix circulated by Canada.
Amber Box Disciplines
The disagreement over OTDS has prevented members from engaging in discussions over other areas of agricultural trade such as AMS support and de minimis reductions, as well as new product-specific limits.
Amber Box support, also known as aggregate AMS support, is considered the most trade-distorting type of support due to its direct links to prices and production. De minimis support is a form of Amber Box support that is permitted under WTO rules because it is limited to 5 percent and 10 percent of value of production for developing and developed members, respectively.
Current members with AMS support, like the U.S., are unwilling to take on new disciplines, while other members that have zero AMS commitments, like China, do not have to undertake any new disciplines.
Members without access to AMS commitments argue that they are more constrained because their product-specific support is capped at de minimis levels.
New Proposals
Last month, the African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) Group proposed that members consider a cap on “Blue Box” expenditures in addition to “meaningful”reductions in AMS commitments and “disciplines to prevent box shifting.” Blue Box support is another form of Amber Box support that is considered somewhat trade-distorting but has no WTO limits.
For countries like China, India and the U.S., which have open-ended Blue Box entitlements, new limits could represent a sufficient compromise to spur progress on the agricultural market access and export competition pillars.
Also last month, Norway introduced a one-page proposal that urged both developed and developing WTO members to adopt far narrower cuts to their levels of trade-distorting domestic support.
To contact the reporter on this story: Bryce Baschuk in Geneva at HYPERLINK "mailto:correspondents@bna.com" correspondents@bna.com
To contact the editor responsible for this story: Jerome Ashton at HYPERLINK "mailto:jashton@bna.com" jashton@bna.com

 
 
 
Tire makers in China subject to US punitive duties
Want China Times
8 August
Chinese passenger vehicle and light truck tire producers and exporters took a hit after the US Commerce Department on June 11 set final dumping margins on imported tires from China, although directives of punitive duties on those products have not been posted on the US government agency's website, the China Business News (CBN) reported. 
Chinese passenger and light truck tire importers are dumping their products in the US at margins ranging from 14.35%-87.99%, the Commerce Department's International Trade Administration has ruled. 
Dumping margins are the percentages below which Chinese tire makers may be undercutting the prices of US tire manufacturers. 
Also, the same importers are obtaining Chinese government subsidies ranging from 20.33%-100.77%, according to a decision issued by the Commerce Department June 12. 
It said that certain tire imports from China have been sold or "dumped" at less than fair market value in the United States and that some have received government subsidies. 
Punitive duties will be imposed on such products now that the US International Trade Commission (ITC) made a final ruling July 27, according to the CBN report. 
The Commerce Department launched the anti-dumping and anti-subsidy investigation into Chinese tires last July, according to the report. 
The Chinese Ministry of Commerce has voiced strong opposition to the decision, saying that the probe breaches the rules of the World Trade Organization (WTO) and US law. 
The punitive measures are expected to affect Chinese tire makers and exporters, particularly those in Shandong province, an important tire production base in China. Nearly 50% of the tires produced in the province are exported and 40% of the exported tires are sold to the United States. 
Last year, tire exports in the province reached US$8.86 billion, a 2.7% year-on-year growth. However, the industry in the province is facing grim prospects. For instance, in the first quarter of this year, the province's Dongying city, a major tire manufacturing hub, posted tire exports of only US$1.34 billion, a 24.6% decline year-on-year. 
In addition, some tire markers in Fujian province, whose products are involved in the investigation, have also been forced to give up their markets in the United States, according to the report. 
Meanwhile, some Chinese tire makers are stepping up their plans to move their factories overseas, the report added
 
Falling exports spell policy paralysis
9 August 2015
Deccan Chronicle
It is distressing that neither the commerce minister nor the finance minister are concerned that exports have fallen continuously for seven months. And if they are concerned, then why are they not taking measures to sort out the problems? Why this policy paralysis in taking decisions? Why are they allowing the situation to deteriorate? If the government feels exporters are not doing enough to maintain quality or to package their goods efficiently, why do they not take them to task?
They should make the exporters accountable. But to do nothing is to kill India’s export capability, built over years of hard work. Commerce minister Nirmala Sitharaman had in April, after an inordinate delay, announced the three per cent interest subvention for exporters. But four months later her ministry has yet to issue a notification about the same. The finance minister had even allocated Rs 1,675 crore, as against Rs 1,585 crore earlier, for the subvention, but all this remains on paper because of the notification delay.
There has been a lot of talk about de-bottleneckingbut little has happened at the ground level to decongest the transport system. For instance, one exporter said there was a 20-km queue of containers waiting to exit but there is some sort of glow-slow at the JNPT off Mumbai harbour.
Similarly, ease of doing business is supposed to be in focus, but transaction costs have gone up in the last two years. According to exporters, banks have many hidden costs, like transaction charges, that have increased across the board, be it customs duty, excise or sales tax. The previous HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Manmohan Singh government had formed the Transaction Cost Council under the chairmanship of then minister JyotiradityaScindia to cut down paperwork for exporters. This had brought down costs. But under the Modi government these costs have skyrocketed, according to exporters.
Perhaps the government, or the RBI, could look into this. In the highly competitive global export market there is need for aggressive marketing.There is no doubt the government gives subsidies for marketing but, according to Leather Export Council president Rafeeque Ahmed, this quantumis inadequate. He says these costs are permitted under the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO agreement. One feels this is justified, and if the government feels that exporters are pocketing this money then it could make them accountable and give the subsidy in tranches according to the exports accomplished. But it is time for the government, particularly the commerce minister, to act. India’s current account deficit is down only because oil and commodity prices, like those of gold, copper, etc., are down. This should not make the government complacent as complacency in this case is dangerous.
Deccan Chronicle Holdings Limited
‘Centre Should Not Sign WTO-GATS Pact’
9 August 2015
New Indian Express
 
Dharmapuri: Education is not a commodity but a right. The Centre should not allow liberalisation in the higher education sector, said S P Udayakumar, Convenor of People’s Movement Against Nuclear Energy. He was here on Saturday to attend a meeting organised by Dharmapuri People’s Forum. Delivering a special address, he said, “The Centre has promised WTO to sign the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS) to liberalise the higher education sector. If it comes into effect, the subsidies given by the Centre to the higher education department would be cut. This would hit students from weaker sections.” The government is planning to sign the agreement during the WTO-GATS conference at Nairobi in December. “For sustainable growth, the government should push for green economy. Hence, the government should change its anti-people and environment policies,” he said and appealed to youth to join hands to make Tamil Nadu nuclear-free. He further continued, “The Kerala government strictly prohibits sand mining from rivers but in Tamil Nadu, the sand mafias are exploiting the nature and smuggling sand to neighbouring states without any restrictions. The government should check this.” He urged the government not to implement the Methane Project again. “The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Oil and Natural Gas Corporation was secretly carrying out a survey for methane exploration in the delta regions,” he alleged and appealed to the State government to implement total prohibition in the state. Scientist and former MP of Norwegian Council of Eelam Tamils Vijay Asokan and Convener of Dharmapuri People’s Forum D Balasubramani were present. Earlier in the day, hundreds of volunteers took out a rally against liberalisation of education sector from Dharmapuri town BSNL to Periyar statue, via Salai Vinayagar road. Educationalist Meenakshi Umesh flagged off the rally
 
Down the path of restrictive regulation
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Ben Langford
8 August 2015
Illawarra Mercury
LOOMING on the horizon for Australia as a nation is the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO's Agreement on Government Procurement (GPA), which restricts governments from giving more favourable treatment to local firms than foreign suppliers.
As of this August 44 countries are bound by the treaty, which came into being in 1994.
It guarantees signatory nations the right for their companies to be treated as local suppliers by the governments of other countries that have signed up, when handing out contracts for government work such as infrastructure projects.
Signatories include Canada, the US, China, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" European Union and Japan.
But this type of treaty has not prevented the US from continuing with protectionist policies such as the Buy American Act.
Dr Stanford said the US was assisted by its size as a trading partner, as well as the size of its domestic economy, which makes it less reliant on international trade.
Australia is not one of the signatory nations to the GPA treaty yet, but is listed as being an "observer" to the process.
The HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO says Australia is in the process of "negotiating accession" to the GPA, meaning this nation may be on the path to further rules restricting the government's ability to give more favourable treatment to Australian companies such as BlueScope.
Economic expert shares possible scenarios post-TPP and impacts on Vietnam's economy
8 August 2015
Vietnam News Summary
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Dr. Nguyen Duc Thanh, Head of the Vietnam Institute for Economic and Policy Research, spoke to VET about the possible scenarios post-TPP and its impact on Vietnam's economy.
He said that the research has identified six major impacts of the TPP on Vietnam’s economy.
Firstly, import turnover will rise while export turnover will tend to decrease.
Secondly, when the TPP comes into being various tariffs will fall gradually to zero and, consequently, State budget revenue from taxes may decline.
Thirdly, joining the TPP will not only require its members to cut tariff barriers but also to simplify non-tariff barriers such as transportation costs and import processing procedures.
Fourthly, Vietnam may no longer maintain its advantage in cheap labor costs as the demand for skilled workers will increase and, consequently, national economic growth may not be sustained, as has happened in China. The free movement of human resources will not only occur within one member country but among all of them.
Fifthly, member countries tend to apply technical barriers to replace tariff barriers and protect their domestic manufacturing industries. With fierce competition in terms of quality, Vietnam may lose ground in exports.
Sixthly, with the concessions made in joining the TPP, investment from other countries into Vietnam may increase remarkably.
In almost all scenarios simulated by using the GE model, Vietnam has the highest GDP growth. The impact of the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" ASEAN Economic Community (AEC) will be minor compared to the impact of the TPP.
Investment into Vietnam will be the most impressive, roughly matching the growth rate seen in Japan, which is nearly twice the rate of Australia, Malaysia or the US in value terms. Meanwhile, investment into countries outside of the AEC and the TPP should decrease significantly, especially to China and Europe.
Simulations have shown that trade activities between Vietnam and other TPP members will increase as trade activities with members outside of the TPP see substantial increases in import turnover and slight decreases in export turnover.
Vietnam joined the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO with a great deal of expectations. Exports and foreign investment increased significantly but such substantial amounts of capital flowing into the country came at a time when we barely had any experience in monetary and fiscal management, and it played a role in the real estate bubble and the double-digit inflation seen from 2008 to 2011. The dependence of Vietnam on imports and foreign investment as well as the prolonged internal weaknesses in the post-WTO period was a lesson in Vietnam not being overly optimistic when signing promising agreements such as the TPP or joining the AEC.
The TPP is now being negotiated quite quickly, and without full preparations its pros and cons may lead to uncontrollable consequences. When the TPP is signed and comes into being, industries with low competitiveness such as the livestock industry, forestry, and mining, etc., will likely suffer losses.
Moreover, with tariffs decreasing gradually to zero, State budget revenue from taxes will fall and the government will have to find other ways to offset the loss to stabilize the State budget. Some policies may prevent the economy from recovering, however, while increasing the likelihood of macroeconomic instability.
He suggested that following the commitments made in the TPP will require changes in policies and laws and regulations in Vietnam. It will need to have legal support polices to promote the development of industries with comparative advantages. For those who will benefit after the TPP comes into being, such as textiles and garments, fisheries, and agricultural products, etc., they will need to be more active in managing their labor, capital, land and other resources. For those who may benefit less, such as the livestock industry and forestry, etc., they will need to restructure to increase their efficiency and productivity.
The State will need to adopt appropriate policies to encourage production and consumption. Those policies should focus on regular spending. Critically, after joining the TPP Vietnam will also need to adjust commercial factors such as those relating to labor and intellectual property rights, etc. These confirm the urgency of implementing institutional reforms in regard to the market liberalization of inputs such as labor, capital, and land. (Vietnam Economic Times – August 8)
Column: A bitter outlook without higher subsidies
Tejinder Narang 
8 August 2015
Financial Express
India is expected to produce 28 million tonnes (mt) of sugar in the sugar year (SY) 2015-16, commencing October 2015, with a carry-in of about 10 mt. Against the total consumption of 24 mt, this amounts to an excess of about 14 mt lying in warehouses, with huge sums blocked. The idea of building a buffer of 3 mt being pushed for by the industry- through government/FCI procurement-is impractical and thus has been abandoned. Under the circumstances, millers' liabilities to banks could become terribly toxic. Farmers' arrears, of about R19,000 crore now, would have also escalated.
The government is not remedying the core issue of arbitrary fixation of sugarcane price-the Fair and remunerative price (FRP) versus the state-advised price (SAP)-and the absence of its linkages to market realisation due to adverse political fallout. Indian sugar is cheaper than the cost of sugarcane, if the empirical rate of conversion is applied-a ridiculous case of an end-product selling cheaper than the raw material. Even revenue from by-products such as alcohol/ ethanol/ co-generation does not compensate the gap in present day earnings of integrated mills. Before the sugar sector is sucked into a vortex of doom, the government appears to tackle this problem from the back-end-which is, expanding the demand-pull through sugar exports and thus anticipating better value realisation in the domestic market.
According to reports, the government is contemplating export subsidy of R 5,000 ($78) per tonne for export of 4 mt of refined/raw sugar during SY 2015-16. In value terms, it means a subsidy of R2,000 crore ($312 million) on projected exports of R8,960 crore ($1.4 billion) with current fob price at $350/tonne of refined sugar.
Mills are currently realising R19,000/tonne ($297) for refined sugar export against the production cost of R31,000/tonne by passing on the massive losses to farmers by delaying payments. Net realisation for mills, with the proposed export subsidy, will go up by R3,000/tonne-almost equivalent to the prevailing domestic price of R22,000. This may enable higher domestic accruals on a pan-India basis. Mills in Uttar Pradesh are at a disadvantage in physical exports due to higher logistics costs than those in Maharashtra, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu.
In the last two years, the raw sugar subsidy was R3,371 (2013-14) and R4,000 (2014-15) per tonne, respectively; this was partially successful with exports touching 1 mt. Maharashtra has belatedly given a R1,000/tonne additional subsidy for mills in the state. As in the past, the proposed subvention of R5,000/tonne will be defrayed from the sugar development fund by increasing excise duty. The full benefit of this support could not be availed by industry as the notifications came much after the start of the sugar year.
The moot point is how effective will this subsidy be in evacuating stocks, though it would be in violation of HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO norms. Even if we forget HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO opposition for now, there is a danger of further depression in the prices. Crude values will stay cheaper, especially with Iran's entry in the world pool. The bearish sentiments may prevail if India announces exports of 4 mt at subsidised prices. Further depreciation in the Brazilian real and some weakness in the Thai baht cannot be ruled out. The silver lining is the virtual absence of end-stocks with Brazil-the world's largest exporter, at 25-26 mt-and the lower carry-in with Thailand.
Should the price realisation (now $350 fob) go up to $400/tonne fob in the coming months? Will the government tinker with subsidy of R5,000/tonne? Logically, it should not, because millers will still be exporting at a loss. The government, having decided to give subsidy, should not act as a trader for fixing and re-fixing the quantum of subvention. The sense is to ship out the maximum tonnage (up to 4 mt) than to calibrate subsidy with market volatility. If necessary, pre-audit clearance should be obtained so that ad hoc interventions can be prevented-either due to internal or external pressures. Conversely, if the fob cost drops to $300/tonne, the industry will have to remain content at a fixed support of R5,000/tonne.
The conditions attached to such grants are the registration procedures insisted upon by the Directorate General of Foreign Trade (DGFT), which retard the speed of trading. The argument advanced is that the government needs an official feedback of the total tonnage exported, which is baseless. Most of the major ports today are on the EDI (Electronic Data Interchange) system and all details of quantity shipped out, prices and destinations can be instantly accessed. For greater effectiveness, the DGFT involvement should be dispensed with.
If the government is serious in implementing this policy, its notification (and not pronouncement) should come out before the model code of conduct for Bihar elections is enforced. If Maharashtra continues with its additional subsidy , it will give a fillip to exports. But, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" WTO is going to cry foul for sure andthe government must have the right response.
This subvention is just patchwork. If the government continues to duck the primary issue of freeing up the cane prices, banks will have higher NPAs from unpaid sugar loans. They will then have to be recapitalised, leading to erosion of the purchasing power of the currency.
The author is a grains-trade expert
India Express Mumbai Limited
Letter to the Editor
[Joseph E. Stiglitz] America in the way
9 August 2015
The Korea Herald
NEW YORK -- The Third International Conference on Financing for Development recently convened in Ethiopia’s capital, Addis Ababa. The conference came at a time when developing countries and emerging markets have demonstrated their ability to absorb huge amounts of money productively. Indeed, the tasks that these countries are undertaking -- investing in infrastructure (roads, electricity, ports, and much else), building cities that will one day be home to billions, and moving toward a green economy -- are truly enormous.　
　
At the same time, there is no shortage of money waiting to be put to productive use. Just a few years ago, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Ben Bernanke, then the chairman of the U.S. Federal Reserve Board, talked about a global savings glut. And yet investment projects with high social returns were being starved of funds. That remains true today. The problem, then as now, is that the world’s financial markets, meant to intermediate efficiently between savings and investment opportunities, instead misallocate capital and create risk.　
　
There is another irony. Most of the investment projects that the emerging world needs are long term, as are much of the available savings -- the trillions in retirement accounts, pension funds and sovereign wealth funds. But our increasingly shortsighted financial markets stand between the two.
　
Much has changed in the 13 years since the first International Conference on Financing for Development was held in Monterrey, Mexico, in 2002. Back then, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" G-7 dominated global economic policymaking; today, China is the world’s largest economy (in purchasing-power-parity terms), with savings some 50 percent larger than that of the U.S. In 2002, Western financial institutions were thought to be wizards at managing risk and allocating capital; today, we see that they are wizards at market manipulation and other deceptive practices.　
　
Gone are the calls for the developed countries to live up to their commitment to give at least 0.7 percent of their GNI in development aid. A few northern European countries -- Denmark, Luxembourg, Norway, Sweden and, most surprisingly, the United Kingdom, in the midst of its self-inflicted austerity -- fulfilled their pledges in 2014. But the United States (which gave 0.19 percent of GNI in 2014) lags far, far behind.　
　
Today, developing countries and emerging markets say to the U.S. and others: If you will not live up to your promises, at least get out of the way and let us create an international architecture for a global economy that works for the poor, too. Not surprisingly, the existing hegemons, led by the U.S., are doing whatever they can to thwart such efforts. When China proposed the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank to help recycle some of the surfeit of global savings to where financing is badly needed, the U.S. sought to torpedo the effort. President HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Barack Obama’s administration suffered a stinging (and highly embarrassing) defeat.　
　
The U.S. is also blocking the world’s path toward an international rule of law for debt and finance. If bond markets, for example, are to work well, an orderly way of resolving cases of sovereign insolvency must be found. But today, there is no such way. Ukraine, Greece and Argentina are all examples of the failure of existing international arrangements. The vast majority of countries have called for the creation of a framework for sovereign-debt restructuring. The U.S. remains the major obstacle.　
　
Private investment is important, too. But the new investment provisions embedded in the trade agreements that the Obama administration is negotiating across both oceans imply that accompanying any such foreign direct investment comes a marked reduction in governments’ abilities to regulate the environment, health, working conditions, and even the economy.　
　
The U.S. stance concerning the most disputed part of the Addis Ababa conference was particularly disappointing. As developing countries and emerging markets open themselves to multinationals, it becomes increasingly important that they can tax these behemoths on the profits generated by the business that occurs within their borders. Apple, HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Google and HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" General Electric have demonstrated a genius for avoiding taxes that exceeds what they employed in creating innovative products.　
　
All countries -- both developed and developing -- have been losing billions of dollars in tax revenues. Last year, the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" International Consortium of Investigative Journalists released information about Luxembourg’s tax rulings that exposed the scale of tax avoidance and evasion. While a rich country like the U.S. arguably can afford the behavior described in the so-called Luxembourg Leaks, the poor cannot.　
　
I was a member of an international commission, the Independent Commission for the Reform of International Corporate Taxation, examining ways to reform the current tax system. In a report presented to the International Conference on Financing for Development, we unanimously agreed that the current system is broken, and that minor tweaks will not fix it. We proposed an alternative -- similar to the way corporations are taxed within the U.S., with profits allocated to each state on the basis of the economic activity occurring within state borders.　
　
The U.S. and other advanced countries have been pushing for much smaller changes, to be recommended by the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD, the advanced countries’ club. In other words, the countries from which the politically powerful tax evaders and avoiders come are supposed to design a system to reduce tax evasion. Our Commission explains why the HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" OECD reforms were at best tweaks in a fundamentally flawed system and were simply inadequate.　
　
Developing countries and emerging markets, led by India, argued that the proper forum for discussing such global issues was an already established group within the United Nations, the Committee of Experts on International Cooperation in Tax Matters, whose status and funding needed to be elevated. The U.S. strongly opposed: it wanted to keep things the same as in the past, with global governance by and for the advanced countries.　
　
New geopolitical realities demand new forms of global governance, with a greater voice for developing and emerging countries. The U.S. prevailed in Addis, but it also showed itself to be on the wrong side of history.
　
By Joseph E. Stiglitz
Joseph E. Stiglitz, a Nobel laureate in economics, is a professor at HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Columbia University. His most recent book, coauthored with HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0);" Bruce Greenwald, is “Creating a Learning Society: A New Approach to Growth, Development and Social Progress.” -- Ed.
　
(Project Syndicate)
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.