Oil price in biggest rise since December 2008
Poor manufacturing could cast a shadow on India’s solar ambitions
China's neighbours feel the chill of an economy turning cold
Why China will experience a 'soft' landing
EU holds vast majority of TTIP meetings with corporate lobbyists
Tobacco industry sees rush to plain packs
The case for free trade in the Gulf Cooperation Council
Food imports: Russia burns out of control
 

Oil price in biggest rise since December 2008
Anjli Raval and David Sheppard 27 August 2015
Financial Times (FT.Com)
Oil jumped by the most in six and a half years on Thursday, rebounding from lows last seen during the financial crisis, as a surge in global stock markets and outages in two major Nigerians pipeline sparked a rally.
" Royal Dutch Shell declared force majeure on shipments of Nigeria’s Bonny Light crude oil after shutting two pipelines, cutting supplies from Africa’s biggest oil producer.
Brent crude, the international benchmark, jumped by $4.42 a barrel in afternoon trading to settle at $47.56. The 10.2 per cent gain marked its biggest one day advance since December 2008.
West Texas Intermediate, the US marker, increased 10.3 per cent, or $3.96 a barrel, to $42.56, the largest daily increase since March 2009.
Meanwhile, Wall Street recovered more of its recent declines. The " S&P 500 finally settled 2.4 per cent up at 1,987, leaving it higher than where it ended last week.
Nigeria, an " Opec member which produces more than 2 per cent of global supplies, has been plagued by pipeline leaks, sabotage and theft in recent years.
" Shell Petroleum Development Company of Nigeria, a Shell subsidiary, said the company was fixing a reported leak on the Trans Niger Pipeline and removing “theft points” on the Nembe Creek Trunkline.
HYPERLINK "javascript:void(0)" Oil was already rallying, however, before the news from Nigeria supported by a move higher in global stock markets after a volatile few trading sessions, with traders seeing a lower chance of a US interest rate rise next month.
“The flat price of crude oil will continue to be influenced by the volatility in the equity markets,” said Olivier Jakob at consultancy Petromatrix.
Growing concerns about an economic slowdown in China — the world’s largest oil importer — and renewed signs of a persistent crude overhang took prices to the lowest levels this week since spring of 2009.
The jump in prices on Thursday bore the hallmarks of a short-covering rally, traders said. Hedge funds and other large speculators had amassed a large short position in both major oil benchmarks in expectation prices would continue to fall.
With prices recovering, funds scrambled to buy back positions, traders said, squeezing prices higher.
On Wednesday, the statistics arm of the " US energy department said weekly commercial crude oil stocks had fallen by 5.45m barrels, the largest drop since early June.
Analysts remain cautious about whether Thursday’s rally signals the oil price decline is over.
As the US summer driving season draws to a close and refinery maintenance season gets under way, plants were “likely to process less crude oil, which in turn will drive up crude oil stocks”, said Carsten Fritsch, analyst at " Commerzbank.
Despite robust global demand, oil analysts have said meaningful supply reductions will have to occur before prices post a sustainable rebound.
US shale production has surpassed expectations while " Opec producers such as Iraq and Saudi Arabia have ramped up output even with prices down more than half since June last year.
“We do not expect prices to rally strongly until supply-side dislocations become much more visible,” said Paul Horsnell, head of commodities research at " Standard Chartered.
Mr Horsnell, who has been bullish on the oil price, reduced his 2016 forecast for Brent by $20 a barrel to $63.
“The main supply-side tightening will likely come later, in mid-2016 and beyond, due to the lagged effect of capex costs on non-Opec supply,” he said.
Additional reporting by Eric Platt
The Financial Times Limited (AAIW/EIW)

Poor manufacturing could cast a shadow on India’s solar ambitions
Shreya Jai
New Delhi 
28 August 2015
Business Standard
Close to 75% of Indian solar power projects are built on imported cells from China and the US
Even as the government gears up for another round of fighting at the " World Trade Organization (" WTO) for its domestic content requirement (DCR) policy under the National Solar Mission (NSM), the low capacity of Indian solar manufacturing could be a long-term handicap for India.
The current installed capacity of Indian solar cell manufacturing is around 1,386 Mw, of which less than 30 per cent is operational. “India’s annual demand for solar cells is close to 4,000 Mw, but the operational capacity is just 200 Mw. With the government scaling up targets, domestic manufacturers are nowhere close to meeting this demand,” said a renewable energy sector analyst in Delhi.
Close to 75 per cent of Indian solar power projects are built on imported cells from China and the US.
The US filed a case in " WTO in 2012 against the domestic content requirement guidelines of the first phase of NSM. Under the stipulated guidelines, solar power project developers were supposed to source 30 per cent of the required equipment from domestic manufacturers.
When the US and some Indian project developers condemned this, the government gave equal shares of projects under the second phase for development from domestic and foreign content.
The Indian government also delayed the official response to the " WTO in 2013 as the case was pending with the ministry of commerce after the ministry of new and renewable energy (MNRE) had given its submission.
“The MNRE would still stand by its position that around 15 to 20 per cent of the projects would be built on domestic content. Earlier it was 50 per cent and we have brought it down. We will file a plea again and any amendment in the policy will be only if we lose the case,” said a senior MNRE official.
Currently, under the new mission guidelines, separate schemes are earmarked for domestic manufacturers. The 1,000 Mw of solar projects to be built by central PSUs are mandated to be built on indigenous solar cells, and 50 per cent of the projects to be tendered out by Solar Energy Corporation of India would be based on domestic cells.
According to industry estimates, Indian solar panels are 30 per cent costlier than those manufactured in China, the US, Taiwan and the European markets.
Business Standard Limited (India)
China's neighbours feel the chill of an economy turning cold
" Nathan Vanderklippe
27 August 2015
The Globe and Mail
China's dramatic rise has made it Asia's financial centre, but its factories, consumers and investors have also brought new wealth to neighbouring countries.
Now, as cracks spread through the foundations of Chinese growth, many of those neighbours are feeling the tremors.
For some global investors, China's poor industrial and export numbers, combined with its surprise currency devaluation and a crash in its stock markets, came as a rude awakening in recent days. In much of Asia, however, the misery has been taking hold for months – and at a speed that suggests the problems in China are deeper than they first appeared.
Beijing's official statistics show a gentle moderation in growth, from 7.5 per cent last year to about 7 per cent this year. But the descent has been much swifter and deeper nearby. In Taiwan, expectations of 3.2-per-cent growth have now been cut in half.
In South Korea, forecasters are predicting the first contraction in per-capita gross domestic product since 2008; local economists have raised an urgent need to build new growth engines. Indonesia is growing at its slowest pace in six years while private forecasters and governments in Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, Hong Kong and Vietnam have all trimmed GDP expectations.
The one exception has been Japan, where the " Shinzo Abe government has seen some success in resuscitating a moribund economy with massive devaluation.
China has, without question, been a regional economic locomotive. In the 15 years following 1998, China's trade with countries in the " Association of Southeast Asian Nations grew nearly 19- fold.
The slowdown has landed some of the heaviest blows on those most closely tied to China. In Hong Kong and Taiwan, exports are no longer slowing – they're shrivelling. A survey of business confidence in Taiwan has come up negative for six months straight for the first time since the global financial crisis.
Taiwan conducts 39 per cent of its trade across the strait with China, and the island is worried that what ails the mainland is contagious. Already, its GDP is expected to contract this quarter.
China could “have a butterfly effect on Taiwan's export performance, and unfortunately export performance is one of the key driving forces for Taiwan's economic development," said Roy Chun Lee, deputy executive director of the Taiwan WTO and RTA Center, a government-backed research institute on world and regional trade agreements.
“We should be very concerned about China slowing down." Taiwan and others fear a second blow from Chinese efforts to strengthen its own domestic supply chain.
“When the mainland China economy is weak, they want import substitution, they want to expand their own local supply capability to replace Taiwan imports," said Gordon Sun, director of the forecasting centre at the Taiwan Institute of Economic Research.
China's economic problems have even raised security fears. Hsia Li-yan, Taiwan's Minister of Mainland Affairs, said in an interview this week that he worries domestic weakness will make China more aggressive outside its borders. “We are very concerned any activities in China will somehow affect us," he said.
But if China's neighbours provide the clearest view of its current economic weakness, they also offer a window into how outside nations can adjust.
Beijing has sought a future less dependent on smokestacks and more tilted toward the banks, mobile phone operators and restaurants that make up the service industry. It has struggled to do so, hampered by stuttering reforms, vested interests in an economy still weighed down by state-owned firms and a population that still stubbornly saves rather than spends.
But change is slowly happening, and it's obvious in places such as Taiwan. In 2007, only 17 per cent of Taiwanese investments in China landed in the service sector. Today, it's 49 per cent.
“If you go to second-tier cities, you realize there's a huge population and there's an undersupply of modern services provisions," Mr. Lee said. “I'm talking kindergartens, trustworthy dental clinics, modern hair salons, breakfast restaurants and bakeries. That's what we do now."
He is optimistic China will navigate its transition and return stronger, as those companies become “the next generation main pillar for China's economic growth."
At the same time, some of those close to China have decided their smartest choice is to point their money elsewhere. In 2010, roughly 80 per cent of Taiwanese foreign investment went to China. Last year, it was less than two thirds. The Globe and Mail Inc.
Why China will experience a 'soft' landing
Frank-jurgen Richter 
28 August 2015
China Daily-US Edition
We can still recall the gleams in the eyes of " Goldman Sachs statisticians in 2000 as they crunched data creating correlations between several countries which soon came to be called "BRICs". They said Brazil, Russia, India and China all had great potential for growth, and they would become the dominant economies with China leading the pack - overtaking Japan by 2015, and even outstripping the US by 2043. South Africa joined the group in 2010 to create BRICS. But BRICS' collective strength has now faded, as developing economies often illustrate long-term tendencies toward lower growth rates. The average growth of BRICS has fallen from 8 percent to 6 percent, though they had annual rates as high as 11 percent. Even so, BRICS' combined economic output last year almost matched that of the US.
Market traders often cry "foul" when they perceive others might have an unfair advantage. That is exactly what the US, and other countries, kept saying China had kept the value of the yuan low relative to the rest of the world's currencies. Over the last 10 years the yuan has fallen from 8 to nearly 6 to the US dollar, but on "Black Monday" (Aug 24) many were still accusing China of beginning a currency war. But we ought not to consider a few days of rapid change as a unique indicator. Summer adjustments of the global economy have occurred sporadically, yet relatively often.
In the near future, China will have an easier time selling its goods to other countries but will find buying commodities more costly - yet perhaps it doesn't wish to buy so much raw materials because of the economic slowdown. China's index of manufacturing growth (purchasing managers index or PMI) has been below 50 for almost a year, falling from occasional highs of 55 from 2004 to 2014. Since "50" is seen as the divide between growth and slump, this suggests China is heading for a fall. And if the fall is "hard" it will have a significant effect on the rest of the world. Associated with its reduced PMI is a general lack of new capital investment and also job shedding (with its associated loss of employees' knowledge base).
But I believe China will experience a "soft" landing. Why? Simply because it has looked carefully at history, and decided many years ago that it needs to manage its people much more carefully.
China has invested heavily in its interiors and western region which are less developed. At present, China's coherent development of its internal trade arteries of roads, railways and rivers augmented by new regional airports strongly support internal trade. It is controlling its massive rural-to-town migration by building about 200 new cities in the interiors and linking them on the trade arteries. Both activities will avert social and economic unrest - but other countries may not be so secure. No other BRICS state can match China's prowess. One example of its prowess is the establishment of two investment banks - the New Development Bank and Asian Infrastructure Investment bank - to help developing countries in particular, one aimed at BRICS and the other at Asia in general.
Furthermore, China has supported its own shipping lanes and ports so that they can take full advantage of the newly enlarged Suez and Panama canals and help lift world trade when it redevelops - specifically to the US, the EU and the UK. And I don't think I am being too optimistic.
The author is founder and chairman of Horasis, a global visions community.
China Daily Information Company
News
EU holds vast majority of TTIP meetings with corporate lobbyists
" Paul Gallagher
28 August 2015
The Independent
" European Commission officials have held hundreds of meetings with corporate lobbyists to discuss the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) treaty - but have met public interest groups only a handful of times.
Official papers reveal that the world's biggest companies in finance, technology, pharma, tobacco and telecoms are dominating discussions with the EU executive body's trade department responsible for the proposed EU-US free-trade treaty, which could become the biggest such deal ever made.
Between January 2012 and February 2014, as TTIP discussions began, the Commission's trade department, the Directorate General for Trade, had 597 behind-closed-doors meetings with lobbyists to discuss the negotiations, according to internal Commission files obtained by the research group " Corporate Europe Observatory (CEO).
There were 528 meetings (88 per cent) with business lobbyists while only 53 (9 per cent) were with groups such as trade unions and NGOs. The remainder were with other parties such as public institutions and academics.
The European Trade Commissioner, Cecilia Malmstrom, took office in November last year promising a "fresh start" for the TTIP negotiations. Listening to public concerns was her "top priority", she said.
Yet in her first six months in office Ms Malmstrom, her cabinet and the director general of DG Trade had 100 meetings with business lobbyists compared with only 20 with public interest groups.
The revelation comes after The Independent sparked calls for greater transparency in the TTIP negotiations by publishing the heavily redacted correspondence between the tobacco companies " British American Tobacco and " Philip Morris obtained by CEO.
The Green MEP Molly Scott Cato said: "The censoring that the Commission has undertaken... reaffirms the secrecy surrounding these negotiations. Nine out of 10 [meetings] during the preparatory phase... were with companies and corporate lobby groups. Corporations are effectively co-writing the treaty."
Independent Print Ltd. 
Tobacco industry sees rush to plain packs
Huw Kidwell 
28 August 2015
TJI Tobacco Journal International
Two European countries have joined Australia with laws mandating uniform branding on packaging for cigarettes and hand-rolled tobaccos. More are waiting in the wings.
In March 2015 the UK and Ireland passed plain pack laws. Final approval in France is expected this autumn. It is highly likely that they will be joined by other European countries including Norway, Sweden and Turkey, which are in the midst of consultations over this issue.
Across Europe to Asia Minor, more countries are working to adopt neutral packaging legislation – something that will be supported when the EU Tobacco Products Directive (TPD) comes into effect in May 2016. The revised TPD sets minimums for pictorial health warnings to cover 65 per cent of the front and back and 50 per cent of the sides of cigarette and RYO packaging.
Branding is allowed in the remaining space, but TPD permits introduction of standardised or neutral packaging on the grounds of public health, providing it is proportionate and does not deliver hidden barriers to trade in the " European Union (EU).
This sets the stage for a major legal confrontation between governments and tobacco manufacturers.
Ministerial meeting
Ministers from around the world met to discuss plain packaging in Paris on 20 July, 2015, at the invitation of French Health Minister, Marisol Touraine.
Attended by health ministers from 10 countries (Australia, France, Hungary, Ireland, New Zealand, Norway, South Africa, Sweden, United Kingdom, and Uruguay), as well as the head of the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control Secretariat, the conference launched “a common drive to introduce plain cigarette packaging with the aim of stubbing out high smoking rates among young people”.
In a joint statement, the attendees said, “significant scientific proof justified [...] plain cigarette packaging”.
The statement said plain packaging had been shown to “reduce the attractiveness of the product for consumers, especially amongst women and young people” as well as increasing, “the effectiveness of health warnings on packets and reducing the ability of tobacco packaging to mislead consumers about the harmful effects of smoking”.
All countries sending representatives to the meeting have either passed a plain packs law or are discussing the issue.
Legal challenges
Currently, the " UK government is facing four lawsuits from the major tobacco companies " Philip Morris International (PMI), " British American Tobacco (BAT), " Japan Tobacco International (JTI) and " Imperial Tobacco (all filed at the High Court during May 2015).
If the courts find in favour of tobacco companies, this could cost the UK and its taxpayers some GBP 11 billion (EUR 15.4 billion) in compensation.
Daniel Torras, managing director at JTI UK said, “we have clearly and repeatedly made clear to the " UK Government that plain packaging will infringe our fundamental legal rights without reducing smoking. Despite the lack of evidence that plain packaging works, the government has decided to proceed and JTI must now protect its rights in the courts.”
In a similar vein, Melvin Ruigrok, " Imperial Tobacco’s general manager in the UK and Ireland, had this to say: “We have a legal right to differentiate our brands from those of our competitors. Our preference is always for constructive dialogue. Regrettably, however, we've been left with no choice than to seek to defend our rights by issuing a legal challenge.”
The legal battle over plain packaging has begun. In March, 2015, the anti-smoking charity " Action on Smoking and Health (ASH) backed the government by commissioning a legal opinion that supported the right of the " UK government to introduce plain packaging under EU law relating to trademarks and fundamental rights.
“The tobacco industry knows it has little or no chance of winning but by threatening legal action it is trying to stop the infection spreading to other countries. Standardised plain packaging threatens the profitability of the industry and they are desperate to prevent other countries from following the example set by Australia, the UK and Ireland,” said Deborah Arnott, chief executive of ASH.
Tobacco manufacturers say they believe plain packaging legislation erodes their right to brand identity and will reduce marketing options to differentiation over price, with subsequent loss of revenue. Tobacco company lawyers have drawn on a legal opinion by former senior Appeal Court judge Lord (Leonard) Hoffman, who said banning the use of branding on cigarette packaging altogether could be a breach of trademark law, and that rejecting a company’s right to use an internationally recognised trademark in the UK could be in breach of the principle of free movement of goods within the EU.
On 2 May 2015, the International Trademark Organisation (INTA) said plain and highly standardised packaging restrictions should be rejected or repealed. INTA recommended governments, “seek less drastic measures that do not violate international and national law.”
The " World Trade Organisation (" WTO) is expected to rule on plain packaging due in 2016. According to INTA, countries should await the trade body decision before proceeding. INTA said it was concerned about, “violations of international treaties and domestic laws,” as well as, “the practical implications of plain and highly standardised packaging impinging upon consumer choice, limiting competition and paving the way for increased counterfeiting and trade in diverted goods”.
Feel good politics
Nick de Bois, a former MP for Enfield North, is against smoking, but also opposed plain packaging in the House of Commons debate. He outlined his reservations about plain packaging to TJI. “This is bad legislation and the result of ‘feel good’ politics rather than rational policy based upon firm evidence.”
The reasons for his objection are threefold. Firstly, there will be no brand differentiation and this will lead to price being the only disparity. Prices of tobacco can be expected to fall, there will be fewer brands and consumers will base their purchasing decisions solely on price. Secondly, there has been no proper assessment of the effect of plain packaging on the growth in the counterfeit and illicit cigarette market where a lack of brand differentiation could actually be an advantage to counterfeit cigarette producers and the consequent sales of unregulated and dangerous tobacco products. Thirdly, there is the threat to the public purse from multiple-litigation brought by tobacco companies seeking compensation for their loss of brand identity, intellectual property and the ability to sell products in a free market.
“It might have been better to await the outcome of litigation from tobacco companies around the world before using UK tax payer’s money to fight the cause of plain packaging,” de Bois said. There would have been plenty of time to introduce plain packaging once the legal challenges had been adjudicated, he said. “During the woefully inadequate 90-minute debate and subsequent vote, Health Minister Jane Ellison gave no answer to the question about the threat to the public purse.”
Legal experts speak
Opinion on the effectiveness and legality of plain packaging in the UK is divided. TJI sought opinions from two legal experts on whether existing law supports the placing of plain packaging restrictions on manufacturers.
Michael Conway is an attorney at Haseltine Lake – a major European patent and trade mark firm.
“Once plain packaging is introduced, it is clear that the ability of tobacco manufacturers to use trademarks and pack design to distinguish their products from those of other companies will be severely diminished,” he said. “But from a trade mark registration perspective although the new plain pack regulations establish a ‘proper reason for non-use’ of any registered trademarks it will not be possible to cancel these trademarks due to non-use, so tobacco companies will be able to retain and enforce any trademark registrations they are unable to use,” Conway said.
Mark O’Halloran, a partner in the commercial team at Coffin Mew, said, “the general position is that there is insufficient evidence to support the move, not least as even the " UK Government conceded in its impact assessment that it was too early to draw conclusions from Australia's experience as the first country to mandate plain packaging. The tobacco companies also argue that the move may infringe intellectual property rights and international trade agreements,” O’Halloran said.
“As the measures affect all brands, domestic and international, they are unlikely to amount to an unfair tariff or restriction on imports under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). More relevant is the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) but this requires only that use of a trademark must not be unjustifiably encumbered by special measures. The public health considerations are likely to be deemed justifiable.”
O’Halloran added he does not see an argument based upon IP and competition law succeeding.
“There may be a particular argument that EU law determines the scope of IP rights and national law only their existence. That point is well established in EU competition law and one could argue that only the EU can therefore legislate for plain packaging. The EU itself hasn't come to a decision on plain packaging but, given the general right of member states to take measures in support of public health, I don't see the competition law approach succeeding.”
Asked what tobacco companies would do if their court challenge is unsuccessful, O’Halloran responded: “Tobacco companies are already preparing for plain packaging. They've begun changing the exact look of their packs, even the feel of the card used in the packaging. When all packs are plain, these small differences may matter to smokers although they clearly cannot have the same impact on non-smokers.”
Evidence from Australia
In March 2015, fourteen studies on the impact of plain packaging between 2012 and 2013 were published in the British Medical Journal supplement, Tobacco Control (April 2015, Volume 24, Suppl 2). These studies provided peer reviewed statistically significant evidence of a reduction in the perceived appeal of cigarette packs to young adults, an increase in smokers thinking of quitting from 20 per cent to 27 per cent and little evidence of an increase in the use of cheaper and illicit tobacco products. According to " Cancer Council Victoria, these results demonstrate that plain packaging in Australia is working.
Losing the last link
It is clear that the plain packaging ‘roller coaster’ is on the move in Europe. It is too early to say whether EU courts or the " WTO will apply the brake. Tobacco companies in the UK, France and Ireland stand to lose a powerful marketing tool, and the last link between brand perception and the customer.
Dr Alan Stanton of " Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health was asked by TJI if he thought having cigarettes and tobacco products in plain packs would stop children and young people from taking up the habit. “Yes,” he answered. “Whilst we could not claim to have watertight scientific evidence, it would seem to be very likely that this will be effective, as part of a range of measures.”
Konradin Business GmbH
The case for free trade in the Gulf Cooperation Council
Courtney Trenwith 
27 August 2015
ArabianBusiness.com
It has been 240 years since Scottish economist Adam Smith made the then-outrageous suggestion that nations could improve their wealth by removing tariffs on imported goods. At the time, 1776, not only did these taxes — invariably more than 40 percent on certain goods — inflate prices for consumers, they often accounted for the majority of government revenues.
Gradually — very gradually — nations have accepted they each have a competitive advantage in specific goods and services and the mercantile system has been slowly repealed in most parts of the world.
In the past 15 years, there has been an unprecedented number of free trade agreements (FTAs), both bilateral and, increasingly, among large economic blocs. In many cases, FTAs have seen trade between the parties soar, while tighter economic ties also generally has strengthened political and security relationships.
This is most evident in the " European Union, which has become the world’s largest trading partner, accounting for about 16 percent of world imports and exports in 2013, giving it an enormous scale of economic advantage. Now a 28-member bloc (albeit with threats to pull out in some member countries), the EU is the world’s largest exporter of manufactured goods and services, and the biggest export market for about 80 countries.
The " Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) has also grown to become the seventh largest economy in the world, if considered as a single entity.
An historic deal signed in June between 26 African states, stretching from Egypt, down the East coast to South Africa, integrates three existing economic blocs, with a combined GDP of $1.3 trillion.
Meanwhile, 12 Pacific nations, including the US, are attempting to finalise a free trade deal that would bind 40 percent of the world’s economy.
However, the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) has been slow to integrate, both intra-regionally and internationally. The Greater Arab Free Trade Area (GAFTA) saw tariffs between 17 Arab states rapidly decline from an average 15 percent in 2002 to 6 percent in 2009. But it has failed to bring down trade costs.
In fact, it remains cheaper for some Arab states to trade with Europe than between themselves. Bilateral trade costs for industrial products between the Maghreb states and France, Italy and Spain is half that of trading with the GCC, Jordan, Iraq, Lebanon or Syria, according to trade policy and development expert Ben Shepherd.
The cost difference also is negligible for trade between Egypt and the rest of MENA versus parts of Europe.
The six member states of the " Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC), which came into effect in 1981, are well ahead of the rest of MENA in terms of both intra-regional and international trade, however, despite its proximity, costs are still two-fifths higher than between France-Italy-Spain, according to Shepherd. And while intra-GCC trade has risen from $19.8bn to $65.4bn in 2010, it remains a small fraction of the GCC’s $1.3 trillion in total trade.
The GCC customs union, which came into force in 2003, eliminates tariffs between the six states and enforces a common 5 percent tariff on imported goods across the region. Citizens also have freedom of movement across borders and the right to employment. Unofficially, the union also has seen the states coordinate in areas such as health, education, security and knowledge.
But non-tariff barriers have inhibited greater trade between the six states. A GCC railway has been mapped out but is yet to gain much traction, while other early plans for a combined value-added tax (VAT) were put on ice until recently, when the oil price crashed. A proposal for a monetary union has been all but quashed after the UAE objected to Saudi Arabia hosting the central bank. The recent Eurozone debt crisis also has generally discouraged the notion of a common currency.
Silvia Colombo and Camilla Committeri described the GCC as a weak integrated regional organisation” in their report ‘Need to Rethink the EU-GCC Strategic Relations’, pointing to political disagreements between member states.
Tensions between some members, particularly Qatar on the one hand, and Saudi Arabia, the UAE and Bahrain on the other, were confirmed when in March last year the latter three withdrew their ambassadors from Doha over complaints including interference in internal matters.
…Serious obstacles have hampered closer integration, including bureaucratic and administrative inefficiencies, as well as old rivalries and a desire among smaller Gulf states to retain their autonomy. Even the countries’ wealth sometimes becomes an obstacle; with economies already growing robustly, there is less incentive to make radical changes to achieve faster growth,” Colombo and Committeri wrote in 2013.
But more recent changes, notably the oil price fall from more than $100 per barrel mid-2014 to as low as $39 in late August, could make a closer GCC union more urgent as each of the six states try to recover their billions of dollars in revenue losses.
" IHS Middle East and India vice president Sanjay Sharma says regional blocs are the latest trend in international economics, as globalisation plateaus. The percentage of trade to global GDP before 2003 was less than 20 percent, peaking at 25 percent in 2008 and 2010, but it has since stagnated.
[Economists] think globalisation has reached saturation point. That is a concern for the GCC producers who are increasing their exports,” Sharma says.
As the GCC works to diversify its exports, Asian countries are edging in on the region’s traditional export markets by signing bilateral FTAs that eliminate or significantly reduce import tariffs and therefore erode previous cost advantages, Sharma says.
As a bloc, [the GCC states] probably under-appreciate the importance of free trade,” Sharma says. They can push their product into any market they like [based on the cost advantage] but that is becoming more and more difficult with these [economic blocs].”
The FTA trend has been set essentially by Asian countries, led by Singapore (20 FTAs in operation and 15-20 more in negotiation or signed), India (ten in existence and at least 22 in negotiation) and South Korea (ten in existence and at least 20 in negotiation).
With a comparatively higher production cost, these countries have been strategically using FTAs to price-out more competitive exporters, Sharma says.
The FTAs are very important for them to compete in those export markets,” he says. If you look at the way the market works, for example, South Korea has an FTA with Turkey, which is a big petrochemical market for the GCC. But since South Korea has an FTA, the Korean producers have an advantage in exporting products to Turkey. The GCC, even if it has a better cash-cost position can’t set their own prices in that market.
[The GCC states] have got into a comfort zone that their cost position is so good… but they lose when FTAs [are signed] with other countries. They thought they’d be able to divert from market to another market; that’s fine in the short term but in the long term, if globalisation is stagnating, that will be a concern.
I think it’s time for them to seriously think about [negotiating more FTAs].”
The GCC has few FTAs as a bloc, of which Singapore has arguably been the most lucrative.
The third-richest country in the world per capita, Singapore has positioned itself as a gateway to Asia and has one of the most open markets globally; it’s almost-blanket zero tariff policy is marred by only a 1.4 percent duty on agricultural products.
The GCC-Singapore FTA, which came into effect in September 2013, lowers tariffs on Singapore-made goods and refined oil products, and grants GCC nationals preferential treatment in sectors such as the law, engineering and retail.
Faisal Tabbaa, deputy managing partner of Saudi-based law firm Dhabaan & Partners, says the pact already has induced some very interesting numbers”.
More than QR900m [$247m] from Singaporean businesses [have been invested] in Qatar [and] there was $9.2bn in trade with the UAE in the first three quarters of 2013. It’s great. So the Singapore FTA is definitely a good one, and it’s a win-win,” Tabbaa says.
The GCC also has been in talks to establish free trade zones with the " European Union, Japan, China, India, Pakistan, Turkey, Australia, New Zealand, Korea, Brazil, Argentina, Uruguay and Paraguay. Some have reached more advanced stages than others, while a handful presently seem almost unattainable.
Potentially worth $64bn in collective annual GDP, a free trade deal with the EU, under discussion since 1990, was unilaterally taken off the negotiating table by the GCC in 2008, as the global economic crisis hit. It was reported at the time that the GCC was unhappy with European demands for the deal to include human rights issues, on the grounds it was an attempt to interfere in domestic policies that had nothing to do with economic cooperation.
EU-GCC relations are mostly driven by Europe’s energy needs — biofuels remain the most traded product between the two regions — and the Gulf’s access to technology and knowledge, according to Colombo and Committeri.
As the world economy pivots further towards Asia, the GCC’s bargaining power with Europe is likely to strengthen, due to its geographical position.
However, Taabba says the experience of other MENA countries shows there is also a real prospect of increased competition from European imports under a lower tariff environment.
For example, Morocco’s trade deficit with the EU increased by more than five times between 1999 — the year before a free trade agreement came into place — and 2009, according to the " World Bank. Similarly, the trade deficit with the US increased fourfold in the four years after an FTA came into force in 2005.
The GCC also is yet to seal a deal with another globally important trading partner, the US. Negotiations have not been helped by Bahrain and Oman’s unilateral agreements, in 2006 and 2009, respectively, Taabba says.
The difference between Bahrain negotiating the FTA on its own and holding on and saying ‘no we’ll only negotiate as part of the GCC’ is it would have gotten a better deal,” he says. Any of these countries on their own are not going to get the same kind of deal and that’s the drawback of FTA agreements in general.
Bahrain did well but I think it could have done better. There’s power in numbers… Bahrain is the smallest of the GCC countries. If Saudi Arabia was to negotiate its own FTA with the US it probably would come out better off than Bahrain. But if you add all the other [GCC states] you’re going to come up with something even better, but it makes the deal more difficult as well. That’s why people go for free trade agreements these days and aren’t so [keen on] the " World Trade Organisation because you can conclude them faster. They’re complicated but not nearly as complicated as the " WTO.”
Given the difficulties associated with sealing FTAs with the larger markets of Europe and the US, as well as the increasing significance of Asian economies, it is perhaps unsurprising the GCC has been looking east for new trade deals.
As well as the FTA with Singapore, the GCC signed in 2011 a framework agreement with Malaysia, covering economic, commercial, investment and technical cooperation. Currently, two-way trade exceeds $30bn. Trade talks also have been taking place intermittently with China, Japan, South Korea, India and Pakistan.
Of those, freer trade with China and India would arguably have the greatest impact, given the growth in their economies. China is forecast to be the GCC’s largest export market by 2020, while India’s $2.1 trillion economy is as close as a three-hour flight.
However, concerns about the threat of cheap GCC imports to local petrochemicals industries have been a major stumbling block in negotiations with both Asian giants.
The deal with China looks a bit more difficult,” Tabbaa says. In this particular case it might not make any sense, that’s a conclusion many have come to, because of the nature of the trade between the two.”
Greater integration with other Arab states also could have significant impacts, not only on trade but employment. GAFTA has liberalised the markets of Algeria, Bahrain, Egypt, Iraq, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Morocco, Oman, Palestine, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, the UAE and Yemen, with the elimination of all tariffs in 2005.
However, it has had little effect. Total inter-Arab trade as a percentage of total Arab foreign trade has remained at about 10 percent a decade later, according to the " United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia.
The " World Bank says MENA’s intraregional exports averaged less than 8 percent of total exports between 2008-10, compared to 25 percent in ASEAN and 66 percent in the EU.
A pan-Arab customs union is due to come into effect this year, but it is not yet clear whether the deadline will be met.
Mohammed Saleh Shelwah, advisor to the UAE Minister of Economy, said in May varying rates of political and economic development of Arab states and different custom fees were major hurdles for creating the pan-Arab customs union.
The customs union is supposed to be the forerunner to an Arab Common Market, removing all restrictions on trade, residence, employment, labour, and transportation in 2021 — an idea first mooted in 1964.
Arab League assistant secretary general Mohammad Bin Ibrahim Al Tuwaijri said a year ago, he expected the Arab customs union to increase intra-Arab trade from 10 percent to 70 percent of member states' total external trade.
" World Trade Organisation director general Roberto Azevêdo said in May that making the movement of goods across borders faster, easier and cheaper” would reduce trade costs by up to 15 percent in developing countries and deliver an annual boost to the global economy of up to $1 trillion per year.
With Gulf economies losing precious oil revenues and export diversification becoming ever more essential, trade agreements will undoubtedly require greater emphasis.
Arabian Business Publishing Ltd
Food imports: Russia burns out of control
Sergei Guriev 
28 August 2015
The Washington Post
" Sergei Guriev is a professor of economics at " Sciences Po in Paris.
The "purifying fire" came as a surprise when the Russian government starting burning food and boasting about it on state television.
A year ago, the government introduced an embargo on food imports from Western countries. This embargo raised domestic food prices and contributed to a major decline in real incomes. But why isn't it enough to confiscate Western food? Why burn it?
For people raised in Soviet and post- Soviet Russia, the destruction of food is a taboo. In the past 100 years, Russia has experienced several famines. Even though there is no famine in modern Russia, more than 20 million people live in poverty. It would certainly make more sense to hand out food to them instead of destroying it. Can food burning be rationalized?
Actually, for today's Russian government, burning imports is a very rational move because it looks so horrible. The Kremlin wants to send a clear message: Yes, we can do things that you find irrational and unthinkable; do not mess with us. It is important to communicate this message inside and outside of Russia. To its supporters within Russia, the government says: The standoff with the West is a matter of principle, whatever the economic cost. (Such a statement is very timely - Russia's second-quarter gross domestic product fell by 4.6 percent over the second quarter of last year.) The Kremlin also sends a signal of self-confidence to the domestic opposition: The government can afford doing unpopular things and still remain in control.
Outside of Russia, this is a signal of commitment to the course of confrontation. The West should understand that it cannot predict the Kremlin's actions, and Western leaders should be afraid that Russia will do things that they would not dare do themselves. Coming from a nuclear power, this message sounds especially frightening.
But this is not the whole story. Food burning also demonstrates that the embargo's main goal was not to reciprocate Western sanctions. If the goal were to punish European farmers, the government would confiscate the imports and hand them to the poor - this would hurt the European exporters as much as burning the food would. Food burning benefits only the Russian agricultural lobby. It reduces the supply of food in Russia, raising domestic prices and domestic producers' profits. In this sense, food burning is not geopolitics; it is good old protectionism, fair and square. It shows that the government cares more about the agricultural lobby than Russian households.
Russia's anti-trade lobby has always been strong, but the " World Trade Organization (" WTO) accession in August 2012 has put it in a straitjacket. Initially, the Russian elites did not fully understand the " WTO's power. Allegedly, when selling the " WTO accession to leftist members of parliament, a top government official said, "You should not worry about " WTO rules; we will only pretend to stick to them while continuing protectionist policies." After joining the " WTO, the government introduced a "car recycling duty." It was supposed to be paid only by foreign car manufacturers - to protect the domestic automotive sector after " WTO accession commitments required a lowering of car import duties. However, Russia soon discovered that the " WTO is a rule-based organization with teeth. An obvious violation of rules would result in retaliation - which other members immediately told Russia. Russia had to return to the equal playing field, and the government imposed the recycling duty on domestic car producers as well.
With Russia's annexation of Crimea, everything has changed. Having sold the cow, Russia has also sold her milk. Having violated the " U.N. Charter when it did so, Russia can afford to break " WTO rules. Once sanctions against Russia were introduced, politically connected businesses successfully lobbied for sector-specific and even company-specific subsidies and protectionist regulations - even if they violate " WTO rules. These decisions show that the government's priority is protecting the incomes of the lobbyists at the expense of Russian taxpayers and pensioners. If there are still any doubts as to whether the government cares more about the corrupt elites or about the ordinary Russians, the "purifying fire" has burned these doubts into the ground.
The writer is a professor of economics at " Sciences Po in Paris. 
Washington Post
END
 
Josep Bosch, Information Officer
Information and External Relations Division
+41227395681
 


Please consider the environment before printing this email or its attachment(s). Please note that this message may contain confidential information. If you have received this message in error, please notify me and then delete it from your system.